MUNICIPAL CODE
OF THE
CITY OF MONTROSE
PREFACE
This copy of the Municipal Code of the City of Montrose should contain all
ordinances up to and including Ordinance 2305, adopted October 16, 2012.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said Ordinance supersede the provisions of
this Municipal Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Please consult the City Clerk's Office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Thank You.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I
ADMINISTRATIVE
• Official Code................................ 1
• General Provisions....................... 2
• City Council ................................. 9
• Municipal Court......................... 14
• Unclaimed Intangible Property.. 15
• Contracts and Purchasing........... 16
• Elections..................................... 17
• Local Improvement Districts ..... 19
• Real Estate Disclosure ............... 21
TITLE II
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
• Planning Commission .................. 1
TITLE III
DEPARTMENTS
• Trash Collections ......................... 1
• City Water and Sewer Systems.... 5
• Pretreatment Program, Industrial
User, and Sewage System
Supplemental Regulations ........... 6
• Stormwater Pollution Prevention. 7
• Cross Connection Control
Program........................................ 8
TITLE IV
BUILDING REGULATIONS
• Building Regulations ................... 1
• Flood Plain Management
Regulations .................................. 2
TITLE IV (Con’t)
• Electrical Code .............................3
• Zoning Regulations ......................4
• Radio Interference Prohibited ......6
• Subdivision Regulations...............7
• Housing Code ...............................9
• Street, Lot and Building
Designations ...............................11
• Mobile Home and Travel Home
Regulations .................................12
• Outdoor Lighting........................13
• Adult Business Regulations........14
TITLE V
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
• Licenses ........................................1
• Hotel Room Tax ...........................2
• Police Alarm Systems...................3
• Transient Merchants .....................6
• Peddlers Prohibited.......................7
• Pawnbroker.................................11
• Alcoholic Beverages...................12
• Sales and Use Tax ......................15
• Telephone Utility Occupation
Tax..............................................16
TITLE VI
POLICE REGULATIONS
• Miscellaneous Offenses................1
• Animal Control Regulations.........2
• Litter and Junk..............................3
• Nuisances......................................4
• Weeds ...........................................5
• Open Burning ...............................6
TITLE VII
FIRE REGULATIONS
• Fire Hydrants ............................... 1
• Fire Protection Regulations ......... 4
TITLE VIII
HEALTH AND SANITATION
• Wood Stoves and Fireplaces........ 1
• Smoking in Public Places ............ 2
• Medical Marijuana……………...3
TITLE IX
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
• Construction and/or Repair of
Sidewalks ..................................... 1
• Curb to Curb Width of Streets ..... 2
• Trees, Shrubs and Bushes ............ 3
• Removal of Snow and/or Ice ....... 4
• Cemetery Regulations.................. 5
• Street Excavation ......................... 7
• Private Use of Public Property .... 8
• Cable Television System
Permits ......................................... 9
• Parks........................................... 10
TITLE X
TRAFFIC
• Traffic Code ................................. 1
APPENDIX
• Franchise Agreement – KN Energy
• Franchise Agreement – Delta-
Montrose Electric Association
TITLE I
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Official Code
2 General Provisions
3 City Limits (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
4 Corporate Limits (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
5 Depository for Public Funds and Investments (Rep. By
Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
6 Salaries (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
7 Ordinances(Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
8 Penalty (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
9 City Council
10 Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
11 City Manager (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
12 City Clerk (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
13 City Attorney and Public Defender (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-
1-80)
14 Municipal Court
15 Unclaimed Intangible Property
16 Contracts and Purchasing
17 Elections
18 Recall from Office (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
19 Local Improvement Districts
20 Mill Levy (Rep. By Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
21 Real Estate Disclosure
22 Response to Emergencies, Civil Emergencies or Local
Disasters
Chapter 1-1
OFFICIAL CODE
Sections:
1-1-1 MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF MONTROSE
1-1-2 EFFECT OF REPEALING ORDINANCES
1-1-3 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 1-1
OFFICIAL CODE
Sections:
1-1-1 MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF MONTROSE
1-1-2 EFFECT OF REPEALING ORDINANCES:
1-1-3 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION
1-1-1: MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF MONTROSE
This compilation, revision, and modification of the general ordinances of the City is
hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the Official Code of the General
Ordinances of the City.
Said Code shall hereafter be known and cited as the “Official Code of the City of
Montrose, Colorado”, and a copy or copies of such Code in printed form shall be
received, without further proof, as the Ordinances of the City in all courts and
administrative tribunals of this State.
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth in full the Section or Sections,
subsection or subsections of the Code being amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement that no ordinance or any Section
thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinances sets forth the revised
ordinance or amended Section in full. (Ord. 612, 2-1-68)
1-1-2: EFFECTS OF REPEALING ORDINANCES
The repeal of ordinances as provided shall not effect any right which has accrued, any
duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceedings as commenced under
or by virtue of the ordinances repealed, nor the tenure of office of any person holding
office at the time when such ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinances
thereby have the effect of reviving any ordinance therefore repealed or superceded.
1-1-3 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of the Official Code and all ordinances amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto the following rules shall be observed unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislative body or repugnant to the
context.
(A) Intent to Defraud: Whenever, by any of the provisions of the Official Code,
and intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it is
sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person, association, or body
politic or any combination of persons.
(B) Liability of Employers and Agents: When the provisions herein contained
prohibits the commission or omission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited thing or omitting the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned or aiding or abetting the person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(C) Title of Sections and Subsections: The title of any Section or Subsection of
this Official Code shall be deemed in no wise to restrict, qualify or to limit
the effect the provisions set forth and contained in such Section or
Subsection.
(D) Constitutionality; Effect of: Should any portion of this Official Code be
declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or
void, such adjudication shall in no way effect the remaining portion of this
Code.
(E) Definitions:
The singular number includes the plural.
Words used in the present tense include the future.
Words used in the masculine gender comprehend as well, the feminine and
neuter.
The word “person” includes bodies politic and corporate, partnerships,
associations and corporations.
The word “writing” includes printing, writing, and typewriting.
The word “signature” includes any name, mark or sign written with the
intent to authenticate any instrument of writing.
The word “oath” includes “affirmation” and the word “swear” includes the
word “affirm”. Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is
embraced in the term “testify” and every written one in the term “depose”.
The words “official time” whenever used shall mean Standard Time or
Daylight Savings Time as may be in current use within the Municipality.
The word “day” shall be any twenty four (24) hour period from midnight to
midnight; and the word “month” shall mean a calendar month unless
otherwise expressed; and the word “quarter” shall mean and three (3)
month period, ending with the last day of March, June, September and
December; the word “year” shall mean any one calendar year unless
otherwise expressed.
The word “shall” is mandatory, “may” is discretionary.
The word “property” includes both real and personal property.
The term “land”, “real estate” and “real property” includes lands,
tenements, hereditaments, water rights, possessory rights and claims.
The term “personal property” includes every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action, and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished,
and every right of interest therein.
The words “public thoroughfare” shall include streets, alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
The word “owner” applied to a building or land shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or
of a part of such building or land.
The word “tenant” or “occupant” applied to a building or land shall include
any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land
whether alone or with others.
Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license
or permit or authority from a board or officers, shall be construed as giving
such board or officer power to license or permit or authorize such thing to
be done. (1959 Code)
The word “Officer” shall include officers and boards in charge of departs
and the members of such boards, and such reference as use of the word
“municipality” shall mean this City; “Clerk” or “Treasurer” and others shall
mean the City Clerk or City Treasurer or City Fiscal Officer as the case
may be applicable. The term “governing body” shall refer to the five (5)
elected members of the City Council and/or the individual members
thereof. (Ord. 613, 2-1-68)
The term “willfully” when applied to the intent, with which an act is done
or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or
make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law
or to injure another or to acquire and advantage.
The terms “neglect”, “negligence”, “negligent”, and “negligently” imports a
want of such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or
omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
The term “knowingly” imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which
brings the act or omission within the provisions of these Chapters. It does
not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
Whenever in this Code it is provided that anything must be done, to the
approval of or subject to the direction of the enforcing officer, this shall be
construed to give such officer only the power to determine whether the
rules and regulations established in this Code have been complied with and
shall not be construed, as giving such officer discretionary powers. (1959
Code)
Chapter 1-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
1-2-1 CHARTER SELF-EXECUTING
1-2-2 MUNICIPAL POWERS
1-2-3 GENERAL PENALTY
1-2-4 CITY SEAL
Chapter 1-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
1-2-1 CHARTER SELF-EXECUTING
1-2-2 MUNICIPAL POWERS
1-2-3 GENERAL PENALTY
1-2-4 CITY SEAL
1-2-1: CHARTER SELF-EXECUTING
The Charter of the City of Montrose, Colorado as such may be amended from time to
time, is fully self-executing except as otherwise expressly provided in the Charter. The
Charter shall be enforced by the City in accordance with its terms.
1-2-2: MUNICIPAL POWERS
(A) The City Council shall have all powers granted to it by its Charter, the
Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado and the United States of
America, subject to those limitations imposed in the Charter.
(B) Any limitation upon the City’ s powers or the manner in which they may be
exercised as imposed by any State Statute or regulation, is hereby
superseded unless otherwise provided in the City’ s Charter or ordinances
to the maximum extent of the City’ s power as a Home Rule City to
supersede State Law.
1-2-3: GENERAL PENALTY
(A) It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of the City Charter, Official
Code of the City of Montrose, Colorado (City Code) or City ordinances.
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of any City ordinance,
the Official Code of the City of Montrose, Colorado, any code adopted by
reference, thereby, or of the Charter of the City of Montrose, Colorado,
may be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period of not more than one (1)
year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, unless a lower maximum
sentence is specified. (Ord. 1614, 12-19-96).
(B) Provided, however, no person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be
sentenced to any period of imprisonment in excess of ten (10) days, except
for traffic offenses.
(C) A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day any violation
continues.
1-2-4: CITY SEAL
The Seal illustrated below is hereby adopted as the Official Seal of the City
of Montrose, Colorado. (Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
Chapter 1-9
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:
1-9-1 SALARY OF CITY COUNCIL
1-9-2 ACTION BY ORDINANCE REQUIRED
1-9-3 MEETINGS
1-9-4 COUNCIL DISTRICTS
Chapter 1-9
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:
1-9-1 SALARY OF CITY COUNCIL
1-9-2 ACTION BY ORDINANCE REQUIRED
1-9-3 MEETINGS
1-9-4 COUNCIL DISTRICTS
1-9-1: SALARY OF CITY COUNCIL
Each City Council member except the Mayor shall receive compensation of two hundred
and seventy-five United States Dollars ($275.00) per month. The Mayor shall receive
compensation of three hundred and twenty-five United States Dollars ($325.00) per
month. (Ord. 2043, 02-03-2005)
1-9-2: ACTION BY ORDINANCE REQUIRED
In addition to those acts of the Council required by provisions of the City Charter to be
by ordinance, conveyance of any interest in any city owned real estate shall be authorized
by ordinance. The Council may also act by ordinance at any other time.
1-9-3: MEETINGS
(A) All regular and special meetings of the City Council shall be held in the
Elks’ Civic Building, except when the Elks’ Civic Building facilities are
not available or adequate. In that case, the Council may designate another
place for the meeting within the City and shall post notice on those doors of
City Hall used for public access designating the substitute-meeting place.
(Ord. 2165, 7-19-2007)
(B) Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held twice a month on the
first and third Tuesdays of each month at seven o' clock (7:00) P.M. The
Council may by motion at a previous meeting cancel, postpone, or set
another day or time for any regular meeting. In the event that it does so,
notice shall be given to the press and radio and official notice shall be
published in a legal newspaper as soon as reasonably possible. (Ord. 2260,
11/18/2010)
(C) Any meeting or work session may be adjourned to a definite date by the
Council.
(D) The majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a lesser number may adjourn to a definite date.
(E) The Council may meet for informal work sessions on Friday noon or other
times, as it desires. No formal action will usually be taken at such
meetings, however, the Council may in its discretion take action of a nature
that does not require formal notice and public hearing.
(F) Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any two (2) Council
members. Written notice must be delivered to each Council member of the
time, place and purpose of the special meeting, either personally or by
delivering a copy of such notice to the Council members residence. The
Clerk shall give notice to the public as practical prior to the meeting.
(G) Meetings of the Council Open to the Public:
(1) All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and minutes
shall be kept of proceedings at regular and special meetings.
However, the Council may go into executive session upon consent of
a majority of the Council present for the following purposes:
(a) For the consideration of documents, testimony or consultation
among themselves given in confidence.
(b) For consultation of an attorney-client nature with the City
Attorney or with other legal counsel retained by the City.
(c) To discuss contract negotiations, land acquisitions and
personnel matters.
(2) The Council shall not take formal action, adopt any resolution or
ordinance, nor approve any contract calling for the payment of money
during an executive session. All such action must be taken in open
session. The Council may, however, set negotiating instructions or
strategy or give directions concerning the conduct or settlement of
pending or threatened litigation during an executive session. (Ord.
1078, 5-1-80)
(Ord. 1856, Amended, 07/05/2001)
1-9-4: COUNCIL DISTRICTS
The City is hereby divided into four (4) Council Districts to be numbers 1 through 4 as
shown on the following map. The property shown on this map presently lying outside the
City limits shall upon annexation automatically be included within the District indicated
by the extended Council District boundaries on this map, unless such property is included
by ordinance in a different Council District.
(A) “Exhibit “A”” (Ord. 2276, 06/20/2011)
Text Descriptions of Council District Boundaries
*To be used in conjunction with the Council District map generated for the purpose of this re-districting in 2011.
[While the Map is controlling, the descriptions below may be used for explanatory purposes.]
District I
Being generally north and west of the line described as beginning at the intersection of Spring Creek
Road/Highway 90 where it intersects the western edge of the current City of Montrose, Montrose County,
Colorado, USA limits;
thence continuing east along Spring Creek Rd./Highway 90/W. Main St./Main St. to the intersection with
Nevada Ave.; north side of road being in District I, south side of road being in District III;
thence continuing on Main St./E. Main St./Highway 50 to the point where that centerline meets the
Loutsenhizer Canal; north side of road being in District I and the south side of road being in District II;
thence north along the centerline of the Loutsenhizer Canal to the junction with Landfill Rd. with the west
side being in District I and the east side being in District II;
thence continuing in an easterly direction along Landfill Rd. past the juncture with 6700 Rd. with the
north side being in District I and the south side being in District II.
District II
Being generally east and north of the line described as beginning at a point on Landfill Road northeast of
the current City of Montrose, Montrose County, Colorado, USA limits;
thence south and west along Landfill Rd. to it’s intersection with Loutsenhizer Canal, with the north side
being in District I and the south side being in District II;
thence southerly along the centerline of the Loutsenhizer Canal to its intersection with Highway 50/E.
Main St.; west side being in District I and the east side being in District II;
thence westerly along the centerline of Highway 50/E. Main St./Main St. to Nevada Ave.; north side
being in District I and south side being in District II;
thence southerly along S. Nevada Ave. to S. 9th St.; west side being in District III and east side being in
District II;
thence westerly along the centerline of S. 9th St. to S. Mesa Ave.; north side being in District III and south
side being in District II;
thence southerly along the centerline of S. Mesa Ave. to S. 11th St.; west side being in District III and east
side being in District II;
thence westerly along S. 11th St. to S. Park Ave.; north side being in District III and south side being in
District II;
thence southerly along S. Park Ave. to S. 12th St.; west side being in District III and east side being in
District II;
thence westerly along S. 12th St. to S. Townsend Ave./Highway 550; north side being in District III and
south side being in District II;
thence southerly along S. Townsend Ave./Highway 550 to Niagara Rd.; west side being in District III and
east side being in District II;
thence easterly along Niagara Rd. to S. Mesa Ave.; north side being in District II and south side being in
District III;
thence north along S. Mesa Ave. to Dover Rd.; west side being in District II and east side being in District
IV;
thence east then north along Dover Rd. to Sunnyside Rd.; west side being in District II and east side being
in District IV;
thence east along Sunnyside Rd. to it’s end; north side being in District II and south side being in District
IV;
thence continuing east along the south line of Section 29 Township 49 Range 9 to the easterly city limits;
north side being in District II and south side being in District IV;
District III
Being generally west and south of the line described as beginning at the intersection of Spring Creek
Road/Highway 90 where it intersects the western edge of the current City of Montrose, Montrose County,
Colorado, USA limits;
thence continuing east along Spring Creek Rd./Highway 90/W. Main St./Main St. to Nevada Ave.; north
side being in District I and south side being in District III;
thence southerly along S. Nevada Ave. to S. 9th St.; east side being in District II and west side being in
District III;
thence westerly along the centerline of S. 9th St. to S. Mesa Ave.; north side being in District III and south
side being in District II;
thence southerly along the centerline of S. Mesa Ave. to S. 11th St.; east side being in District II and west
side being in District III;
thence westerly along S. 11th St. to S. Park Ave.; north side being in District III and south side being in
District II;
thence southerly along S. Park Ave. to S. 12th St. east side being in District II and west side being in
District III;
thence westerly along S. 12th St. to S. Townsend Ave./Highway 550; north side being in District III and
south side being in District II;
thence southerly along S. Townsend Ave./Highway 550 to Niagara Rd.; east side being in District II and
west side being in District III;
thence easterly along Niagara Rd. to Mesa Ave.; north side being in District II and south side being in
District III;
thence easterly along Niagara Rd. to Hillcrest Ave.; north side being in District IV and south side being in
District III;
thence south along Hillcrest Ave./proposed Hillcrest Ave. to the intersection with E. Oak Grove Rd.; east
side being in District IV and west side being in District III;
thence east along E. Oak Grove Rd. to the intersection with Loutsenhizer Canal; north side being in
District IV and south side being in District III;
thence south along the Loutsenhizer Canal to Odelle Rd.; east side being in District IV and west side
being in District III;
thence east and south along Odelle Rd. to the intersection with Ogden Rd.; north/east sides being in
District IV and south/west sides being in District III;
thence west along Ogden Rd. to the intersection with the C Drain; north side being in District III and
south side being in District IV;
thence south and east along centerline of C Drain to the east boundary of Township 48 Range 9 Section
30 Lot 15; east/north sides being in District IV and west/ south sides being in District III;
thence due south along said line to the centerline of Dry Cedar Creek; east side being in District IV and
west side being in District III;
thence southeast along centerline of Dry Cedar Creek to the southerly city limits; northeast side being in
District IV and southwest side being in District III.
District IV
Being generally east and south of the line described as beginning at the intersection of the south line of
Section 29 Township 49 Range 9 and the east City of Montrose, Montrose County, Colorado, USA limits;
thence west along said section line to Sunnyside Rd.; north side being in District II and south side being
in District IV;
thence west along Sunnyside Rd. to the intersection of Dover Rd.; north side being in District II and south
side being in District IV;
thence south and west to the intersection of S. Mesa Ave.; east side being in District IV and west side
being in District II;
thence south along S. Mesa Ave. to the intersection of Niagara Rd.; east side being in District IV and west
side being in District II;
thence easterly along Niagara Rd. to Hillcrest Ave.; north side being in District IV and south side being in
District III;
thence south along Hillcrest Ave./proposed Hillcrest Ave. to the intersection with E. Oak Grove Rd.; east
side being in District IV and west side being in District III;
thence east along E. Oak Grove Rd. to the intersection with Loutsenhizer Canal; north side being in
District IV and south side being in District III;
thence south along the Loutsenhizer Canal to Odelle Rd.; east side being in District IV and west side
being in District III;
thence east and south along Odelle Rd. to the intersection with Ogden Rd.; north/east side being in
District IV and south/west side being in District III;
thence west along Ogden Rd. to the intersection with the C Drain; north side being in District III and
south side being in District IV;
thence south and east along centerline of C Drain to the east boundary of Township 48 Range 9 Section
30 Lot 15; east/north side being in District IV and west/south side being in District III;
thence due south along said line to the centerline of Dry Cedar Creek; east side being in District IV and
west side being in District III;
thence southeast along centerline of Dry Cedar Creek to the southerly city limits; northeast side being in
District IV and southwest side being in District III.
CHAPTER 1-14
MUNICIPAL COURT
Sections:
1-14-1 JURISDICTION
1-14-2 RULES OF PROCEDURE
1-14-3 JUDICIAL POWERS
1-14-4 SENTENCING
1-14-5 ENFORCEMENT OF FINES
1-14-6 DEFECT IN FORM
1-14-7 COURT CLERK AND FACILITIES
1-14-1: JURISDICTION
The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction of all causes arising under the City’ s Charter
or ordinances, including prosecution of any violation of any provision of the City Charter
or ordinances, including those ordinances which by their terms apply to City owned
property outside the City limits. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction of any
other matters as provided by law.
1-14-2: RULES OF PROCEDURE
(A) The Municipal Court shall be subject to the Colorado Municipal Court
Rules, the provisions of the City Charter, this Chapter, and other applicable
provisions of City ordinances and shall be subject to those provisions of
article 20, title 13, C.R.S. 1973, as amended, which are not in conflict with
the City Charter or ordinances, and which have not been superseded by this
Chapter or the Charter.
(B) The following sections of article 20, title 13, C.R.S. 1973, as amended are
hereby superseded: 13-10-104, 13-10-105, 13-10-106, 13-10-108, 13-10-
109, 13-10-110, 13-10-113, and 13-10-115.
(C) The Municipal Judge is authorized to adopt additional local rules of
procedure which are not inconsistent with the Colorado Municipal Court
Rules, the provisions of the City Charter, this Chapter, or other City
Ordinances.
1-14-3: JUDICIAL POWERS
(A) The Municipal Judge shall have all judicial powers relating to the operation
of the Municipal Court, including the power to impose punishment for
contempt of court.
(B) In addition to any other acts which maybe deemed contempt of court, the
Municipal Judge shall have the authority to punish the following as
contempt of court in accordance with the provisions of Rule 107, of the
Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure:
(1) Failure to obey a subpoena properly served without adequate excuse.
(2) Failure to obey a summons for jury duty or to respond to inquiry
from the court requesting information necessary to choose a jury
panel without adequate excuse.
(3) Failure of an attorney of record or party to appear before the court at
a scheduled appearance date without adequate excuse.
(4) Failure to obey a lawful order of the court without adequate excuse
or other behavior constituting contempt as provided in Rule 107
Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure.
(C) The Municipal Judge may appoint legal counsel to represent indigent
defendants before the Municipal Court at his discretion, provided; however,
if any person is determined to be indigent and is not appointed legal
counsel after request, they may not be sentenced to any term of
imprisonment.
(D) The Municipal Judge shall have authority to appoint an alternate judge to
hear matters which the Municipal Judge is unable to hear.
(Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
(E) The Municipal Judge, assistant municipal judges and alternate municipal
judges shall have powers to include solemnization of marriages.
(Ord. 1370, 6-2-88)
1-14-4: SENTENCING
(A) Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of the City Charter or
ordinances shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of this
Section, or in any other lawful manner not in conflict with this Section.
(B) The minimum fine or term of imprisonment imposed shall not be less than
that specified by the applicable ordinance or City Charter provision, and the
maximum fine or term of imprisonment shall not exceed that specified by
the applicable ordinance or City Charter provision.
(C) Plea discussions and plea agreements may be entered into by the
prosecution and approved by the Municipal Judge in accordance with the
provisions of part 3, article 7 of title 16, Colorado Revised Statutes 1973, as
amended, including deferred prosecution and deferred sentencing as
provided in part 4, article 7 of title 16, Colorado Revised Statutes 1973, as
amended.
(D) The Court may place the defendant upon probation, supervised or
unsupervised, for such period and on such conditions as the Court may
determine.
(E) The Court may suspend a sentence or a portion of it upon such conditions
as the Court may determine.
(F) Prisoners may be put to work for the public benefit.
1-14-5: ENFORCEMENT OF FINES
A sentence imposing a fine shall be enforceable by the City in the same manner as a civil
judgment as or other delinquent charges due the City. Further, if the defendant fails to
pay the fine in accordance with the direction of the Court, the defendant shall be
imprisoned until the fine is satisfied or the defendant has served fifteen (15) days in jail.
Serving a term of imprisonment does not discharge the obligation to pay the fine. A
warrant for the arrest of any defendant failing to pay a fine in accordance with the Court’s
order may be issued.
1-14-6: DEFECT IN FORM
No action in the Municipal Court shall be dismissed for any defect in form of the
summons or complaint without giving the prosecution leave to amend such summons or
complaint. However, if such amendment is allowed, the defendant may be allowed
additional time to prepare his defense if necessary to avoid prejudice.
1-14-7: COURT CLERK AND FACILITIES
(A) The Municipal Court shall be provided with facilities and personnel as
necessary in the discretion of the City Manager and City Council to conduct
its business.
(B) The Court Clerk shall perform such duties as required under this Chapter,
the Colorado Municipal Court Rules, and other applicable law and as
specified by the Municipal Judge. (Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
Chapter 1-15
UNCLAIMED INTANGIBLE PROPERTY
Sections:
1-15-1 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
1-15-2 PROCEDURES
Chapter 1-15
UNCLAIMED INTANGIBLE PROPERTY
Sections:
1-15-1 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
1-15-2 PROCEDURES
1-15-1: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Any tangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom less any
lawful charges or other amounts due the City, that is held by or under control of the City,
which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more that one year after it
becomes payable or distributable, shall be disposed of in accordance with the procedures
set out in this Chapter.
1-15-2: PROCEDURES
(A) Prior to the disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated
value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the City shall send a notice to the
owner’ s last known address, if any, as shown on the records of the City by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
(B) Prior to the disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated
value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less, or property concerning which no
address is shown in City records for the owner, the City shall cause a notice
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
(C) The notice required pursuant to subsection (A) or (B) above shall describe
the property, the name of the perceived owner, if known, the amount or
estimated value of the property and if available the purpose for which the
property was deposited or held. The notice shall state that if the owner
fails to submit a written claim to the City within sixty (60) days of the date
of the mailing or publication, the property shall become the sole property of
the City and any claim of the owner shall be forfeited.
(D) If no such claim is received within said sixty (60) days, the property shall
become the sole property of the City and any claim of the owner to the
property shall be deemed forfeited.
(E) If the City receives a written claim within sixty (60) days, the City shall
evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within ninety
(90) days thereafter, whether the claim has been accepted or denied in
whole or in part. The City may investigate the validity of the claim and
may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to
resolving the matter.
(F) In the event there is more than one claimant for the same property, the City
may, in its sole discretion, resolve the claims in any appropriate manner.
(G) In the event all claims are denied, the property shall become the property of
the City and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed
forfeited.
(H) The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt additional regulations for
the administration of this Chapter as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 1450,
6-11-92).
Chapter 1-14
MUNICIPAL COURT
Sections:
1-14-1 JURISDICTION
1-14-2 RULES OF PROCEDURE
1-14-3 JUDICIAL POWERS
1-14-4 SENTENCING
1-14-5 ENFORCEMENT OF FINES
1-14-6 DEFECT IN FORM
1-14-7 COURT CLERK AND FACILITIES
Chapter 1-16
CONTRACT AND PURCHASING
Sections:
1-16-1 AUTHORITY
1-16-2 CONTRACT APPROVAL
1-16-3 BID REQUIREMENTS
1-16-4 GENERAL PURCHASING REGULATIONS
1-16-5 SALE OR DISPOSAL OF CITY OWNED PERSONAL PROPERTY
1-16-1 1-16-3
Chapter 1-16
CONTRACT AND PURCHASING
Sections:
1-16-1 AUTHORITY
1-16-2 CONTRACT APPROVAL
1-16-3 BID REQUIREMENTS
1-16-4 GENERAL PURCHASING REGULATIONS
1-16-5 SALE OR DISPOSAL OF CITY OWNED PERSONAL PROPERTY
1-16-1: AUTHORITY
The City Manager shall be responsible for the purchase of all goods and services and the
disposal of City owned personal property subject to the provisions of this Chapter, other
City ordinances and the City Charter. The City Council may promulgate additional
regulations as necessary for the interpretation and administration of this Chapter.
1-16-2: CONTRACT APPROVAL
(A) Any contract which involves consideration to be provided by the City with
a value in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), or which creates
any obligation upon the City to provide consideration in any fiscal year
other than a fiscal year for which a budget has been adopted with adequate
provision for the consideration, shall require the approval of the City
Council.
(B) Other contracts may be approved by the City Manager or his authorized
representative. The City Manager may refer any contract to the Council
for approval.
(C) All written contracts, or utilized contract forms shall be subject to review
by the City Attorney. (Ord. 1786, 07-06-2000)
1-16-3: BID REQUIREMENTS
(A) The purchase of goods or services for which the City’ s consideration is
less than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000) may be made informally, without
competitive solicitation, and in accordance with regulations or policies
1-16-3 1-16-5
otherwise approved by City Council. The purchase of goods or services
for which the City’ s consideration exceeds Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000) shall be subject to formal competitive solicitation, unless
otherwise authorized by City Council. All purchases of goods or services
in excess of Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000) shall require City Council
approval. (Ord. 1786, 07-06-2000)
(B) The City shall reserve the right to accept or reject any or all proposed bids,
or any combination of them, and to waive any informality or irregularity in
the bid or in the bidding.
1-16-4: GENERAL PURCHASING REGULATIONS
(A) Any contract entered into or any purchase made in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter, the City Charter, other applicable ordinances, or
administrative regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter, shall be
voidable by the City. Any agent or employee of the City making such an
unauthorized purchase or contract shall be personally liable for any
obligations which result.
(B) When procuring in an amount exceeding Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00), the City intends to provide Local Businesses with an
advantage in the bidding process, so that funds received from such
contracts will be spent by the employees of Local Businesses in the local
economy. To accomplish this goal, “Local Business(es)” shall mean a
business situated or based either in Montrose County or in one of the
surrounding Colorado counties, depending on the applicable Subsection,
that employs adequate local residents to perform the bulk of the work
anticipated under the contract. This Section shall not apply to contracts
with funding sources that prohibit the consideration of local preference.
(1) If such procurement is not for supplies or services of inferior quality to
those offered by competitors outside of Montrose County, and can be
accomplished without significant additional cost to the taxpayers,
primary preference may be given by the City in the procurement of
supplies and services produced, manufactured, sold, distributed or
grown in Montrose County, and in the procurement of services and
construction contracts to bidders, as follows:
(i) If all other evaluation criteria set forth herein, or in the
invitation for bids or requests for proposals are equal, said
primary preference may be given to Local Businesses situated
inside Montrose County.
1-16-3 1-16-5
(ii) For any procurement, the primary preference given pursuant to
this Subsection (1) shall be in an amount not to exceed five
percent (5%) of the total price and in no case more than Fifty
Thousand Dollars ($50.000.00).
(2) If such procurement is not for supplies or services of inferior quality to
those offered by competitors outside of the Colorado counties abutting
Montrose County, and can be accomplished without significant
additional cost to the taxpayers, secondary preference may be given by
the City in procurement of supplies and services produced,
manufactured, sold, distributed or grown in Colorado counties abutting
Montrose County, and in the procurement of services and construction
contracts to bidders, as follows:
(i) If all other evaluation criteria set forth herein, or in the
invitation for bids or requests for proposals are equal, said
secondary preference may be given to Local Businesses situated
in the Colorado counties abutting Montrose County.
(ii) For any procurement, the secondary preference given
pursuant to this Subsection (2) shall be in an amount not to
exceed three percent (3%) of the total price and in no case
more than Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50.000.00).
(3) Joint ventures/partnerships wishing to qualify for either preference
must be able to prove to the City’s satisfaction that the Local
Business’s joint venturer or partner shall perform and be paid for no
less than fifty-one percent (51%) of the work.
(Ord. 2221, 05-07-2009)
(C) No vendor or potential vendor of the City shall provide gifts or
entertainment to any City employee for the purpose of influencing or
obtaining a competitive advantage. Any gifts received shall become
property of the City.
1-16-5: SALE OR DISPOSAL OF CITY OWNED PERSONAL PROPERTY
City owned personal property may be disposed of when no longer needed by destruction,
disposal, trade, sale, auction, or by soliciting bids, as appropriate in the discretion of the
City Manger; provided, however, property likely to be worth one thousand dollars
$1,000.00) or more shall be disposed of by a method to be approved by the Council.
(Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
Chapter 1-17
ELECTIONS
Sections:
1-17-1 COLORADO MUNICIPAL ELECTION CODE
1-17-2 PRECINCTS
1-17-3 CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
1-17-4 RECALL FROM OFFICE
1-17-5 WRITE-IN AFFIDAVITS OF INTENT
1-17-6 MAIL BALLOT NOMINATION PROCEDURES
Chapter 1-17
ELECTIONS
Sections:
1-17-1 COLORADO MUNICIPAL ELECTION CODE
1-17-2 PRECINCTS
1-17-3 CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
1-17-4 RECALL FROM OFFICE
1-17-5 WRITE-IN AFFIDAVITS OF INTENT
1-17-6 MAIL BALLOT NOMINATION PROCEDURES
1-17-1: COLORADO MUNICIPAL ELECTION CODE
The general Municipal and special Municipal elections shall be held and conducted in
accordance with those provisions of the Colorado Municipal Election Code, as amended,
(article 10 of title 31, C.R.S. as amended), applicable to regular Municipal elections and
special elections respectively, except as modified by the City Charter, this Chapter, or
other ordinances of the City. Provided however, the City Council by resolution may
authorize the City to utilize requirements and procedures of the Uniform Election Code
of 1992, Articles 1 to 13 of Title I, C.R.S. with respect to any specific election.
1-17-2: PRECINCTS
The City Council may designate precincts and polling places to be used in elections as
necessary and convenient.
1-17-3: CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
Repealed by Ord. 1634 on 6-5-97.
1-17-4: RECALL FROM OFFICE
Officers may be recalled from office in accordance with the valid and applicable
provisions of the City Charter and article XXI of the Colorado Constitution. Any
provisions of any Colorado Statute concerning recall are hereby superseded, except that
the provisions of subsection 31-4-503(2) and (3), and section 31-4-504.5, C.R.S. 1973, as
amended, shall apply. (Ord. 1078, 5-1-80)
1-17-5: WRITE-IN AFFIDAVITS OF INTENT
No write-in vote for any Municipal office shall be counted at any election unless an
affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by the person whose name is writtenin
twenty (20) days before the day of election indicating that such person desires the
office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. (Ord. 1448, 4-2-92)
1-17-6: MAIL BALLOT NOMINATION PROCEDURES
Notwithstanding any provision in the Colorado Municipal Election Code or Uniform
Election Code of 1992, the time periods for circulation and submission of nomination
petitions for any City mail ballot election other than one conducted as part of a
coordinated election, shall be as follows, or as otherwise directed by Council Resolution:
First day to pick up petition 77 days before election
Last day to file petition 57 days before election
Last day to amend petition 50 days before election
Chapter 1-19
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Sections:
1-19-1 AUTHORITY AND ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES
1-19-2 INITITATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY PETITION
1-19-3 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY COUNCIL ACTION
1-19-4 NOTICE, HEARINGS AND CREATION OF AN IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT
1-19-5 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS AND MANAGEMENT OF
THE DISTRICT
1-19-6 BASIS OF ASSESSMENTS
1-19-7 APPORTIONMENT OF THE COSTS AND ASSESSMENT
1-19-8 LIEN FOR ASSESSMENTS
1-19-9 ASSESSMENT ROLL
1-19-10 PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
1-19-11 DISSOLUTION AND ASSIGNMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
1-19-12 JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS ON APPEAL
Chapter 1-19
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Sections:
1-19-1 AUTHORITY AND ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES
1-19-2 INITITATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY PETITION
1-19-3 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY COUNCIL ACTION
1-19-4 NOTICE, HEARING AND CREATION OF AN IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT
1-19-5 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS AND MANAGEMENT OF
THE DISTRICT
1-19-6 BASIS OF ASSESSMENTS
1-19-7 APPORTIONMENT OF THE COSTS AND ASSESSMENT
1-19-8 LIEN FOR ASSESSMENTS
1-19-9 ASSESSMENT ROLL
1-19-10 PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
1-19-11 DISSOLUTION AND ASSIGNMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
1-19-12 JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS ON APPEAL
1-19-1: AUTHORITY AND ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES
(A) The City Council shall have the power to create local improvement districts
for the construction of public improvements of a local and municipal
character, to issue bonds therefore, and to assess the costs of construction or
any part thereof against benefited property within the district in accordance
with the procedures provided in this Chapter.
(B) The procedures provided in this Chapter are alternatives to any procedure
for the creation of an improvement district, development authority, or other
such entity provided by Colorado law. The City shall retain all powers
granted by Colorado law for the creation and operation of such entities.
1-19-2: INITITATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY PETITION
(A) Any person may initiate the creation of an improvement district by
submitting a petition executed by owners of that real property which is
proposed to be assessed more than fifty percent (50%) of the costs to be
assessed exclusive of costs proposed to be born by the City. The petition
must be executed by the property owners and shall be accompanied by an
affidavit of any circulator certifying the validity of the signatures.
(B) The petition shall at a minimum contain the following information:
(1) The name of the district and the description of the improvements to
be constructed.
(2) The legal description of each tract of property to be included within
the district and assessed for costs along with the name and mailing
address of each of the owners of such tracts as listed in the records
of the Montrose County Assessor, unless more current information is
available.
(3) The maximum cost of the proposed improvements, including legal
and administrative costs, the maximum assessment (not including
interest during construction) for each separately owned parcel of
property, the basis upon which assessments shall be computed and
assessed against each parcel of property, and the percentage of the
costs with which each parcel of property will be assessed.
(4) Any portion of the cost proposed to be born by the City as conferring
a general public benefit.
(5) A Warranty of Ownership for the property owned by petitioners.
(6) The names and addresses of any tenants, lessees or parties in
possession of the property to be assessed for the improvements as
known to petitioners.
(7) The names of three (3) representatives of petitioners who shall have
the power to enter into agreements binding upon the district.
(8) The number if optional installments, the payment period and
maximum rate of interest to be charged.
(C) Submitted with the petition shall be a map of the proposed district showing
each parcel of real estate and the portion of the cost which is proposed to be
assessed against such portion.
(D) No petition with the requisite signatures shall be voided on account of any
alleged defects, and any petition may be amended at any time prior to the
creation of the district by filing an amendment executed by the petitioners.
Amendments which do not increase the maximum assessment of any parcel
or adversely affect the quality or quantity of improvements to be
constructed may be agreed to by the named representatives of the
petitioners.
(E) The petition may be filed as duplicate petitions. No petition may be
withdrawn nor may any petitioner withdraw his name after the petition has
been filed, unless the City Council fails to create the district within nine (9)
months from the time the petition is filed, in which case any petitioner may
withdraw.
(F) The City Clerk shall refer any petition in substantial compliance with the
requirements of this Section to the City Council for action in accordance
with Section 1-19-4.
1-19-3: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY COUNCIL ACTION
The City Council may initiate proceedings to create an improvement district by passing a
Resolution of Intent to create an improvement district setting out the terms and conditions
proposed for such district, including at a minimum the information required for a petition
in Section 1-19-2, except that no Warranty of Ownership, designated representatives, or
signatures of petitioners shall be required.
1-19-4: NOTICE, HEARINGS AND CREATION OF AN IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT
(A) If the Council determines that a Petition for the Creation of the district is in
substantial conformity with the requirements of Section 1-19-2, and has
been signed by the owners of one hundred percent (100%) of the property
to be assessed for the costs of the improvements, and further determines
that any of the proposed improvements to be constructed at the City’ s cost
will confer a general public benefit, and that the creation of the district is in
the public interest, the Council may create the district by ordinance.
(B) Council to Adopt Resolution of Intent:
(1) If the Council adopts a Resolution of Intent to form a district or
determines that a petition has been submitted to it in substantial
compliance with Section 1-19-2, executed by less than one hundred
percent (100%) of the owners of the real property to be assessed, it
shall set a public hearing to consider the formation of the district and
shall cause a Notice of Hearing to be published once in a legal
newspaper at least ten (10) days before the hearing.
(2) The Notice shall contain the following:
(a) The name of the district. A description of its location and
the location of the property within the district to be
assessed for the improvements, and the kind of
improvements to be constructed.
(b) The maximum cost of the improvements to be assessed
against the property within the district, the basis upon
which the assessments will be made and the portion of the
costs which will be born by the City.
(c) The number of installments in which assessments may be
paid, the payment period, and the interest rate to be
charged upon unpaid assessments.
(d) A statement describing a method of filing written
objections, and advising that the petition of Resolution of
Intent and a map of the district showing the proposed
assessment for each parcel of real estate is available for
inspection at City Hall.
(3) A copy of the Notice of Hearing along with the Petition or
Resolution of Intent and the map of the district shall be sent to each
property owner to be assessed any portion of the costs and
improvements by depositing such in the U.S. Mail at least fifteen
(15) days before the hearing, addressed to the owner at his address as
listed in the office of the County Assessor, unless a better address is
known. Also accompanying the notice shall be a form for filing
written comments.
(4) The hearing may be held in conjunction with second reading of an
ordinance establishing the district, or separately.
(5) Following the hearing and consideration of the testimony and written
comments submitted, the Council may create the district by passage
of an ordinance if it has determined that the following criteria are
met:
(a) The Petition of Resolution of Intent, as amended is in
substantial compliance with the requirements of this Chapter,
and the procedures specified have been substantially
followed.
(b) The proposed improvements will confer a benefit on the
property to be assessed, no assessment will be unreasonable
when compared with the fair market value of any parcel to be
assessed, the assessments will comply with the provisions of
this Chapter and are equitable with respect to the resulting
benefits.
(c) The costs of any improvements to be paid by the City will
confer a general public benefit, and the creation of the district
and construction of the improvements is in the public interest.
(6) The ordinance creating the district may provide lawful changes or
modifications to the terms of the Petition or Resolution of Intent as
the Council deems equitable, provided, however, that the maximum
assessment specified for any parcel of property may not be increased
nor may the quantity or quality of the improvements be reduced
unless the affected property owners have agreed to such changes in
writing.
(C) No local improvements other than streets, curb and gutter, paving,
sidewalks, water mains, sewers and their appurtenances, shall be ordered in
the event a majority in area, or a majority in frontage, as the case may be, of
the owners of the lands to be assessed with the costs thereof, shall have
filed a written protest against such improvements within twenty (20) days
after final passage of the ordinance creating the district and authorizing the
construction of such improvements.
(D) The ordinance shall be recorded and shall describe the property to be
assessed by legal description.
1-19-5: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS AND MANAGEMENT OF
THE DISTRICT
(A) Following the creation of the district, the City Council shall cause the
improvements to be constructed substantially in accordance with the terms of the
ordinance creating the district and the applicable provisions of the Petition or
Resolution of Intent, as amended.
(B) All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standard City
construction and material specifications and regulations, and shall be the
property of the City.
(C) The City Council shall be the governing body of the district and shall have
full authority to act on behalf of the district in all matters, and shall have all
powers granted to the City when acting on behalf of the district.
(D) The costs of constructing the improvements may be financed in any lawful
manner, including the issuance of local improvement bonds or other
instruments of indebtedness issued for that purpose.
1-19-6: BASIS OF ASSESSMENTS
(A) The costs of improvements shall be assessed against the property in the
district in accordance with the criteria set out in this Section, unless the
Council determines that an adjustment is necessary because such criteria
would result in inequities and would not accurately reflect the proportional
benefit to the various parcels of property resulting from the construction of
the improvements on account of topographical or other physical limitations
on the development and use any of the property, or because of the shape of
any parcel.
(B) Costs of Construction.
(1) The costs of construction of streets, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and
alleys shall generally be assessed against those parcels abutting the
affected street or alley, on a pro-rata basis proportional to the
frontage length of each parcel of property to be assessed, when the
depths of the parcels assessed measured back from the
improvements concerned are substantially similar.
(2) The costs of curbs, gutters, sidewalks or street improvements on
streets which are abutted only by corner lots shall generally be
assessed as follows: one-fourth (1/4) of the costs to be assessed
shall be assessed to the corner parcels abutting such street, based
upon the pro-rata abutting length of such corner parcels. The
remaining three-fourths (3/4) of the costs to be assessed shall be
assessed to each corner parcel and the parcels located between each
corner parcel and the middle of the block on which such corner lot is
located, based upon their pro-rata frontages on that block.
(3) When the depth of property to be assessed for abutting
improvements varies substantially from one tract to another, the
assessments may be assigned pro-rata based upon area or upon the
basis of different assessment ratios for different zones at different
depths from the improvements in such a manner that the assessments
assigned will be equitable with respect to the benefits accruing to the
various tracts of land to be assessed.
(C) The costs of street and alley intersections shall be assumed by the City.
The City may also assume a portion of the costs of street improvements,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks or bike paths along minor or major arterial streets
as designated on the City’ s Major Thoroughfare Plan as the City Council
deems appropriate. The City may assume other costs as the Council deems
appropriated.
(D) Assessments for sewer main improvements or water main improvements
shall be assessed upon all of the benefited property pro-rata based upon the
area of each parcel to be assessed.
(E) The costs of other public improvements shall be assessed to equitably
reflect the respective benefits to the property involved as determined by the
City Council.
1-19-7: APPORTIONMENT OF THE COSTS AND ASSESSMENT
(A) Upon substantial completion of the improvements or earlier if the total
costs of the improvements can be determined, the City Clerk shall prepare a
statement listing the total costs, including legal and administrative costs,
any accrued interest in indebtedness and apportion the costs to each parcel
of property to be assessed in accordance with the basis of assessment as
approved by the Council. The statement shall set a date for a hearing on
any complaint or objection concerning the improvements, the costs, or the
assessment of the costs. A copy of the statement shall be mailed to each of
the owners of property to be assessed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
date of the hearing, addressed to the address listed upon the petition or
resolution, or to a more current address if one has been provided. The
hearing shall be held either with second reading of the assessing ordinance,
or separately, as the Council may decide.
(B) After the hearing and consideration of any complaints or objections, the
Council may make such adjustments as are necessary, appropriate, and
lawful, except that no assessment may be imposed above the maximum
assessment as approved by the Council at the time the district was formed,
except to the extent that construction costs paid to independent contractors
exceed the original estimates, or as attributable to accrued interest on
district indebtedness, unless agreed to in writing by the owners of the
property affected. The Council shall assess the costs of the improvements
against each parcel of real estate to be assessed in the district by ordinance.
Passage of the ordinance shall be prima facia evidence of the fact that the
property assessed is benefited in the amount of the assessment, and that
such assessments have been lawfully levied.
(C) The assessing ordinance shall also set out the optional number of
installments, payment period, due dates and interest rate.
1-19-8: LIEN FOR ASSESSMENTS
(A) All assessments made in pursuance of this Chapter together with all interest
thereon and penalties for default in payment thereof and all costs in
collecting the same, shall constitute from the date of the final publication of
the assessing ordinance, a perpetual lien in the several amounts assessed
against each lot or tract of land and shall have priority over all other liens,
except general tax liens.
(B) As to any subdivision of any land assessed in pursuance of this Chapter, the
assessment shall in each case be a lien upon all of the subdivisions in
proportion to their respective areas.
(C) No delays, mistakes, errors, or irregularities in any act or proceedings
authorized by this Chapter shall prejudice or invalidate any final
assessment; but the same may be remedied by subsequent amending acts or
proceedings, as the case may require. When so remedied, the same shall
take effect as of the date of the original act or proceeding.
(D) If any court of competent jurisdiction any final assessment made in
pursuance to this Chapter is set aside, the Council may, upon notice as
required in the making of the original assessment, make a new assessment
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
1-19-9: ASSESSMENT ROLL
The City Clerk shall prepare a local assessment roll in book form showing in suitable
columns each piece of land assessed, the total amount of assessment, the amount of each
installment of principal and interest, if applicable, and the date on which each installment
will become due. The assessment roll shall have suitable columns for use in the case of
payment in the whole amount or of any installment or penalty.
1-19-10: PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
(A) Any assessment may be paid to the City at any time after the final
publication of the assessing ordinance. If paid within thirty (30) days after
final publication of the assessing ordinance a two percent (2%) discount
shall be allowed.
(B) At the end of the thirty (30) day period the City shall certify the assessment
role and deliver it to the County Treasurer for collection of the same in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 525, 526, 527, 528, 529, 530,
531 and 532 of Article 25 of Title 31, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973 as
amended, and other applicable statutes. A copy of the assessing ordinance
shall also be delivered to the County Treasurer. The City may also collect
the assessments itself, in which event any delinquent payments may be
certified to the County Treasurer for collection as other delinquent charges.
(C) Any person shall be deemed to have elected to pay in installments by
failure to pay the whole assessment within a thirty (30) day period, and
such person shall be conclusively considered to have consented to the
improvements, and such election shall be conclusively considered to be a
waiver of any right to question the power or jurisdiction of the City
constructing the improvements, the quality of work, the regularity or
sufficiency of the proceedings, the validity or correctness of the
assessments, or the validity of the lien thereof.
(D) No error, failure, neglect or default on the part of the County Assessor or
the County Treasurer in collection of the assessments shall invalidate any
special district assessment or affect the lien.
(E) Failure to pay any installment, whether of principal or interest when due,
shall cause the whole of the unpaid principal to become due and collectable
immediately. The whole amount of the unpaid principal and accrued
interest shall thereafter draw interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per
month or fraction of a month until the day of sale. At any time prior to the
day of the sale the owner may pay the amount of all unpaid installments
with interest at one percent (1%) per month or fraction of a month and all
penalties accrued and shall be restored to the right thereafter to pay
installments in the same manner as if the default had not been suffered.
The owner of any property not in default as to any installment or payment,
may, at any time, pay the whole of the unpaid principal with the interest
accruing to the maturity of the next installment of interest or principal.
(F) The County Treasurer shall receive payment of all assessments appearing
upon the assessment role with interest. In case of default in the payment of
any installment of principal or interest when due, the County treasurer shall
advertise and sell all property concerning which such default is suffered for
the payment of the whole of the unpaid assessments thereon. Said
advertisements and sale shall be made at the same times and in the same
manner, under all the same conditions and penalties, and with the same
effect as provided by general law for sales of real estate in default of
payment of the general property tax.
(G) At any sale by the County Treasurer for the purpose of paying a special
assessment for local improvements made under provisions of this Chapter,
the City may purchase such property without paying for the same in cash,
and shall receive certificates of purchase in the name of the City. Any
proceeds which the City realizes from such certificates of purchase,
whether from sale thereof, foreclosure upon, or sale of property after
acquiring a tax deed, shall be credited to the improvement district fund to
the extent of the unpaid assessment, penalties and interest. Any excess
realized shall be credited as the City Council shall determine. As the
holder of such certificate of purchase, the City shall have all rights granted
it under Section 31-25-532, C.R.S. 1973, as amended, or other statutes
applicable to the holder of a certificate of purchase on a sale for delinquent
taxes.
(H) The County Treasure shall remit payments to the City monthly on or before
the 10th day of each month for the previous calendar month.
1-19-11: DISSOLUTION AND ASSIGNMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
(A) Local improvement districts may be dissolved by a resolution of the
Council when all improvements have been completed, indebtedness
satisfied and assessments collected. The resolution shall be recorded.
(B) When all improvements have been completed and indebtedness satisfied,
any additional assessments or other monies collected may be assigned to
the Surplus and Deficiency Fund.
1-19-12: JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS ON APPEAL
(A) No legal or equitable action shall be brought or maintained except to enjoin
the collection of assessments levied under this chapter upon the grounds:
(1) That notice of a hearing upon the amount of the assessment was not
given as required by this Chapter. Any person presenting objections
to the governing body at or before the hearing on assessment shall be
deemed to have waived this ground.
(2) That the hearing upon the amount of the assessment as provided in
this Chapter was not held.
(3) That the improvement ordered was not one authorized by this
Chapter.
(4) That the assessment levied exceeds the benefits received by the
property assessed.
(B) No action shall be brought on the grounds provided in paragraph 3 or 4 of
subsection (A) of this Section unless the objections on which such action is
based have been presented to the governing body prior to the hearing on the
assessment in writing or orally at the hearing in the creation of the district
or the assessment of costs. Any action brought under this Chapter shall be
commenced within thirty (30) days after passage of the assessing ordinance
or else be forever barred.
Chapter 1-21
REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE
Sections:
1-21-1 REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
1-21-2 AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER
1-21-1: REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
(A) The City Councilmen, City Manager, Director of Community
Development, City Attorney, and City Planner shall each file with the City
Clerk a real estate disclosure statement within thirty (30) days of the date
on which they first take office or commence employment in such position.
(B) The real estate disclosure statement required to be filed hereunder shall be
on forms provided by the City and shall include a list identifying all real
property situated in Montrose County, Colorado, in which the declarant, his
spouse and any minor children residing with him, have any legal or
equitable interest, whether held in their own or other names or by any
partnership, trust corporation or other entity in which the declarant, his
spouse and any minor children residing with him together have a ten
percent (10%) or greater interest, including, but not limited to, an option to
buy or first rights of refusal. Property within the City of Montrose shall be
identified by street address, if any. Property outside of the City of
Montrose, or having no street address shall be identified by the section,
township and range within which it is located.
(C) Any person required to file a real estate disclosure statement shall file an
amended statement within thirty (30) days after the termination or
acquisition of any interest in real property for which disclosure is required
in accordance herewith, during the period of time in which such person
holds office or is employed by the City of Montrose in the positions
specified in Subsection (A) above.
(D) Any person vacating the position in subsection (A) above may have all real
estate disclosure statements or amendments thereto filed by such person
returned to such person upon request.
(E) The real estate disclosure statements and any amendments thereto on file
with the City Clerk shall be available for inspection during normal City
working hours. Persons inspecting statements shall sign a written request
giving their address.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully file a false or incomplete real
estate disclosure statement or amendment thereto or to willfully fail to file
any such statement or amendment thereto required by this Section.
(G) Statements required to be filed initially within thirty (30) days of the
effective date of this Chapter.
1-21-2 : AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER
No amendment or repeal of this Chapter shall be effective until approved at an election
called for that purpose. (Ord. 985, 4-20-78)
Chapter 1-22
RESPONSE TO EMERGENCIES, CIVIL EMERGENCIES OR LOCAL
DISASTERS
Sections:
1-22-1 TITLE
1-22-2 LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION
1-22-3 DEFINITIONS
1-22-4 AUTHORIZATION TO ISSUE DECLARATION OF CIVIL
EMERGENCY, EMERGENCY, OR LOCAL DISASTER
1-22-5 FILING OF DECLARATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCY,
EMERGENCY OR LOCAL DISASTER
1-22-6 TERM OF DECLARATION
1-22-7 SUCCESSION OF AUTHORITY
1-22-8 POWERS
1-22-9 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS
1-22-10 AUTHORITY TO ENTER A PROPERTY
1-22-11 LOCATION OF GOVERNING BODY MEETINGS AND
DEPARTMENTS
1-12-12 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
1-22-13 DUTIES OF LOCAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
COORDINATOR
1-22-14 ACCESS TO TABOR FUNDS
1-22-15 REPORT BY CITY MANAGER /DISCRETIONARY
RATIFICATION BY CITY COUNCIL
1-22-16 SEVERABILITY
1-22-17 ADOPTION OF BASE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
1-22-1: TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Montrose Emergency
and Local Disaster Response Act.
1-22-2: LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION.
It is the intent of this Chapter to provide for continuity of government
and for the necessary organization, powers, and authority to enable the
timely and effective use of all available city resources to prepare for,
respond to and recover from civil emergencies, emergencies, or local
disasters, whether natural or manmade, that are likely to affect the
health, security, safety, or property of the inhabitants of the city. It is
intended to grant as broad a power as permitted within applicable law,
the letter and spirit of the Montrose City Charter, and the council -
manager form of government. The City Council retains the power
and authority to direct the City Manager during the pendency of any
declaration of emergency under this chapter.
1-22-3: DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Civil emergency - means conditions of unrest such as riot, civil
disturbance, unlawful assembly, hostile military or paramilitary action,
war, terrorism, or sabotage.
Declaration - means the written document executed by the City
Manager which declares a disaster, emergency, or civil emergency, as
defined within this chapter.
Emergency - means any occurrence or threat of natural or man made
disaster of a major proportion in which the safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city or their property are jeopardized or placed at
extreme peril that timely action may avert or minimize.
Local disaster - means the occurrence of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or
manmade cause including but not limited to flood, fire, cyclone,
tornado, earthquake, severe high or low temperatures, blizzard,
landslide, mudslide, hurricane, building or structural collapse,
airplane crash, high water table, water pollution, air pollution,
epidemic, pandemic, riot, drought, utility emergency, sudden and
severe energy or water shortages, volcano, snow, ice, windstorm,
haboobs, waves, terrorism, hazardous substance spills, chemical or
petroleum spills, biological material release or spill, radiological
release or spill, structural failure, public health emergency or
accidents.
1-22-4: AUTHORIZATION TO ISSUE DECLARATION OF CIVIL
EMERGENCY, EMERGENCY, OR LOCAL DISASTER.
The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to declare a civil
emergency, emergency, or local disaster if the City Manager finds that
the city or any part thereof is suffering from or is in imminent danger of
suffering a natural or manmade civil emergency, emergency, or local
disaster.
1-22-5: FILING OF DECLARATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCY,
EMERGENCY OR LOCAL DISASTER.
Any declaration of a civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster by
the City Manager shall be promptly filed with the City Clerk and the
City Manager shall promptly notify the City Council of such
declaration. The public shall be notified of such a declaration
through general dissemination to the news media, posting on the city
website or other means of publicity intended to promptly advise the
general public.
1-22-6: TERM OF DECLARATION.
The declaration of a civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster
shall be in effect as determined by the City Manager for a period of
up to seven (7) days. This period may be extended upon submission of
a request by the City Manager and the approval of the City Council. In
the event a quorum of the City Council cannot be assembled to approve
a continuance of the declaration, such declaration shall remain in effect
until such time as a quorum can be assembled. In the event a quorum
of the City Council can meet to provide the City Manager with advice
and consultation during the pendency of a declaration, such meeting
shall be held in compliance with the Colorado Open Meetings Law
and City Council rules and procedures as soon as possible, but in no
event later than seven days following the initial declaration.
1-22-7: SUCCESSION OF AUTHORITY.
If the City Manager is unavailable, the line of succession of authority
shall include in order, Assistant City Manager, Chief of Police/
Emergency Manager, Emergency Management Coordinator,
Municipal Services Director, Administrative Services Director,
Finance Director, and thereafter any other department head in
alphabetical order of the name of the department. In the event none of
these people are available to serve as the City Manager, the deputy or
assistant director of the various departments in the line of
succession as indicated shall serve in such capacity.
1-22-8: POWERS.
Upon the issuance of a declaration of civil emergency, emergency, or
local disaster, the City Manager may exercise the following powers,
including, but not limited to:
(A) An order establishing a curfew during such hours of the days or nights and
affecting such categories of persons as may be designated.
(B) An order to direct and compel the evacuation of all or a part of the
population from any stricken or threatened areas within the city, if the
City Manager deems this action is necessary for the preservation of
life, property or other civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster
mitigation, response or recovery activities, and to prescribe routes, modes
of transportation and destination in connection with any such
evacuation.
(C) An order controlling, restricting, allocating or regulating the use, sale,
production or distribution of food, water, clothing, and other
commodities, materials, goods, necessities, services or resources.
(D) An order requiring the closing of businesses deemed nonessential by the
City Manager.
(E) An order suspending or limiting the sale, distribution, dispensing, or
transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and/or
combustible products, and requiring the closing of those businesses
or parts of businesses insofar as the sale, distribution, dispensing or
transportation of these items are concerned.
(F) An order prohibiting the sale or distribution within the city of any
products which, the City Manager determines, could be employed in a
manner that would constitute a danger to public health or safety.
(G) An order closing any streets, alleys, sidewalks, public parks, public
ways or other public places.
(H) An order closing the access to any buildings, streets, alleys, sidewalks
or other public or private places.
(I) An order establishing control routes of transportation ingress or egress.
(J) An order imposing traffic restrictions to control ingress and egress from a
civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster site, including prohibiting
all traffic except for vehicles operated by individuals deemed essential
by the City Manager to assist in the emergency operations and
prohibiting any person to stop, stand, park or abandon any vehicle in a
right-of-way that in the discretion of a police officer obstructs
emergency operations or snow removal operations. Any such vehicle
shall be subject to removal pursuant to the general police power of the
city to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(K) Subject to any applicable requirements for compensation, commandeer
or use any private property if the City Manager finds this action
necessary to cope with the civil emergency, emergency or local
disaster.
(L) Appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, authorize the obtaining
and acquisition of property, equipment, services, supplies and materials
without the strict compliance with procurement regulations or
procedures.
(M) Transfer the direction, personnel or functions of city departments and
agencies for the purposes of performing or facilitating civil
emergency, emergency, or local disaster services.
(N) Utilize all available resources of the city as may be reasonably
necessary to cope with the civil emergency, emergency, or local
disaster whether in preparation for, response to, or recovery from a
civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster.
(O) Suspend or modify the provisions of any ordinance, if strict compliance
thereof would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in
coping with any civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster.
(P) Accept services, gifts, grants and loans, equipment, supplies, and
materials whether from private, nonprofit or governmental sources.
(Q) Suspend or limit the use of the city's water resources.
(R) Require emergency services of any city officer or employee. If regular
city forces are determined to be inadequate, then to acquire the
services of such other personnel as are available, including citizen
volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency
services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities provided
by applicable state law.
(S) Hire or contract for construction, snow removal, engineering,
architectural, building, electrical, plumbing, and/or other professional
or construction services essential to continue the activities of the city
without the advertising of bids or compliance with procurement
requirements which otherwise would be applicable.
(T) Make application for local, state or federal assistance.
(U) Terminate or suspend any process, operation, machine, device or event
that is or may negatively impact the health, safety and welfare of
persons or property within the city.
(V) Delegate authority to such city officials as the City Manager determines
reasonably necessary or expedient.
(W) Require the continuation, termination, disconnection or suspension of
natural gas, electric power, water, sewer or other public utilities.
(X) Close or cancel the use of any municipally owned or operated building or
other public facilities.
(Y) Exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of civil
emergency, emergency, or local disaster including the waiving of
compliance with any time-consuming procedures and formalities,
including notices, as may be prescribed by law pertaining thereto.
(Z) Issue any and all other orders or undertake such other functions and
activities as the City Manager reasonably believes is required to protect
the health, safety, welfare of persons or property within the city, to
preserve the public peace, or to abate, clean up, or mitigate the effects
of any civil emergency, emergency or local disaster. The declaration
of civil emergency, emergency or local disaster shall list the
restrictions applicable to that circumstance by reference to the
individual subsections of this section. The restrictions may be changed
from time to time during the time frame of the declaration based upon
the discretion of the City Manager.
1-22-9: ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS.
(A) The members of the police department, code enforcement, and such other
law enforcement and peace officers as may be authorized by the City
Manager, are further authorized and directed to enforce the orders,
rules and regulations made or issued pursuant to this chapter. All
members of the public shall be deemed to have been given notice of the
restrictions contained within a declaration upon its dissemination to
the news media or publication on the city website or other means of
publicity.
(B) During the period of a declared civil emergency, emergency, or local
disaster, a person shall not:
(1) Enter or remain upon the premises of any establishment
not open for business to the general public, unless such
person is the owner or authorized agent of the
establishment;
(2) Violate any of the orders duly issued by the City
Manager or designee pursuant to such declaration;
(3) Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any duly authorized
city officer, employee or volunteer in the enforcement or
exercise of the provisions of the chapter, or of the
undertaking of any activity pursuant to this chapter.
(C) The municipal court shall have the jurisdiction to preside over
alleged violations of this section. A person convicted of a violation of
this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in §1-2-3 of the
Montrose Municipal Code.
1-22-10: AUTHORITY TO ENTER A PROPERTY.
During the period of a declared civil emergency, emergency, or local
disaster, a city employee or authorized agent may enter onto or upon
private property if the employee or authorized agent has reasonable
grounds to believe that there is a true emergency and an immediate
need for assistance for the protection of life or property, and that
entering onto the private land will allow the person to take such steps
to alleviate or minimize the emergency or disaster or to prevent or
minimize danger to lives or property from the declared civil
emergency, emergency, or local disaster.
1-22-11: LOCATION OF GOVERNING BODY MEETINGS AND
DEPARTMENTS.
(A) Whenever a civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster makes it
imprudent or impossible to conduct the affairs of the city at its
regular locations, the governing body may meet at any place, inside
or outside the city limits, or may meet via the telephone or other
communication device. Any temporary civil emergency,
emergency, or local disaster meeting location for the governing body
shall continue until a new location is established or until the civil
emergency, emergency or local disaster is terminated and the
governing body is able to return to its normal location.
(B) Whenever a civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster makes it
imprudent or impossible to conduct the affairs of any department of the
city at its regular location, such department may conduct its business
at any place, inside or outside the city limits and may remain at the
temporary location until the civil emergency, emergency or local
disaster is declared ended or until the department is able to return to
its normal location.
(C) Whenever a civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster makes it
imprudent or impossible for City Council, or any city committee,
board or commission to meet at a previously scheduled date and time,
such meeting shall be deemed to be postponed until a quorum of the
City Council, committee, board or commission is able to meet.
(D) Any official act or meeting required to be performed at any regular
location of the governing body or of its departments is valid when
performed at any temporary location authorized under this section.
(E) The provisions of this section shall apply to all executive, legislative and
judicial branches, powers and functions conferred upon the city and its
officers, employees, and authorized agents by the Colorado
Constitution, Colorado Statutes, the Montrose Municipal Code,
including the Montrose City Charter.
1-22-12: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
(A) The City Manager may, on behalf of the city, enter into such reciprocal
aid, mutual aid, joint powers agreements, intergovernmental
assistance agreements or other compacts or plans with other
governmental entities for the protection of life and property. Such
agreements may include the furnishing or exchange of supplies,
equipment, facilities, personnel and/or services.
(B) The governing body or any of its committees, commissions or
authorities may exercise such powers and functions in light of the
exigencies of the emergency or disaster and may waive compliance
with time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law
pertaining thereto.
(C) The foregoing shall apply to all executive, legislative and judicial powers
and functions conferred upon the city and its officers, employees and
authorized agents.
1-22-13: DUTIES OF LOCAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
COORDINATOR.
The local Emergency Management Coordinator shall:
(A) Comply with all requirements issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and the Colorado Division Emergency
Management Agency (CDEM) in order to procure the maximum
amount of federal and state assistance and grant monies for the city.
(B) Assure that the local emergency operations plan (EOP) is kept current.
(C) Act as liaison with all local emergency response agencies and ensure their
cooperation in drafting their portions of the plan. All agencies over
which the city has authority shall provide such cooperation in planning.
(D) Develop a schedule of training to ensure that all persons with specific
responsibilities under the EOP understand their duties and are capable of
performing such duties. All persons with specific responsibilities under
the EOP shall comply with the training schedule to understand their
duties and be capable of performing their duties.
(E) Prepare and coordinate exercises of the EOP as mandated by CDEM and
FEMA. The emergency operations plan shall be tested as deemed
necessary.
(F) Conduct debriefings in the aftermath of plan exercises and revise the
plan to reflect lessons learned.
(G) Assist the City Manager in negotiating and entering into mutual aid
agreements.
(H) Coordinate resources for the City Manager and perform all other duties
assigned by the City Manager in the response to a civil emergency,
emergency, or local disaster.
(I) Cooperate and coordinate with state and federal authorities in the
aftermath of a civil emergency, emergency or local disaster to ensure the
maximum available support for recovery and assistance for persons
and businesses.
(J) Develop a mitigation plan for the city in cooperation with all city
departments and agencies. All agencies over which the city has authority
shall provide cooperation in mitigation planning.
(K) Work through the City Manager to ensure that requirements for
infrastructure replacement are consistent with current best practices to
ensure the maximum assistance from the federal government in the
event that public facilities must be reconstructed or replaced in the
aftermath of a civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster.
1-22-14: ACCESS TO TABOR FUNDS.
In the event of a declared civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster,
the city manager shall have access to the city emergency reserves
mandated by the Taxpayer's Bill of Rights (TABOR) as set forth in
article X, section 20, subsection (5) of the Colorado Constitution. Funds
utilized pursuant to this section shall be replenished no later than the
conclusion of the following fiscal year.
1-22-15: REPORT BY CITY MANAGER /DISCRETIONARY
RATIFICATION BY CITY COUNCIL.
At such time as a civil emergency, emergency, or local disaster shall be
declared ended, the city manager shall prepare a written report that
details the official actions taken by the city manager during the
declaration, including a timeline, significant actions, and a detailed
summary of all expenses incurred during such declaration. Such
written report shall be submitted to the city council within 30 days. The
City Council may, but is not required to, approve a resolution ratifying
the actions taken by the City Manager during the declaration. In the
event that a resolution is not approved, the City Manager 's report shall
be retained by the city clerk and made a part of the official record of the
City Council meeting at which the report was discussed by the City
Council in conjunction with the City Manager.
1-22-16: SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable, and if
any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any
reason be held to be invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, or if the application of this Chapter
to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, unenforceable or
unconstitutional by such court, such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of
this Chapter.
1-22-17: ADOPTION OF BASE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.
The Base Emergency Operations Plan for the City of Montrose shall
be adopted by resolution or ordinance of the City Council.
Amendments thereafter may be adopted by resolution of the City
Council or by the City Manager by promulgation.
TITLE II
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Planning Commission
2 (Rep. Ord. 785, 1-17-74)
3 (Rep. Ord. 695, 12-17-70)
4 (Rep. Ord. 618, 3-7-68)
5 (Rep. Ord. 914, 11-4-76)
Chapter 2-1
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:
2-1-1 CREATION OF PLANNING COMMISSION
2-1-2 TERMS OF OFFICE
2-1-3 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS
2-1-4 (Reserved for future use. Ord. 2020, 8-19-2004)
2-1-5 DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION
2-1-6 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
2-1-7 LEGAL STATUS OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
2-1-1: CREATION OF PLANNING COMMISSION
(A) There is hereby created a Planning Commission to consist of seven (7)
members appointed from among the qualified electors of the City by a
majority vote of the City Council members present. In addition, by a
majority vote of the City Council members present, the Council may
appoint alternate Planning Commission members who may be called to sit
on the Commission and vote as a member thereof on account of the absence
of any regular member. (Ord. 2158, 5-3-2007)
(B) Each Planning Commission Member except the Chairman shall receive
compensation of forty dollars ($40.00) per month. The Chairman shall
receive compensation of sixty dollars ($60.00) per month. Additionally,
members may be reimbursed for authorized expenses. (Ord. 1487, 9-2-93)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE
Members of the Planning Commission and alternates, if any, shall serve four (4) year
overlapping terms. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by
consent of a majority of the City Council members present. Members of the Planning
Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, and may be removed by
majority vote of the City Council members present, with or without cause. (Ord. 2158, 5-
3-2007)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS
The Planning Commission shall elect from its membership a chairman and his term of
office shall be for one year with eligibility for re-election. The Commission shall adopt
rules for its own organization and for the transaction of business not in conflict with
ordinances or laws. It shall also keep a public record of its proceedings.
Meetings shall be held monthly or more frequently as the Commission deems it
advisable.
2-1-4: (Reserved for future use. Ord. 2020, 8-19-2004)
2-1-5: DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION (Ord. 2142, 12-21-2006)
(A) The Commission shall perform the following duties:
(1) Pursuant to relevant provisions of the Municipal Code, review
matters limited to planning, zoning, subdivision, land use and
development and make recommendations to the Council for
adoption of such amendments.
(2) Promote public interest and education in planning land use and
development matters.
(3) Participate in the process for the adoption of a comprehensive or
master plan and amendments thereto as described in Section 2-1-6.
(4) Perform other duties as set out in the City Charter and City
ordinances or regulations.
(B) The Planning Commission may recommend, to Council for adoption, bylaws
for the conduct of its business consistent with the City Charter and
City ordinances and regulations.
2-1-6: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (Ord. 2142, 12-21-2006)
(A) The Commission shall be encouraged to participate in the City Council
approved public processes for the adoption of a Comprehensive Plan
(sometimes referred to as a master plan), parts thereof, and amendments
thereto.
(B) The elements of the Comprehensive Plan may be adopted separately and
may include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Plans for physical improvements, public projects and facilities;
(2) A major street plan;
(3) A land use plan;
(4) Detailed goals, objectives, guidelines, policies, and implementation
steps;
(5) Other plans related to development, land use and environmental
protection.
(C) The Comprehensive Plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding
and accomplishing the coordinated and harmonious development of the
City and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future
needs, promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity,
and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development, including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic,
the promotion of safety from fire, flood waters, and other dangers, adequate
provision for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient
distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and
arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, the promotion
of energy conservation, and the adequate provision of public utilities and
other public requirements.
(D) Prior to adoption of the Comprehensive Plan or any element thereof, City
Council shall hold a public hearing with prior published notice thereof.
2-1-7: LEGAL STATUS OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (Ord. 2142, 12-21-
2006)
Following adoption, the Comprehensive Plan and elements thereof shall serve as a guide
to the City Council and City Manager, and shall have such legal status as may be
provided by ordinance.
TITLE III
DEPARTMENTS
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Trash Collection
2 Fire Department (Rep. By Ord. 916, 1-18-76)
3 Building Department (Rep. By Ord. 926, 4-7-77)
4 Water Department (Rep. By Ord. 930, 5-5-77)
5 City Water and Sewer Systems
6 Pretreatment Program, Industrial User, and Sewage
System Supplemental Regulations
7 Stormwater Pollution Prevention
8 Cross Connection Control Program
Chapter 3-1
TRASH COLLECTION
Sections:
3-1-1 TRASH CONTAINERS
3-1-2 ADDITIONAL TRASH (Rep. By Ord. 1372, 7-7-88)
3-1-3 PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION
3-1-4 SPECIAL WASTE COLLECTION MATTERS
3-1-5 CONTAINERS (Rep. By Ord. 1372, 7-7-88)
3-1-6 TAMPERING WITH TRASH CONTAINERS
3-1-7 COLLECTION CHARGES FOR SCHEDULED COLLECTION
3-1-8 REMEDIES FOR NONPAYMENT
3-1-9 TERMINATION AND INITIATION OF SERVICE
3-1-10 ABUSE OF TRASH COLLECTION SERVICE
3-1-11 ADMINISTRATION
3-1-12 CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION
3-1-1: TRASH CONTAINERS
(A) The City shall collect trash only from those trash containers meeting City
specifications compatible with City collection equipment.
(B) The City shall determine which residential customers shall be required to
use individual containers and which shall use shared containers. The City
shall provide and maintain shared containers at City expense.
(C) The City will provide initially one ninety (90) gallon container to each
residential customer required to use individual containers at the time the
dwelling unit is first served. Thereafter, the customer shall be responsible
to maintain it in good condition. Provided, however, the City may perform
minor repairs to the containers as appropriate in the City’s discretion.
Replacement of the container shall be at the customer’s expense. Such
container shall be owned by the City and not removed from the property
served.
(1) A residential customer of the City of Montrose trash collection
service may request in writing one (1) additional ninety (90) gallon
container for residential use only. Requests for additional containers
shall be for a minimum duration of eight (8) months.
(Ord. 2091, 11-3-2005)
(D) The City will supply a nonresidential customer using a ninety (90) gallon
container with one ninety (90) gallon container at the time the customer is
first served. Such customer shall provide at their expense any additional or
larger containers and maintain all containers in good condition. Provided
however, the City may make minor repairs to such containers as
appropriate in its discretion. Upon termination of service, any City
supplied container or its replacement shall be returned to the City in good
condition or the customer will be charged for the cost of repair or
replacement. Such container is owned by the City and shall not be
removed from the property served.
(E) The City shall maintain a supply of containers for sale to customers.
(F) Each customer shall supply a sufficient number of complying containers
adequate to accommodate the amount of trash normally generated by the
customer.
(G) Containers which are overfilled, overweight or dangerous shall not be
serviced by the City.
(H) Containers of City customers shall be appropriately identified.
(Ord. 1372, 7-7-88)
3-1-2: ADDITIONAL TRASH (Rep. By Ord. 1372, 7-7-88)
3-1-3: PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION
(A) Containers and other items, when other items not within a trash container
may be appropriately offered for collection as determined by the City, shall
be placed at the edge of the alley easily accessible to the sanitation crews
for collection, unless a customer does not abut an alley.
(Ord. 2091, 11-3-2005)
(B) Customers without an alley shall place their containers and other items,
when other items not within a trash container may be appropriately offered
for collection as determined by the City, adjacent to an abutting street by
six o’ clock (6:00) A.M. on the day of collection. Containers shall be
removed from any street by the customer following collection on the same
day the trash is collected. (Ord. 2091, 11-3-2005)
(C) Containers may be placed in other locations accessible to City sanitation
trucks if approved by the City. (Ord. 2091, 11-3-2005)
3-1-4: SPECIAL WASTE COLLECTION MATTERS
(A) No extremely flammable, toxic, explosive or hazardous materials, no
materials contaminated with contagious diseases, and no dead animals shall
be placed in any containers for collection. Special arrangements must be
made with the City for collection of such items or for collection of other
large or unusual loads. The City may refuse to collect such items, or may
charge an additional fee. (Ord. 2091, 11-3-2005)
(B) Arrangements may be made for non-scheduled collections if approved by
the City. An additional charge may be required by the City.
(Ord. 1081, 6-19-80)
3-1-5: CONTAINERS (Rep. By Ord. 1372, 7-7-88)
3-1-6: TAMPERING WITH TRASH CONTAINERS
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, tamper with, remove or otherwise disturb any
trash container or its contents which belongs to another without permission or a legal
right to do so. (Ord. 2091, 11-3-2005)
3-1-7: COLLECTION CHARGES FOR SCHEDULED COLLECTION
(Ord. 2033, 12-02-2004)
(A) (All Residential Customers shall be charged the following rates
beginning January 1, 2011 and thereafter, (Charges per Month): (Ord.
2256, 10/21/2010)
(B) Reserved for future use. [Rep. by Ord. 2033, 12-02-2004]
Number of Containers
(90 gallons each)
Total Charges for
one (1) pick up
per week
1 $14.40
2 $24.90
(C)
(1) Non-residential Customers shall be charged the following rates
beginning January 1, 2011 and thereafter:
Rates:
$’s per gallon $0.022
The monthly Non-residential Customer charge shall be calculated by
multiplying the above Rate [in Dollars per gallon] by the Total Monthly
Capacity in gallons. The Total Monthly Capacity in gallons is calculated
by multiplying the gallon size of container used by the Non-residential
Customer by the contracted number of pick-ups per week [adjusted for
additional pick-ups] by the number of weeks in a year (52) and then
dividing by the number of months (12) in a year. (Ord. 2256,
10/21/2010)
(Rate)*((Gallons)*(Pick-ups)*52)÷12)
(2) Depending upon the amount of trash generated, the City, in
consultation with each of the Non-residential Customers, will
determine the appropriate size and number of container(s) to be
utilized and the frequency of scheduled pick ups; either 2, 3, 4, or 5
per week.
(D) Residential customers shall be charged for City trash collection services
whether or not they use said trash collection services, except those
multifamily residences of eight (8) or more units which elect not to utilize
City trash collection service, and except for periods when the dwelling unit
is unoccupied and a signed form from the customer to terminate said trash
collection service has been received, along with a fee in an amount set forth
in Section 3-1-1 of the City of Montrose Regulations Manual to pickup the
container; when the customer provides notice to the City requesting said
trash collection services be resumed a separate fee as set forth in Section 3-
1-1 of the City of Montrose Regulations Manual will be collected to
redeliver a container. (Ord. 2140, 12-7-2006)
(E) Charges for periods of services of less than one month shall be prorated.
(F) All bills shall be subject to a County Landfill surcharge that is included in
the calculation of the collection charges.
(G) [Rep. by Ord. 2033, 12-02-2004]
3-1-8: REMEDIES FOR NONPAYMENT
(A) All charges shall be a lien upon the property served from the date billed
which may be foreclosed in accordance with law.
(B) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for
amounts due plus interest.
(C) The City may certify any amounts due to the County which may then be
assessed and collection as other real property taxes against the property
served.
(D) The City may terminate service in accordance with the procedure set out in
Section 3-5-16, as amended, in this Code.
(E) It us unlawful to fail to pay the charges assessed by this Chapter and the
City may prosecute any person liable for the charges and failing to pay for a
violation of this Chapter.
3-1-9: TERMINATION AND INITIATION OF SERVICE
(A) Any commercial or industrial customer desiring to terminate or resume City
trash collection shall apply to the City on forms provided by the City.
(B) Termination shall be effective at the next billing cycle date if the customer
has removed the City’s identification mark from his containers and cans.
(C) City trash collection may be initiated when the customer’s containers are
identified with a standard City mark following application for service.
3-1-10: ABUSE OF TRASH COLLECTION SERVICE
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize City trash collection services
without paying the charges imposed by this Chapter.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to place his trash for collection with or
in containers belonging to a City customer unless such person is paying the
charges imposed by this Chapter and has the other’ s permission.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person not a City customer to mark or possess a
container or can with the standard City identification mark.
3-1-11: ADMINISTRATION
The City Manager is responsible for the administration of this Chapter and may issue
additional regulations for its administration and enforcement. (Ord. 1081, 6-19-80)
3-1-12: CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION
(A) Residential customers, including residents of multifamily residences of
eight (8) or more units, that elect to utilize the City’s trash collection
service, may choose to participate in the curbside recycling collection
program. Residential customers who elect to participate in the curbside
recycling collection program will not be charged an additional fee for
participation.
(B) The City shall initially provide each residential customer who elects to
participate in the curbside recycling collection program with two (2)
recycling containers at the time the dwelling unit is first served, free of
charge. Thereafter, the customer shall be responsible to maintain said
containers in good condition. The City may perform minor repairs to the
containers as appropriate at the City’s discretion. Replacement of the initial
two (2) containers shall be at the customer’s expense. Such containers shall
be owned by the City and not removed from the property served.
(C) The City shall maintain a supply of containers for sale or distribution to
customers.
(D) Customers shall place their recycling containers adjacent to an abutting
street, or in such other location as may be designated by the City, by six o’
clock (6:00) A.M. on the day of collection. Containers shall be removed
from the street or alley by the customer following collection on the same
day the recyclable material is collected.
(E) Only those materials specified by the City to be recycled in each container
may be placed in those containers. The City Manager shall identify from
time to time, through City policies and procedures, acceptable recyclable
materials the City shall collect, based upon available markets for said
materials. Containers with unacceptable materials as defined by the City
may not be serviced.
(F) The City shall schedule curbside recycling collection at a frequency to be
determined by the City Manager, but not less frequently than one (1)
general collection per month.
(G) Sections 3-1-10 and 3-1-11 of the Official Municipal Code of the City of
Montrose are hereby made applicable to the City’s curbside recycling
services.
(Ord.2214, 12-18-2008)
Chapter 3-5
CITY WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
Sections:
3-5-1 APPLICABILITY
3-5-2 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; DEPOSIT
3-5-3 APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION
3-5-4 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY
3-5-5 WATER AND SEWER USER CHARGES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-5-6 REMEDIES FOR NONPAYMENT
3-5-7 SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS
3-5-8 WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS
3-5-9 RIGHT OF ENTRY
3-5-10 UTILITY FUND
3-5-11 SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS
3-5-12 WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM INVESTMENT AND
CONNECTION CHARGES
3-5-13 INSIDE CITY WATER RATES
3-5-14 NONMETERED WATER RATES INSIDE CITY (Rep. By Ord. 1096,
10-2-80)
3-5-15 OUTSIDE CITY WATER RATES
3-5-16 SHUT OFF, TERMINATION, AND RESUMPTION OF WATER
SERVICE
3-5-17 SENIOR CITIZEN’ S WATER RATE REDUCTION (Rep. By Ord.
1096, 10-2-80)
3-5-18 RESTRICTION OF WATER USE
3-5-19 USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS
3-5-20 SEWER CHARGES
3-5-21 LIMITATIONS ON USE OF THE SEWER SYSTEM
3-5-22 RATES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE DUMPING OF SEPTAGE
AND SEWAGE INTO THE CITY SEWER SYSTEM
3-5-23 RULES AND REGULATIONS
3-5-24 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
3-5-1: APPLICABILITY
(A) All users of City water or sewer shall be subject to the terms and conditions
as set out in this Chapter and shall be subject to all applicable regulations of
this Code, the City Charter and other ordinances, resolution and regulations
of the City, as they now exist or as they may be amended in the future.
(B) The owner, lessee, party in possession and party actually using water or
sewer service, or any property served by City water or sewer shall be
jointly and severally liable for all fees, charges, and penalties imposed by
this Chapter and for compliance with other requirements of this Chapter,
notwithstanding any agreement among themselves.
3-5-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; DEPOSIT
(A) Application for City water or sewer service shall be made upon forms
provided by the City, which forms shall require information as may be
necessary for the proper billing and management of the water or sewer
system. (Ord. 930, 5-5-77)
(B) All applications for City of Montrose water and sewer service shall be
accompanied by a deposit in an amount specified in § 3-1-1(A) of the City
of Montrose Regulations Manual; however, no deposit shall be required of
an applicant who has previously been a customer of the City of Montrose
water and sewer system and has paid all charges billed without delinquency
for the period of the applicant’s latest eighteen (18) months' service.
(Ord. 2113, 7-6-2006)
(C) The City shall grant a permit for the use of water or sewer upon receipt of
the proper applications, payment of all applicable fees, charges, and
deposits.
(D) The deposit shall be returned to the customers at (i) the termination of
service together with interest after deducting all water, sewer and sanitation
charges or fees due to the City; or (ii) together with interest after eighteen
(18) months of continuous service during which no Delinquent/Shut off
Notice has been sent to the customer. Interest on customer deposits shall
be calculated at the rate set by the Department of Regulatory Agencies,
Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado, as adjusted from time
to time, which rate is hereby adopted by the City without acknowledgment
of, or submission to the jurisdiction of the State of Colorado or its agencies
and departments with regard to such matters. (Ord. 2113, 7-6-2006)
(E) The application for City water or sewer service outside of the City shall be
accompanied by evidence of title and an agreement executed as required in
subsection 3-5-3 (B).
3-5-3: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION
(A) Applications for connection to the City water or sewer system shall be
made upon forms provided by the City which forms shall require
information as may be necessary for the proper management and operation
of the systems. The application shall be accompanied by the system
investment and connection charges imposed by this Chapter, and a plan of
the property to be served.
(B) If the property to be served is outside of the City limits, the application
shall also be accompanied by:
(1) A title memorandum furnished by a reputable title company or a
copy of the applicant’s deed or a copy of a title insurance policy
showing the title status of the property and the owner of record and
specifying the legal description of the property to be served.
(2) An agreement executed by the applicant and the owner of record
agreeing to the following conditions for water or sewer service
outside the City. The agreement shall contain the following
conditions:
(a) The property served shall be constructed and maintained in
compliance with all City building regulations including the
Plumbing Code, Building Code, Electrical Code, and Gas Code.
(b) City water or sewer service shall be deemed a privilege and
may be terminated at any time without notice by the City, if
the Council shall deem it necessary to do so for any reason.
(c) The owner and applicant agree to annex (and to execute a
petition for annexation of the property served) to the City
upon request at any time that such property is eligible for
annexation, and they agree to vote for annexation of said
property at any annexation election which may be held.
They will pay the City’s cost and expenses for such
annexation proceeding on a prorata basis with other property
being annexed. This agreement shall be binding upon and
shall run with the land for which service is provided.
(d) Whenever a City sewer main is installed within four hundred
feet (400’) of the premises served by City water, the occupant
or owner will upon request of the City connect to such sewer
line and pay all connection charges therefore in accordance
with City ordinance and regulations as they may be amended
from time to time.
(3) Applications for connection to the City water or sewer system shall
be accompanied by properly executed documents granting the City
all easements reasonably necessary for water, sewer, or drainage as
required by the City.
(C) When the application is for service to a privately owned water or sewer line
serving several individual users, all users shall be listed on the application
and all owners of record shall execute the agreements required by this
Section. Privately owned water or sewer lines may not serve additional
users in excess of the number previously authorized until an amended
application, accompanied by the applicable system investment and
connection charges, has been approved by the City.
(D) Applications for connection inside the City limits may be approved by the
City Manager. Applications for all connections outside of the City limits
or for connection of a privately owned water or sewer line must be
approved by the Council.
(E) The Council may declare a moratorium on new connections at any time due
to limitations on system capacity or other circumstances which require such
action in their opinion. (Ord. 930, 5-5-77)
3-5-4: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY
(A) The City shall make all connections to the City water or sewer system and
shall install water service lines from the City main to the customer’ s curb
box and shall be responsible for maintenance of said connections, water
service lines and curb box.
(B)
(1) The City shall provide, at City expense, all water meters one
inch (1”) size or smaller along with a remote reading device,
yoke and a pit if required. Such yokes, pits, meters and remote
readers will be installed by the builder or customer at his
expense. The location of all meters and remote reading devices
must be approved by the City prior to installation. No
occupancy permit shall be issued by the City for any building
requiring water service until a meter and remote reading device,
if required, has been installed, inspected and approved in
accordance with these provisions. The City will own and
maintain all meters one inch (1”) in size or less after installation
along with the remote reading devices.
(a) Condominium airspace units and townhomes shall
each be provided with a separate water meter.
Apartment buildings solely containing residential
rental units may have one meter for each building, but
shall be provided with a separate meter for each unit
upon conversion to condominium airspace units or
townhomes. (Ord. 2231, 10-15-2009)
(2) Individual pumped sewer service, such as a grinder pump or E-1
pump system, shall be allowed only in those instances when the City
determines that gravity operated service is not technically feasible.
The customer of property authorized to utilize an individual pumped
sewage service system such as a pump grinder or the E-1 pump
system, shall be responsible for the cost of the initial pump
installation along with its vault and appurtenances. Such pumps
must be of a type approved by the City and installation shall be in
accordance with City standards and specifications. The City may
require that developers of subdivisions approved for such pump
systems, to install vaults and appurtenances for the pumps and
connect the piping to the City main as part of the installation of the
sewage collection system. Following City approval of proper
installation of the connection, vault and pump, the City will own and
maintain the vault, appurtenances therein, the pump and line
between pump and City main, thereafter. (Ord. 1885, 02-07-2002)
(C) The installation and maintenance of any meter larger than one inch (1”) and
the pit, yoke, remote reading device and other fixtures therefore shall be the
responsibility of and at the expense of the builder or customer. The
location of such meter and the type and make of the meter, materials and
other fixtures must be approved by the City in accordance with City
specifications and regulations. No occupancy permit shall be issued by the
City for any structure requiring water service until a meter has been
installed, approved and inspected in accordance with these provisions.
(D) The customer will be responsible for installation and maintenance of all
other water and sewer lines and facilities including the entire length of
sewer lateral and plumbing facilities serving his property.
(E) If any portion of the water or sewer lines or facility for which the customer
is responsible is in need of repair, and the customer fails to make such
repairs following notice from the City, the City may either terminate water
service or make the repairs and bill them to the customer. Such charges
shall become a lien upon the property and may be collected as other charges
imposed by this Chapter. (Ord. 987, 5-4-78)
(F) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B), if a customer subject to
the nonresidential rates of subsection 3-5-13(B), elects to install an
additional meter off of the existing tap to meter used solely to supply
landscape watering, the meter, remote reading device, yoke and pit shall be
supplied by the City at the customer’ s expense and installed by the
customer at the customer’ s expense at a location approved by the City in
accordance with City specifications and standards. The City will own and
maintain all such meters, one inch (1”) in size or less, after installation
along with the remote reading devices. (Ord. 1372, 7-7-88)
(G) In the event the City is requested to do any maintenance, alterations or
replacement of any portions of the City’ s facilities serving the customer for
the convenience of the customer, such as raising or lowering meter pits, the
City may do such work and charge the customer for the City’ s costs in
performing the work with a minimum $25.00 charge. If any customer
damages any City property, the City may recover the damages from the
customer. All such costs or damages may be included on the customer’s
monthly bill and collected as a part of it or may be collected separately.
3-5-5: WATER AND SEWER USER CHARGES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) Charges for water service shall be payable, assessed and billed at periodic
intervals specified by Council resolution.
(B) Sewer charges may be billed with the water bills and otherwise as
determined by Council resolution (Ord. 930, 5-5-77)
(C) All bills shall specify a due date. (Ord. 1033, 7-5-79)
(D) (Rep. by Ord. 1096, 10-2-80)
(E) All charges imposed by this Chapter shall become a lien on the property
served as of the date they are billed.
3-5-6: REMEDIES FOR NONPAYMENT
In addition to any other remedies which the City may have, the City may take the
following action upon failure to pay any charges or fees by the date specified as due upon
the bill, or when they are otherwise due:
(A) The City may foreclose the lien imposed by this Chapter in accordance with
law.
(B) The City may maintain an action for the amount of changes due in a court
of competent jurisdiction including interest as allowed by law.
(C) The City may certify the amount of any charge due to the County Clerk and
Treasurer to become an assessment upon the property served to be collected
with other taxes upon such property.
(D) It shall be unlawful to fail to pay the charges imposed by this Chapter.
(E) The City may shut off the water to any premises for which the bill is not
paid, in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 3-5-16 of this
Chapter.
3-5-7: SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS
(A) The materials used and installation of all components of the City water and
sewer system, service lines and plumbing systems connected thereto and
served thereby shall be in accordance with all City building and plumbing
regulations and other applicable regulations. Such City standards,
specifications and regulations may include but not be limited to, the
installation, location, and type of material of water and sewer mains,
service lines, curb boxes, valves, corporations stops, meters, meter pits,
meter yokes, and other fixtures and facility. All such facilities shall also
comply with all applicable State and Federal regulations.
3-5-8: WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS
(A) No water or sewer main of the City may be extended without the approval
of the City.
(B) The City may at its own expense extend its water or sewer mains as deemed
feasible or necessary. The City may provide for such extensions in
accordance with its subdivision regulations or by contract with any person
desiring such extensions. Such contract shall be on terms approved by the
City and may provide for the size of the mains to be extended, the
apportionment of the costs of the extensions, reimbursements provisions for
subsequent taps onto such extension, or such other provisions as the
Council deems in the public interest.
(C) All such mains connected to the City system shall be dedicated to the City.
3-5-9: RIGHT OF ENTRY
(A) Whenever necessary to make an inspection or investigation, to perform any
duty, or to enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter, the City Manager
and his authorized representatives may enter upon any building or premises
served by City water or sewer at any reasonable time for such purposes. If
the building is occupied, he shall present proper credentials and request
entry. If such building is unoccupied, he shall make reasonable efforts to
locate the owners or persons in possession of the premises and request
entry. If entry is refused, he shall have recourse to all remedies provided
by law to secure entry.
(B) This right of entry shall apply but not be limited to the following functions.
To determine the location and conditions of all hydrants, pipes, fixtures,
and meters, to read meters, to make repairs, to perform dye or smoke tests,
and to investigate violations of this Chapter.
(C) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises, after request
is made for entry provided herein, to deny entry to the City Manager or his
representative.
3-5-10: UTILITY FUND
(A) Funds received from the collection of the charges authorized by this
Chapter shall be deposited in the fund to be known and designated the
“Utility Fund” which fund shall be available for the payment of costs and
expenses of the management, maintenance, and repair, renewing,
improving, and extending of sewer and water systems of the City and the
payment of salaries of employees engaged in operating said systems.
(B) At any time there is a surplus of funds, it may be placed in a sinking fund
for the purpose of acquiring, renewing, or extending said systems.
(C) Notwithstanding the combination of the water and sewer funds into a
Utility Fund, the City shall keep separate books of account for each the
water and the sewer system in accordance with requirements of Section 23
of Article IV of the Charter of the City of Montrose, Colorado.
3-5-11: SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS
The City shall have the right at any time, without notice, to temporarily interrupt water or
sewer service in any City mains, lines or services lines for the purpose of making repairs,
connections, extensions or for other purposes requisite or useful in the operation,
maintenance or expansion of the water or sewer system.
3-5-12: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM INVESTMENT AND
CONNECTION CHARGES
(A) The water tap fee shall be three hundred U.S. Dollars ($300.00) for an
accessory dwelling unit located on the same lot as the primary dwelling
within the “REDO” Overlay Zone. The system investment (capacity) fee,
and unit charges shall be waived for an accessory dwelling unit located on
the same lot as the primary dwelling within the “REDO” Overlay Zone. In
order to qualify for the reduced water tap fee and system investment
(capacity) fee and unit charge waiver, the accessory dwelling unit’s water
meter shall be of the same or smaller size as the existing meter serving the
primary dwelling on the lot. For the purposes of this § 3-5-12 (A)(1), the
term “accessory dwelling unit” shall have the definition given in § 4-4-8.1.
(Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(B) No connection to the City system shall be allowed which is smaller or
larger than reasonably necessary to serve the proposed use. No customer
may make any changes or additions to property served which would
substantially increase the amount of water used or sewage produced
without obtaining an enlarged tap sufficient to accommodate such use.
(C) If an existing connection is not of reasonably adequate size, a credit shall be
allowed towards the charges imposed by this Section, for an amount
equivalent to the charge which would be imposed by this Section, for a
connection the same size as the one to be replaced by a new connection and
taken out of service. Such credit may be applied only towards charges
imposed by this Section. Provided, however, in all cases the applicant shall
be charged at least for actual costs of material and labor expended by the
City.
(D) WATER: The following Basic Charges shall be imposed and collected
prior to connection to the water system. The charges consist of a water Tap
Fee and a Capacity Fee. The water Tap Fee covers typical materials, labor,
and administrative costs for installing the connection to the water system.
Capacity Fees are paid to the City of Montrose in conjunction with the Tap
Fee. Capacity Fees have been developed to recover the cost of new
connector’s proportionate share of capacity in the infrastructure and to fund
growth related capital improvements.
Basic charges effective January 1, 2011:
Size of tap Tap fee Capacity fee Total Charge
¾” $753 $1,882 $2,635
1” $1,004 $3,136 $4,140
1 ½” $1,254 $6,272 $7,526
2” $1,882 $10,035 $11,917
3” $2,509 $18,816 $21,325
4” $3,387 $37,632 $41,019
6” $6,272 $66,483 $72,755
? Taps in excess of 6” must be accomplished by special
arrangement. After obtaining a water tap permit from the City,
the applicant shall contract for a licensed plumber to make the
physical connection to the water system.
? Taps in previously developed or infill areas may require labor,
material, and equipment charges in addition to the Basic Charges.
(Ord. 2256, 10-21-2010)
(E) Unit Charge
In addition to the Basic Charges imposed by Subsection (D) above, all
multiple unit residences and dwelling facilities, including, but not limited to
duplexes, multiple family residences, apartments, hotels, motels, mobile
homes, mobile home parks and travel parks, shall be assessed an additional
charge of eight hundred seventy eight dollars ($878.00) per unit for each
unit after the first unit which is served by the City water. Such charge shall
be payable prior to the time any occupancy permit for such unit is issued
and prior to the use of such unit.
In addition to the Basic Charges imposed by Subsection (D) above, the
charge for connecting a private fire system to the City system shall be eight
hundred seventy eight dollars ($878.00) plus materials and labor. (Ord.
2256, 10-21-2010)
(F) All businesses and industries locating within the Montrose Aerospace
Business Park Subdivision after October 4, 2001, or existing businesses and
industries within said Subdivision seeking to expand or significantly alter
their building structures after October 4, 2001, shall be required to connect
to the City fire-flow system. The charge for connecting to the fire flow
system located within the Aerospace Research Park Subdivision shall be
ten thousand dollars ($10,000) per acre (approximately $0.23 per square
foot), based upon the entire acreage of each lot to be served by the
connection. The payment of this charge shall be subject to one of the
following payment options:
(1) Payment of the charge may be subject to a payoff schedule based
upon an amortization schedule that reaches maturity on Sept 1, 2019,
subject to 5% annual interest. The first payments shall commence
on Sept 1 subsequent to the issuance of building permit, with
remaining payments due upon the annual anniversary thereof.
Under this option, such payments shall be structured under a
connection agreement approved by the City, whereby any failure of
to make timely payments may be enforced under the remedies
available to the City as provided in this Chapter 5.
(2) Payment of the charge, in one lump sum, at the time if issuance of
the building permit, discounted to reflect present value.
The contractor shall be responsible for installing the fire line between the
building improvements to be served and the fire-flow main line (which
main line extends from Lot 5 of the Fire-flow Subdivision to the Creative
Place cul-de-sac). The City shall install the actual connection of the lateral
fire-flow line to the main fire-flow line, and the contractor shall pay for all
labor and materials thereof. The payment of time and material as provided
herein shall be separate from the payment of connection charge as provided
above, and payable in total to the City at the time of connection.
The contractor shall also be responsible for any applicable street or hard
surface repair resulting from the fire-flow connection. All connections and
lines shall be subject to City specifications and inspection. There shall be
no domestic water lines connected to the fire-flow infrastructure.
The provisions herein shall be applicable to any businesses or industries
located outside of the Montrose Aerospace Business Park Subdivision
seeking to connect to the City fire-flow system. Any such connection shall
require prior City review, approval and inspection.
(G) SEWER: A sewer Tap Fee, of two hundred seventy-six dollars and zero
cents ($276.00) for inspection, testing, and administrative costs, shall be
imposed and collected prior to any connection to the sewer system. In
addition to the sewer Tap Fee, an associated Capacity Fee is paid to the
City of Montrose to recover the cost of new connector’s proportionate share
of capacity in the infrastructure and to fund growth related capital
improvements.
(1) A Capacity Fee for Sanitary Sewer Connection is based on water
meter size.
(a) Capacity Fees
Capacity Fees effective January 1, 2011
Meter Size Capacity Fee
5/8” $3,889
¾” $5,896
1” $9,784
1 ½” $19,443
2” $31,109
3” $58,330
4” $116,659
6” $243,103
8” $349,978
(2) Unit Charge
In addition to the sewer Tap Fee and Capacity Fee imposed by
subsection G(1) above, all multiple unit residences and dwelling
facilities, including, but not limited to duplexes, multiple family
residences, apartments, hotels, motels, mobile homes, mobile home
parks and travel parks, shall be assessed an additional charge of two
thousand seven hundred and sixty dollars ($2,760.00) per unit. Such
charge shall be payable prior to the time any occupancy permit for
such unit is issued and prior to the use of such unit.
(Ord.2256, 10/21/2010)
(3) Individual Pumped Sewage Service Systems
Connection utilizing individual pumped sewer service systems shall
be subject to the sewer Tap Fee and Capacity Fee as provided in
subsection G(1) above, based on the City’s determination of what
size water meter would be required for an equivalent gravity service
line serving the customer.
(4) The entire sewer tap fee and system investment (capacity) fee, as
well as unit charges for an accessory dwelling unit located on the
same lot as the primary dwelling shall be waived within the “REDO”
Overlay Zone. For the purposes of this § 3-5-12 (G)(4), the term
“accessory dwelling unit” shall have the definition given in
§ 4-4-8.1.
(H) Private water or sewer systems shall be charged the fees and charges
imposed by this Section, both for the connection of the private line to the
City systems and for each customer served by such line, prior to connecting
or serving such customers. Private water systems shall also remit eight
hundred seventy eight dollars ($878.00) for each additional unit added to a
multi-unit facility as specified in Subsection (D) above. Private sewer
systems shall remit two thousand seven hundred and sixty dollars
($2,760.00) for each additional unit added to a multi-unit facility as
specified in (G)2 above. (Ord. 2256, 10-21-2010)
(I) [Reserved for Future Use] (Rep. By Ord. 1985, 11-20-2003)
(J) If at the time the connection is actually made to the system, or at the time
service is first initiated following connection, the amount of system
investment and connection charges has been increased or decreased by the
City from what the applicant paid previously at the time he obtained the
permit for connection or actually made the connection, he shall remit such
additional amount at the time of connection or initial service or shall be
entitled to a rebate in event of a decrease. Provided, however, this
subsection is not applicable to connections made, purchased and approved
before April 7, 1977.
(K) [Reserved for Future Use] (Rep. By Ord. 2144, 12-21-2006)
(L)
(1) Any sewer connection which utilizes sewer mains constructed by the
Montrose Development Authority, which serves property located
outside of the Authority, shall be subject to a surcharge (connection
fee) in the amount of $1,000.00. In the case of connections serving
uses other than dwelling units, the surcharge shall be equivalent to
that for a single-family dwelling for a 4” tap. The surcharge due for
non-residential taps larger that 4” shall be computed as follows:
Surcharge = (Actual diameter of Tap/4”)2 x $1,000
(2) Payments received pursuant to this Subsection (L) shall be collected
by the City and paid over to the Montrose Development Authority.
(3) This surcharge shall terminate on September 18, 2006.
(4) The surcharge provided for herein shall be due in full at the time the
other connection charges pursuant to this Section are due, and
collected by the City pursuant to Section 3-5-7 and other procedures
of this Chapter.
(M)
(1) Those sewer connections which utilize sewer mains constructed by
the Southeast Sewer District Project directly or indirectly and serve
property not assessed as part of the District, shall be subject to a
construction surcharge computed in accordance with the following
formula:
Surcharge = (Actual Diameter of Tap/4”)2 x $1,500
(2) This surcharge shall terminate on March 30, 2012.
(N)
(1) Those sewer connections which utilize the North East Sewer
Extension directly or indirectly shall be subject to a construction
surcharge computed in accordance with the following formula:
Surcharge = (Actual Diameter of Tap/4”)2 x $1,000
(2) The surcharge as provided herein shall not apply to properties
located within the Colorado West Addition No. 2, or properties
issued tap credits in consideration of easement dedication to the City
for the North East Sewer Extension or construction thereof.
(3) The surcharge as provided herein shall expire on March 8, 2020.
(O)
(1) Those sewer connections which utilize the East Sunnyside Sewer
Extension directly or indirectly shall be subject to a construction
surcharge computed in accordance with the following formula:
Surcharge = (Actual Diameter of Tap/4”)2 x $1,000
(2) The surcharge as provided herein shall not apply to properties
located within the East Sunnyside Addition No. 3, or properties
issued tap credits in consideration of easement dedication to the City
for the East Sunnyside Sewer Extension or construction thereof.
(3) The surcharge as provided herein shall expire on January 21, 2019.
(P) [Reserved for Future Use] (Rep. By Ord. 2181, 01-17-2008)
(Q) Customers utilizing individual pumped sewage service systems shall be
assessed for the surcharges set out forth in Paragraphs (K), (L), (M), (N)
and (O), based upon the City's determination of the size of a gravity sewer
service line tap which would otherwise be required for the customer.
(Ord. 1985, 11-20-2003)
3-5-13: INSIDE CITY WATER RATES
(A) Single-family residences, duplexes, churches, condominiums, townhouses
or other multiple unit dwellings consisting of separately described,
individually owned units; which have one inch (1”) meters or smaller shall
pay the following charges for each meter serving the customer:
(1) Charges in effect for service as of the first complete billing cycle
after January 1, 2008 through December 31, 2008 are as follows:
Monthly Usage (Gal.) Monthly Charge
Base Charge $17.07
1,000 or less 19.84
1,001 – 2,000 22.62
2,001 – 3,000 25.40
3,001 - 4,000 28.17
4,001 – 5,000 30.95
5,001 – 6,000 33.73
6,001 and over 33.73 + $2.78/1,000 gallons
over 6,000 gallons
(2) Charges in effect for service as of the first complete billing cycle
after January 1, 2009 are as follows:
Monthly Usage (Gal.) Monthly Charge
Base Charge $18.09
1,000 or less $21.03
1,001 – 2,000 $23.98
2,001 – 3,000 $26.92
3,001 - 4,000 $29.86
4,001 – 5,000 $32.81
5,001 – 6,000 $35.75
6,001 and over 35.75 + $2.95/1,000 gallons
over 6,000 gallons
(Ord. 2208, 10-16-2008)
(B) All customers inside the City limits other that those provided for in
subsection (A) above shall pay the following charges:
(1) Charges in effect for service as of the first complete billing cycle
after April 1, 2010 are as follows:
Meter Size, inches Amount
5/8 $32.01
¾ $42.09
1 $65.02
1 1/2 $120.97
2 $229.52
3 $534.99
4 $831.50
Volume Charge, $ per 1,000 gallons (applied
to usage in excess of base charge)
Nonresidential $1.74
Water Company $2.97
Base Charge, $ per
bill $18.09
Volume Charge, $
per 1,000 gallons $2.95
(Ord. 2247, 03-18-2010)
(C) Customers with a private fire system of any size, which is not metered,
shall pay a monthly base charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) in addition to the
charges imposed above.
(D) Monthly charges for periods of service for less than one month shall be
prorated.
(E) At the time a building permit is issued for new construction, the applicant
for the permit shall be charged a flat fee for the use of water during
construction prior to commencement of regular monthly bills in accordance
with the following schedule:
(1) A $60.00 minimum shall be charged for each separate building.
Buildings with more than three residential units shall be charged an
additional $20.00 for each unit after the first three.
(2) Commercial developments large enough to generate water usage in
excess of a three-unit residential development, shall be assessed a
flat additional charge proportional with the projected water needs of
the project.
(Ord. 1985, 11-20-2003)
3-5-14: NONMETERED WATER RATES INSIDE CITY (Rep. By Ord. 1096, 10-2-80)
3-5-15: OUTSIDE CITY WATER RATES
(A) Single family residences, duplexes, churches, condominiums, townhouses
or other multiple unit dwellings consisting of separately described,
individually owned units; which have one inch (1”) meters or smaller and
are outside of the City limits (excluding privately owned systems and
companies billed by a master meter) shall pay one and one-half (1 ½) times
the amount that would be due pursuant to subsection 3-5-13(A) if the
customers were located within the City limits.
(B) All customers outside the City limits other than those provided for in
subsection (A) above shall pay one and one-half (1 ½) times the amount
that would be due pursuant to subsection 3-5-13(B) if the customers were
located within the City limits.
(C) No un-metered private fire systems outside of the City limits shall be
allowed.
(D) When service is supplied to a group of users on a privately owned system
through a master meter, such group shall be treated as a single user and the
rates imposed herein shall be applied to the water metered by said master
meter, unless individual meters are available, in which case the City may,
but need not, base all or some of the charges upon individual meter
readings.
(E) Monthly charges for periods of service for less than one month shall be
prorated.
(Ord. 1985, 11-20-2003)
3-5-16: SHUT OFF, TERMINATION, AND RESUMPTION OF WATER
SERVICE
(A) In case any person fails or refuses to pay any charges or penalties for City
water service or shall fail to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the
City Charter or other regulations applicable to the City water service, the
City may shut off the water to the premises served.
(B) Prior to shutting off the water, the City shall send a notice to the address of
the customer concerned, as shown on all City records, stating the reason for
shut off, and the date upon which service may be shut off, unless the
charges are paid or other specified violation is corrected. Such date shall be
at least seven (7) days after the deposit of the letter, giving notice of the
shut off in the mail.
(C) The customer shall be entitled to a hearing with the City Manager or his
representative for the purpose of resolving any dispute concerning the
amount due or the violation specified. The notice of shut off shall so advise
the customer.
(D) If the customer requests a hearing, an informal hearing shall be scheduled
as soon as possible by the City.
(E) If the City Manager or his representative, following the hearing, determines
the matter adverse to the customer, service may be shut off immediately or
on the date specified in the notice of shut off, whichever is later.
(F) The customer may appeal any such decision to the City Council where he
will be allowed a hearing, providing he makes a deposit with the City in the
amount of any changes due.
(G) If payment is not received by the date and time specified on the
Delinquent/Shut off Notice, sent pursuant to this Chapter 5 of Title 3 of the
Montrose Municipal Code, water service may be subject to shut off and the
customer shall be responsible for all applicable delinquency fees, penalties,
deposits or other applicable charges as set forth in § 3-1-1 (A) of the City of
Montrose Regulations Manual, or the Montrose Municipal Code, which
have been billed. Once the City shuts off water service pursuant to this
Section, water service shall not be restored until all overdue charges,
penalties, or other applicable charges which have been billed, have been
paid to the City. (Ord. 2113, 7-6-2006)
(H) Any person desiring their water service temporarily shut off or water turned
on shall pay the City a shut-off fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or a turn-on
fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for such service. Monthly water and sewer
charges shall not accrue during the period when water is shut off.
(Ord. 1985, 11-20-2003)
3-5-17: SENIOR CITIZEN’ S WATER RATE REDUCTION (Rep. By Ord.
1096, 10-2-80)
3-5-18: RESTRICTION OF WATER USE
(A) (Rep. By Ord. 1096, 10-2-80)
(B) (Rep. By Ord. 1096, 10-2-80)
(C) The Council may by resolution limit the use of City water to specific times,
days and uses.
(D) It shall be unlawful to waste City water. It shall be prima facie evidence
that water is being wasted if unreasonable amounts are allowed to flow into
the streets. Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall no
longer be entitled to non-metered service.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give water away to be used on
premises other than those for which service is provided outside of the City
limits.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, tamper, damage, destroy, or
operate any part of the City water system without lawful authority to do so.
(G) It shall be unlawful to open or close any fire hydrant, stop, or curb valve, or
to turn on or turn off the water service to any property without lawful
authority to do so.
(H) No water service shall be provided to any premises eligible for annexation
if the owner refuses to sign an annexation petition when requested to do so
by the City.
(I) It shall be unlawful to cause or allow any pollutant to be introduced into the
City system or to cross connect it with any irrigation water system.
3-5-19: USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS
(A) When it is necessary to use water temporarily at a place where the water
supply is inadequate, application may be made to the City for a permit to
use water from a fire hydrant. It shall be unlawful to use water from or
connect any apparatus to, a fire hydrant without first obtaining a permit.
(B) Each permit shall specify the terms and conditions of use and the fire
hydrant or hydrants authorized to be used. No person shall attach to the
operating stem or cap of a fire hydrant any wrench or tool that is not
approved by the City for use on fire hydrants. In addition to any other
remedy available to the City, any wrench, connecting apparatus, valve,
hose, or other item attached to a fire hydrant in violation of this Section
shall be subject to removal and confiscation by the City.
(C) Charges for Use of Fire Hydrants: Water used from a fire hydrant shall be
metered, with the meter to be provided by the City. The charges shall be
determined from Sections 3-5-13 or 3-5-15, as applicable, plus a fifty-dollar
($50.00) service charge.
(D) Permits shall not be granted for the use of water from hydrants for normal
and incidental use connected with construction or similar activities or any
other use other that fire prevention or use by City itself, unless the City
Manager or his representative, authorizes a permit for extraordinary or
emergency conditions.
(Ord. 1985, 11-20-2003)
3-5-20: SEWER CHARGES
(A) Charges in effect for service as of the first complete billing cycle after
January 1, 2011, and thereafter, are as follows:
Base Charge, $ per bill Amount
Residential $21.75
Nonresidential $16.41
*Volume charge, $’s per 1,000
gallons (Nonresidential) $2.08
Extra Strength Charge, $ per
1,000 gallons
Rate Code
900 $0.59
901 $0.81
902 $1.12
903 $1.60
904 $2.07
905 $2.39
906 $3.03
907 $3.99
908 $5.12
909 $.59
910 $2.07
920 ($ per) bill $62.76
*Applied to usage in excess of base charge allowance.
(Ord. 2256, 10-21-2010)
(B) A monthly surcharge for any users (other than the residential class)
discharging wastewater with biological oxygen demand greater that those
of the average residential user** shall be assessed an Extra Strength
Charge, based on the Rate Code, shown in subsection (A) above,
determined by the City or the best available engineering data, except when
data based upon actual composite sampling, done in accordance with
minimum Colorado State Health Department sampling procedure
guidelines, is available, in which event such data shall be used. The
surcharge is added to applicable nonresidential charges provided for in
subsection (A) above:
** Average residential User BOD = 1.669 lbs/1000 gallons = 200mg/l
(C) If any user is discharging toxic or other pollutants in concentrations higher
that that of a residential user which cause increased treatment or system
costs, an additional surcharge may be imposed based upon the excess
concentrations prior to accepting sewage from such user.
(D) Monthly charges for periods of service for less than one month shall be
prorated.
(E) Each user shall be notified at least annually in conjunction with a regular
bill of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to
wastewater treatment services.
(F) Customers utilizing individual pumped sewage service systems shall be
subject to a monthly surcharge of twenty percent (20%) of the charges due
pursuant to Subsection (A) above.
(Ord. 1985, 11-20-2003)
3-5-21: LIMITATIONS ON USE OF THE SEWER SYSTEM
(A) Rep. By Ord. 1267, 5-16-85
(B) Rep. By Ord. 1267, 5-16-85
(C) Rep. By Ord. 1267, 5-16-85
(D) Rep. By Ord. 1267, 5-16-85
(E) Rep. By Ord. 1267, 5-16-85
(F) Rep. By Ord. 1267, 5-16-85
(G) No building permit, occupancy permit, or water tap shall be authorized or
approved for any building or facility requiring sanitary sewer service within
the City unless such building is to be connected to the City’ s sanitary
sewer systems and all applicable system investment and connection charges
and other applicable charges have been or will be paid. The City may
require any building requiring sanitary sewage disposal to be connected to
the City’ s sewer system at the owner’ s expense, including payment of all
applicable system investment and connection charges any time a City sewer
main is located within four hundred feet (400’ ) of the building affected. If
the owner fails or refuses to make such connection, the City may cause the
connection to be made and collect the cost of doing so, including payment
of the system investment and connection charges, as provided in Section 3-
5-6. (Ord. 1225, 1-5-84)
3-5-22: RATES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE DUMPING OF SEPTAGE
AND SEWAGE INTO THE CITY SEWER SYSTEM
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped septage
or sewage into the City sewer collection system or treatment plant except
through a lawful tap to the system or in accordance with the provisions of
this Section.
(B) Any person desiring to release septage or sewage into the City sewer
system in accordance with this Section shall first obtain a permit from the
City Manager, or its designee. (Ord. 2215, 12-18-2008)
(C) The dumping of sewage and septage in the City sewer system in accordance
with this Section shall be done only at such times and places as specified by
the City Manager. (Ord. 930, 5-5-77)
(D) Fees for the release of sewage or septage into the City sewer system shall
be as follows:
(1) The minimum charge shall be one hundred and fifty dollars
($150.00); or
(a) The charge shall be fifteen cents ($ 0.15) per gallon,
multiplied by the number of gallons of capacity of the truck
or container that is used to carry the sewage or septage to the
place of release. If the truck or container has an external
measuring device approved by the City Manager, the charge
shall be fifteen cents ($ 0.15) per gallon, multiplied by the
number of gallons of sewage or septage actually released.
(2) A surcharge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per load shall apply for
all deliveries made outside of the normal business hours of the
Wastewater Treatment Plant.
(Ord. 2215, 12-18-2010)
(E) No person shall release, dump or discharge into the City sewer system,
sewage or septage which is of a nature harmful to the City sewer collection
system or treatment plant as determined by the City Manager. The City
shall refuse to grant, and the City Manager may revoke the permit of any
person or entity violating this subsection.
(1) The City may refuse service at the City septage receiving station
whenever a user of said station fails to follow all City Ordinances
and Regulations, and applicable state and federal laws.
(Ord. 2215, 12-18-2010)
(F) All permits issued by the City may be revoked or canceled by the City
Manager for any violation of this Section 3-5-22 and its Subsections, or any
regulations promulgated hereunder, or for failure to pay all charges for the
release of sewage and septage, in accordance with procedures established
by the City Manager for the billing of such charges. (Ord. 2215, 12-18-
2010)
(G) The dumping of septage into the City sewer system in accordance with this
Section shall be deemed a privilege and not a right, and the City Council
reserves the right to revoke all septage dumping permits if in its opinion it
becomes necessary to do so in the public interest.
(H) The City Council may establish special rates for the release of septage and
sewage into the City sewer system by other governmental entities, or septic
system cleaners operating inside or outside of the city limits of the City of
Montrose. Any such contracts presently in effect are hereby ratified.
(1) The City Manager may establish and promulgate regulations and
procedures for the administration of this Section 3-5-22, and its
Subsections.
(Ord. 2215, 12-18-2010)
3-5-23: RULES AND REGULATIONS
(A) The City Manager shall issue specifications, rules, and regulations
necessary for the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of this
Chapter and any amendments hereto. (Ord. 930, 5-5-77)
(B) The City Manager, or his representative, shall have authority to make an
equitable adjustment to a water bill, when the bill is extraordinary high due
to an undiscovered break downstream of the customer's meter, if it was not
caused by the customer’s negligence and the customer did not have a
reasonable opportunity to discover the break more quickly than he did.
(Ord. 1985, 11-20-2003)
3-5-24: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this Chapter
or any amendments or additions thereto. Any person convicted of such
violation may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00) or imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day an offense is allowed or
permitted to continue may be deemed to be a separate violation. Provided,
however, no person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be sentenced
to any term of imprisonment. (Ord. 930, 5-5-77)
Chapter 3-6
PRETREATMENT PROGRAM, INDUSTRIAL USER, AND SEWAGE SYSTEM
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Sections:
3-6-1 APPROVAL OF INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES
3-6-2 PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
3-6-3 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES
3-6-4 SELF-MONITORING AND REPORTS
3-6-5 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION
3-6-6 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ACTION
3-6-7 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
3-6-8 DEFINITIONS
3-6-9 ADMINISTRATION
3-6-10 SPECIFIC REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
3-6-11 REQUIRED TEST PROCEDURES
3-6-12 PUBLICATION OF LIST OF SIGNIFICANT VIOLATORS
3-6-13 SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL
3-6-14 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL
3-6-1: APPROVAL OF INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES
(A) No Industrial User shall discharge any new or increased contributions of
pollutants or pollutants changed in nature where such contributions do not
meet the applicable requirements of this Chapter or where such
contributions would cause the City to violate its NPDES discharge permit.
(B) No Industrial User shall be allowed to initially connect to the City sewage
system, or to discharge to the City sewage system any new pollutants, any
materially increased contributions of pollutants, or any pollutants materially
changed in nature, unless such changed or new discharge is approved by a
Discharge Authorization Order issued by the City.
(C) Applications for discharge authorization shall be submitted on forms
provided by the City, which may require all information necessary and
convenient to characterize and evaluate the Industrial User, its industrial
processes, and the quantity and quality of its proposed discharge, and to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
(D) The City shall review all such applications for discharge authorization and
shall approve any application only on the condition that the application is
complete and that the applicant can and will comply with all the
requirements of this Chapter and all applicable law. Upon approval, a
“Discharge Authorization Order” shall be issued to the Industrial User,
setting out maximum effluent limits applicable to their discharge, other
conditions, and any applicable sampling, testing, monitoring and reporting
requirements. Said Order shall state the duration of the Order, prohibit
transfers, include notification and record keeping requirements, include
applicable penalties, and include any compliance schedule.
(E) All Industrial Users classified as Class I - Significant Industrial Users shall
be required to have a Discharge Authorization Order. Industrial users
classified as Class II – Minor Industrial Users may be required to have a
Discharge Authorization Order when the City determines that potential
discharges require the control and oversight afforded by the Discharge
Authorization Order.
(F) The City may periodically require any Industrial User to complete and
submit reports or surveys on forms provided by the City. Such forms and
surveys may require any information necessary or convenient for the
administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
(G) The Industrial User may have a meeting with the City Manager concerning
any provision in a Discharge Authorization Order by submitting a written
request to the City within five (5) days of receipt of the order.
3-6-2: PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
(A) General Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful to introduce into the City
sewage system any pollutants which Pass Through the system or Interfere
with the operation or performance of the system. These general
prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in Subsection (B) apply to each
Industrial User introducing pollutants into the sewer system whether or not
the Industrial User is subject to other National Pretreatment Standards, or
any national, State, or local pretreatment requirements.
(B) Specific Prohibitions: In addition to the following pollutants shall not be
introduced into the City Sewage system:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewage
system, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed
cup flashpoint of less than sixty degrees (60°) Centigrade (140°)
Fahrenheit using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the City's
sewage system or with pH lower than five (5.0);
(3) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
to the flow in the sewage system, or other Interference with the
operation of the sewage system;
(4) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause Interference with the system;
(5) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the system
resulting in ’Interference. In no case shall heat be introduced in such
quantities that the temperature at the sewage treatment plant exceeds
one hundred four degrees (104°) Fahrenheit.
(C) Additional Specific Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful to do or cause to
allow any of the following:
(1) To permit or cause the discharge into the City sewage system of any
water or other liquids containing toxic, poisonous or other solids,
liquids or gases, which, in sufficient quantities, either singly or in
interaction with other waste, could contaminate the sludge produced
by the treatment plant; interfere with or injure any sewage treatment
process; constitute a hazard to humans or animals; create a public
nuisance; or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the
quality of any waters discharged from the City sewage treatment
plant.
(2) To connect any device to the City sanitary sewer system other than
sanitary plumbing facilities, including, but not limited to any
downspout, foundations drain, areaway drain, storm sewer, or other
source of surface runoff or ground water.
(3) To operate a wash rack with drains connected to the City sewer
system unless a trap which effectively prevents the entry of sand,
mud and gravel has been installed in accordance with specifications
approved by the City Engineer.
(4) To make any discharge into the City sewer system from a hotel,
restaurant, club, commercial or institutional kitchen, unless a trap for
grease and oil, approved by the City Engineer, has been installed.
(5) To discharge or permit to be discharged into the City sewer system
any of the following:
(a) Any liquid or vapor, other than domestic hot water, having a
temperature higher than one hundred eighty degrees (180°).
(b) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil, other
volatile, flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gas.
(c) Any solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size
capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewer or
Interference with the proper operation of sewage treatment
facilities, including, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, gravel, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, hair flushings, entrails, paper,
dishes, cups or containers.
(d) Garbage that has not been properly shredded or ground by a
garbage disposal or grinder.
(e) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause Interference or
Pass Through.
(f) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oil, fat
or grease.
(g) A slug of wastewater of such size or concentration that the
treatment process is not capable of meeting discharge
requirements.
(h) Any substance which the sewage treatment plant cannot treat
sufficiently to meet plant effluent standards, which causes the
release of obnoxious gases, or is harmful to the sewer system
and parts.
(i) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
as designated by the POTW or as otherwise approved in
advance in writing by the City Engineer or his designee.
(j) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(6) To discharge or deposit or cause to allow to be discharged or
deposited into the City wastewater system any effluent which fails to
comply with the following:
CONSTITUENT LIMIT (mg/l)
Arsenic 0.59
Cadmium 0.12
Chromium (Total) 4.20
Chromium (vi) 2.74
Copper 3.84
Lead 0.62
Mercury 0.03
Molybdenum 1.06
Nickel 2.11
Selenium 1.25
Silver 8.50
Zinc 6.70
(7) To discharge or deposit or cause to allow to be discharged or
deposited into the City wastewater system any effluent which fails to
comply with the following:
CONSTITUENT LIMIT (ug/1)
Benzene 50
BTEX* 750
*Aggregate parameter of benzene, ethyl benzene, toluene and xylene
(D) National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(1) In addition to providing necessary wastewater treatment as required
to comply with this Section, National Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements, and permit conditions, it shall be unlawful for
Industrial Users to discharge any pollutants into the City sewer
system in violation of the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (“E.P.A.”), as in effect and amended from time to time.
(2) Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be
implemented within the applicable time, as stated in the Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, applicable Federal Regulations, or pursuant
to a compliance schedule issued pursuant to this Chapter. In no case
may the deadline for compliance with a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard be extended beyond the time stated in the
Standard.
(E) Dilution Prohibited: Except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, no Industrial
User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete subterfuge for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard.
3-6-3: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES
As a condition of any Discharge Authorization Order, Administrative Enforcement
Order, order implementing compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or other
order, the City may impose a compliance schedule setting forth reasonable time limits to
insure that progress is being made in discrete steps towards the installation of required
pretreatment technology and facilities, or to meet the other requirements of this Chapter.
3-6-4: SELF-MONITORING AND REPORTS
(A) All Industrial Users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall
sample and monitor their effluent and provide all reports as required by the
applicable Standard and 40 CFR 403.12. The required monitoring and
sampling frequency shall be set out in the Industrial User’s Discharge
Authorization Order.
(B) All Industrial Users shall notify the City immediately upon the discharge of
any slug load or accidental discharge that may contribute to Interference
with the City's sewage system.
(C) All Class I - Significant Industrial Users shall install, use and maintain a
control manhole and monitoring equipment approved by the City Engineer
adequate to facilitate self-monitoring by the Industrial User and compliance
monitoring by the City. Such manhole and any monitoring or measuring
devices shall be accessible and safely located and shall allow the City to
readily and safely measure the volume and obtain samples of the flow at
any time. In addition, all Class I - Significant Industrial Users shall install a
suitable device for continuously recording the flow discharged to the City
system. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained at the Industrial
User’s expense.
(D) All Class I - Significant Industrial Users shall take samples, perform tests
and submit reports of a nature and at such frequencies as may be specified
by the City in their Discharge Authorization Order.
(E) Any Class II - Minor Industrial User may be required by order to install
such a control manhole and monitoring equipment, and to take samples and
make reports similar to those required for Class I - Significant Industrial
Users when it is determined necessary or appropriate for the proper
administration and enforcement of this Chapter by the City.
(F) It shall be unlawful to falsify any report, tamper with monitoring equipment
and methods or fail to make required reports.
(G) All results of sampling, testing and related reports should be kept on file
and available for inspection for a minimum of three (3) years by the Class I
and II Industrial Users. This period of retention shall be extended during
the course of any unresolved litigation involving the discharge of pollutants
by the Class I and II Industrial Users or during the course of any
administrative proceedings before the City upon direction of the City or
E.P.A.
(H) All data and records obtained by the City in the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter shall be a public record, except information or
data subject to the confidentiality requirements of 40 CFR 403.14.
Provided however, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and
Colorado Department of Health shall have access to all data obtained by the
City and all effluent data shall be available to the public on an unrestricted
basis.
3-6-5: RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION
The City shall have the authority to enter upon the premises and property of any sewage
system customer for the purpose of inspection, administration, or enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter and for sampling and monitoring discharges to the City sewage
system. The City shall also have the right to inspect and copy all test results, sample
results, and records required to be kept by this Chapter and other business records of the
Industrial User related to sewage generation at all reasonable times. In the event that
entry or inspection is denied, the City shall have recourse to all remedies allowed by law,
including obtaining an inspection warrant from the Municipal Court, or terminating sewer
service.
3-6-6: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ACTION
(A) In the event the City determines that any Industrial User is introducing
wastes into the City sewage system in violation of the requirements of this
Chapter, the City may issue an Enforcement Order that may require any of
the following:
(1) Pretreatment to an acceptable condition;
(2) Control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
(3) Additional payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the waste;
(4) Rejection of the specific wastes or pollutants.
(B) The City may, on account of any violation of any provision of this Chapter,
terminate sewer service to any Industrial User in accordance with the
procedures of this Subsection.
(1) In the event that any actual or threatened discharge to the City
system presents an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health and welfare of persons or environment, the City may
summarily terminate all sewage service. If necessary, to effectuate
such termination, the City may terminate water service to the
Industrial User. If the Industrial User does not voluntarily comply
with such order, the City may sever the sewer connection.
(2) In other cases, the City shall deliver notice to the Industrial User at
his business premises or mail notice to the Industrial User at the
address listed in the City utility records for such Industrial User, of
termination of sewer service. Such notice shall advise the Industrial
User of the nature of the violation, the date service will be
terminated, and of the Industrial User's right to have an informal
meeting before the City Manager prior to the termination date
concerning the question of whether there is a violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter. If the Industrial User does not request a
meeting by the termination date specified, or, if following the
meeting the City Manager determines that a violation of this Chapter
exists, the City may thereafter terminate sewer service. If necessary,
to effectuate termination, the City may also terminate water service
or sever the sewer connection.
(3) If necessary, in order to prevent damage to the City sewage system,
or violations of the City's NPDES discharge permit, the City may, by
order, impose revised effluent limits upon any Class I or Class II
Industrial User, which may be more stringent than prevailing Federal
Standards. The City may impose mass limitations on Industrial
Users which are using dilutions to meet applicable Pretreatment
Standards or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations
is appropriate.
(C) Any Industrial User may request an informal meeting with the City
Manager with respect to the terms of any Administrative Enforcement
Order by submitting such request in writing to the City within five (5) days
of receipt of such order. The City shall thereafter schedule an informal
meeting with the City Manager to resolve any question concerning the
Order.
3-6-7: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
(A) It shall be unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter or of
any Discharge Authorization Order, administration enforcement order or
other order or regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter. Any person
convicted of such a violation may be penalized as authorized under Section
1-2-3 of the Municipal Code.
(B) All discharges in violation of the provisions of this Chapter are hereby
declared to be a nuisance and may be abated in accordance with law.
(C) The City may maintain an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin any violation of the requirements of this Chapter and to recover from
the responsible party the amount of any damages done to the City sewage
system on account of any violation of this Chapter or otherwise.
(D) The rights and remedies provided herein are in addition to all other rights
and remedies as may be provided by law.
(E) Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, or any Discharge
Authorization Order, Administrative Enforcement Order, or other order or
regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day each day such a violation
continues. The City may maintain an action to recover civil penalties in
any court of competent jurisdiction. In addition to the penalty the City may
recover reasonable attorney fees, costs and other expenses associated with
the enforcement activities such as consultant's fees, sampling and
monitoring costs, any damages caused to the City, and any fines or
penalties incurred by the City or a result of the violations. In determining
the amount of the penalty, the Court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the
violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit to the
Industrial User by failure to comply, any corrective actions by the Industrial
User, the Industrial User's compliance history, any fines or penalties
incurred by the City as a result of the violation, and other factors justice
requires.
3-6-8: DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Chapter.
(A) "Industrial User" shall mean the source of the introduction of pollutants into
the City sewage system from any non-domestic source regulated under
section 307 (b), (c) or (d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251, et seq. It shall also include
any user who discharges wastes from industrial processes.
(B) "Class I - Significant Industrial User" means any Industrial User of the
City's wastewater disposal system who:
(1) is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or
(2) discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per
day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary non-contact
cooling and boiler blow down wastewaters); or
(3) contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the treatment plant; or
(4) has a reasonable potential in the opinion of the City or E.P.A. to
adversely affect sewage system operation or for violating any
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
(C) "Class II - Minor Industrial User" is any Industrial User that discharges
non-domestic pollutants to the public sewer in amounts that, on a routine
basis, have insignificant impact on the treatment plant, but may,
nonetheless, present the potential to impact the collection or treatment
system or to violate the prohibited discharge limitations in this Chapter.
This includes those industries that present the potential to cause sewer
obstruction, slug loads, or chemical spills.
(D)
(1) "Interference" or “Interfere” means a discharge which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
(a) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(b) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
City's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“NPDES”) discharge permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the
following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations
contained in any State sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection
Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(2) "Pass Through" means a discharge which exits the City's sewage
treatment plant into water of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the City's NPDES discharge permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
(3) For the purposes of this Subsection (D), an Industrial User
"significantly contributes" to such a permit violation or prevention of
sludge use or disposal whenever such Industrial User:
(a) discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed
by this Chapter, any order issued pursuant hereto, or
applicable Federal or State law.
(b) discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or
constituents from the Industrial User's average discharge.
(c) knows, or has reason to know, that its discharge alone, or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result
in a violation of the City's NPDES discharge permit, or
prevent sewage sludge use or disposal.
(d) knows, or has reason to know, that the City is, for any reason,
violating its final effluent limitations in its NPDES discharge
permit and that the Industrial User's discharge, either alone or
in conjunction with discharges from other sources, increases
the magnitude or duration of the City's NPDES discharge
permit violations.
(E) "Slug" shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste in
which the concentration of any given constituents, or which the quantity of
flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes
more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or
flow during normal operation.
(F) "City" shall mean the City of Montrose, Colorado, and any authorized
council, commission, board, employee or agent thereof.
(G) "Categorical Pretreatment Standards" or " National Categorical Standards"
means those standards set out in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N as
authorized by section 307 (b) and (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act 33
U.S.C. 1251 et. seq., as such standards are promulgated or amended from
time to time.
(H)
(1) “New source" means any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed
Pretreatment Standards under section 307 (c) of the Clean Water Act
which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
(a) the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
(b) the building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(c) the production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a New Source if the construction does
not create a new building structure, facility or installation meeting
the criteria in Subsections (H) l (a), (b) or (c) of this Section but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.
(3) Construction of a New Source as defined under this Subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
(a) begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite
construction program;
(1) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(2) significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly or installation of New Source
facilities or equipment, or
(b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this Subsection.
(I) The term “National Pretreatment Standard,” “Pretreatment Standard” or
“Standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the E.P.A. in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the
Clean Water Act that applies to an Industrial User. This term includes
prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.
(J) The term “Publicly Owned Treatment Works” or “POTW” means a
treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, which is owned be a State or municipality (as defined by
Section 502 (4) of the Act). This definition includes any devices and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature to implement
section 1281 of the Clean Water Act, or necessary to recycle or reuse water
at the most economical cost over the estimated life of the works, including
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping,
power, and other equipment, and their appurtenances; extensions,
improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements
essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment
units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of
the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process (including land
used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems prior to
land application) or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment.
For purposes of reconciling these terms with the numerous provisions
throughout this City Code pertaining to this subject matter of wastewater
collection and treatment, “Publicly Owned Treatment Works” or “POTW”
shall mean the same thing as “wastewater treatment plant,” “sewage
system,” “sewage treatment plant,” “sewer system,” “sewer treatment
facility,” “sanitary sewer system,” “sewer collection system,” and
“treatment plant,” and other such references to the City wastewater
treatment plant.
(K) The term “Pretreatment Requirement(s)” means any substantive or
procedural requirement to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment
Standard, imposed on an Industrial User.
3-6-9: ADMINISTRATION
(A) The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter.
(B) The City Manager may adopt such additional regulations as may be
appropriate for the administration, interpretation and enforcement of this
Chapter.
(C) The City Manager shall develop local limits and enforce them with respect
to any substance deemed appropriate.
3-6-10: SPECIFIC REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
(A) In addition to any other types of reports required by this Chapter, Industrial
Users shall submit the specific reports as required by 40 CFR, section
403.12 including those referenced in this Section.
(B) Within eighty (80) days after the effective date of a Categorical
Pretreatment Standard or when otherwise required pursuant to 40 CFR
403.12 (b), Industrial Users subject to such Categorical Pretreatment
Standards shall submit to the City a baseline monitoring report which
contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12 (b).
(C) Compliance schedule progress reports shall be submitted as required by 40
CFR 403.12 (c).
(D) Reports on compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be
submitted as required pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12 (d).
(E) Periodic reports on continued compliance shall be submitted required
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(e).
(F) All Industrial Users shall promptly notify the City in advance of any change
in the volume greater than twenty percent (20%) or character of pollutants
in their discharge.
(G) All reports required by this Chapter including baseline monitoring reports,
ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic reports on continued
compliance must be signed and certified by a duly authorized representative
of the Industrial User, meeting the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 (l) and
the certification statement shall meet the requirements of 40 CFR 403.6 (a)
(2) (ii).
(H) All Industrial Users must notify the City, E.P.A. and Colorado Department
of Health of the discharge of any hazardous waste pursuant to 40 CFR
403.12 (p).
3-6-11: REQUIRED TEST PROCEDURES
Test procedures as required in 40 CFR part 136 shall be used with respect to all tests
required or conducted pursuant to these regulations.
3-6-12: PUBLICATION OF LIST OF SIGNIFICANT VIOLATORS
The City shall at least once annually publish a list of Industrial Users in significant
noncompliance as that term is defined in 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (2) (vii).
3-6-13: SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL
(A) The City shall "evaluate", at least once every two (2) years, whether each
Class I - Significant Industrial User needs a plan to control slug discharges.
For purposes of this Section, a slug discharge is any discharge of nonroutine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a
non-customary batch discharge. The results of such activities shall be
available to the E.P.A. and Colorado Department of Health upon request.
(B) If the City decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain,
at a minimum, the following elements:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the City of slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40
CFR 403.5 (b) with procedures for follow-up written notification
within five (5) days;
(4) If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental
spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment
structure or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
3-6-14: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL
Following any requested informal meeting with the City Manager, any
Industrial User may appeal the terms of any Discharge Authorization Order
or Administrative Enforcement Order to the City Council by submitting a
written request for such appeal to the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days
of the date of such order. The Council shall schedule and hold such a
hearing and thereafter may make such decision as it deems appropriate
concerning the order.
Chapter 3-7
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
Sections:
3-7-1 DEFINITIONS
3-7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-7-3 STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION
ACTIVITIES
3-7-4 ENFORCEMENT
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS
The terms as used in this Ordinance shall have the following meanings:
Animal Waste - means excrement and other waste from domestic animals,
including household pets.
Best Management Practices (or "BMPs") means the customary and
accepted practices and activities designed to prevent or reduce the pollution
of waters and minimize the impacts of development through the use of
nonstructural and structural devices, including prevention activities,
treatment requirements, operating procedures, maintenance practices and
educational programs, such as are customarily implemented before,
during and after pollution-producing activities, that are intended to
reduce or eliminate the introduction of pollutants into receiving waters.
Most structural BMPs are designed to manage and/or treat stormwater
runoff before it reaches a waterway, pond or lake. Examples of Structural
BMPs include, but are not limited to, silt fence, inlet protection, and
siltation ponds, etc. Specific BMPs may be imposed by the City in
compliance with this Chapter.
CDPS – means the Colorado Discharge Permit System.
CDPS Permit - means a permit issued by the state of Colorado under
Part 5 of the Colorado Water Quality Control Act (Title 25, Article 8 of
the Colorado Revised Statutes) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable to a person, group or
area.
City - means the City of Montrose.
Clean Water Act (CWA) – means Public Laws 95-217, 95-576, 96-483,
and 97-117; 33 USC 1251, et. seq., Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
enacted by Public Law 92-500, as amended.
Commercial - means pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other
activity engaged in for profit activities.
Construction Site - means any location where land disturbing construction
or construction related activity occurs.
Contaminated - means containing harmful quantities of pollutants that
exceed state or federal guidelines.
Contractor - means any person or firm performing or managing
construction work at a land disturbing construction site, including any
construction manager, general contractor or subcontractor. The definition
also includes, but is not limited to, earthwork, paving, building, plumbing,
mechanical, electrical or landscaping contractors, and material suppliers
delivering materials to the construction site.
Development - means any public or private land disturbing construction,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement
of any structure within the jurisdiction of the City, as well as any
manmade change or alteration to the landscape, including but not limited
to, mining, drilling, dredging, grading, paving, excavating and/or filling.
The term "development" does not necessarily include the routine
maintenance of existing stormwater runoff facilities, except that such
maintenance may nevertheless require a permit pursuant to this Chapter.
Director – means the City Manager, or a duly authorized representative or
designee.
Discharge - means any addition or release of any pollutant, Stormwater or
any other substance whatsoever into storm drainage system.
Disturbed Area - means any area of land surface disturbed by any work
activity upon lands within the City, by means of grading, excavating,
moving, removing or stockpiling soil, fill or other material, clearing,
vegetation removal, or removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other
materials, including but not limited to other activity that exposes or
disturbs soil. Disturbed area does not include regular maintenance to
right-of-way, residential gardening and landscaping, or the normal
farming, plowing or tillage of land that is zoned agricultural for
agricultural purposes, or the normal farming or tillage of a parcel zoned
PD (planned development) within an area specifically identified for
agricultural uses, nor does it include the performance of emergency
work necessary to remedy or prevent an immediate threat to life,
property, or the environment. However, any person(s) performing such
emergency work shall immediately notify the Public Works Department
of the emergency situation and the actions taken in response to such
emergency. The Public Works Department may in its reasonable
discretion require such person(s) to obtain an Excavation Permit and/or
produce a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan in order to implement
such emergency remedial measures.
Domestic Sewage - means sewage originating primarily from kitchen,
bathroom and laundry sources, including waste from food preparation,
dishwashing, garbage grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) – means the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal
department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the
EPA, and any duly authorized official of the EPA or such successor agency.
Fertilizer - means a substance or compound that contains an essential plant
nutrient element in a form available to plants and used primarily for its
essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth
of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more
fertilizers.
Fire Protection - means any water and any substance(s) or material(s) contained
therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a fire. By definition, fire
protection activities are determined to constitute an emergency.
Fungicide - means a substance that destroys or inhibits the growth of fungi.
Garbage – means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from
the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including
waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale
of produce and other food products.
Groundwater - means any water residing below the surface of the ground
or percolating into or out of the ground.
Harmful Quantity - means the amount of any substance that the Director
determines will cause an adverse impact to storm drainage system or will
contribute to the failure of the City to meet the water quality based
requirements of the CDPS permit for discharges from the Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System.
Hazardous Substance – means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40
CFR, Part 302, as amended.
Hazardous Waste – means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous
waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR, Part 261 as amended.
Herbicides - means a chemical substance used to destroy plants and
especially weeds.
Illegal Discharge - See Illicit Discharge.
Illicit Connection - means any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm
drainage system. Such connection includes any physical connection to a
publicly maintained storm drain system composed of non-stormwater that
has not been permitted by the public entity responsible for the operation
and maintenance of the system.
Illicit Discharge - means any discharge to a storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to a CDPS
permit, and discharges further exempted by this Chapter.
Industrial Waste - means any wastes produced as a by-product of any
industrial, institutional or commercial process or operation, other than
domestic sewage.
Mechanical Fluid - means any fluid used in the operation and maintenance
of machinery, vehicles and any other equipment, including lubricants,
antifreeze, petroleum products, oil and fuel.
Mobile Commercial Cleaning – means washing, steam cleaning, and any
other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning, of vehicles and/or exterior
surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes or related to a commercial
activity.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System - means the system of
conveyances, including roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains,
catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins and ponds
owned and operated by the City and designed or used for collecting or
conveying stormwater, and not used for collecting or conveying sanitary
sewage.
MSDS – means Material Safety Data Sheet for hazardous chemicals.
NDPES - [Delete this term and entire definition from Official Code.]
NPDES Permit - [Delete this term and entire definition from Official
Code.]
Notice of Violation - means a written notice detailing any violations of this
Chapter and listing actions expected of the violators.
Oil - means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to,
petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, grease,
sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste.
Part of a Larger Common Plan of Development - means a contiguous area
where multiple separate and distinct construction activities will be
taking place at different times on different schedules under one plan.
An example would be a commercial development with multiple separate
buildings constructed over the course of multiple construction schedules.
Permanent BMPs - means those BMPs including, but not limited to, a
vegetated swale, wetland, pond, or water quality structure, to be installed
and regularly maintained at a site in order to ensure long term water
quality benefits.
Person - means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns, including all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pesticide - means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent,
destroy, repel, or migrate any pest.
Petroleum Product - means a product that is obtained from distilling and
processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant
in a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline, gasohol,
other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil,
and #1 and #2 diesel.
Pollutant - means any substance attributable to water pollution, including
but not limited to rubbish, garbage, solid waste, litter, debris, yard waste,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, animal waste, domestic sewage, industrial
waste, sanitary sewage, wastewater, septic tank waste, mechanical fluid, oil,
motor oil, used oil, grease, petroleum products, antifreeze, surfactants,
solvents, detergents, cleaning agents, paint, heavy metals, toxins, household
hazardous waste, small quantity generator waste, hazardous substances,
hazardous waste, soil and sediment.
Pollution - means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or
biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water that renders the
water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life,
property, or public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or
the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Potable Water - means water that has been treated to drinking water
standards and is safe for human consumption.
Private Drainage System - means all privately or publicly owned ground,
surfaces, structures or systems, excluding the Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer System, that contribute to or convey stormwater, including but not
limited to, roofs, gutters, downspouts, lawns, driveways, pavement, roads,
streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels,
culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds, draws, swales, streams and any
ground surface.
Qualified Person - means a person who possesses the required certification,
license and appropriate competence, skills, and ability as demonstrated
by sufficient education, training and/or experience to perform a specific
activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the regulatory
requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity
and may, for certain duties, be required to be a Professional Engineer
licensed in the state of Colorado or as required under § 12-25-101, C.R.S.
Release - means to dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject,
leach, dispose or otherwise introduce into the storm drainage system.
Rubbish – means non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist
of: (A) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood,
excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar
materials; and (B) noncombustible waste materials, including glass,
crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials
that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees
Fahrenheit).
Sanitary Sewage - means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that
is discharged into the City Sanitary Sewer System and passes through the
Sanitary Sewer System to the City sewage treatment plant for treatment.
Sanitary Sewer - means the system of pipes, conduits, and other
conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the City sewage
treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater
are not intentionally admitted).
Sediment - means soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and
transported naturally by water, wind, gravity, or mechanically by any
person.
Septic Tank Waste - means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such
as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and aerated tanks.
Site - means the land or water area where any facility or activity is
physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection
with the facility or activity.
Solid Waste - means any garbage, rubbish, refuse and other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material,
resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining or
agricultural operations, and residential, community and institutional
activities.
Storm Drainage System - means all surfaces, structures and systems that
contribute to or convey stormwater, including private drainage systems, the
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, surface water, groundwater,
waters of the State and United States.
Stormwater – means run-off resulting from precipitation.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan – means a detailed written plan
specifying a design to minimize erosion and sediment runoff and water
quality issues for a construction site or development during and after
construction, including a site description, size, location and description
of appropriate BMPs (both structural, non-structural, temporary or
permanent), and inspection and maintenance procedures. This is also
referred to as a "Stormwater Management Plan (or SWMP)" by the State
of Colorado.
Surface Water - means water bodies and any water temporarily residing
on the surface of the ground, including oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers,
ponds, streams, puddles, channeled flow and runoff.
Temporary BMPs - means those temporary BMPs including, but not
limited to, silt fence(s), wattles, vehicle tracking pads, inlet filters,
diversions, sediment ponds and dewatering structures, to be installed and
regularly maintained by the applicant or permittee until the site is
sufficiently stabilized and permanent BMPs established.
Toxic - means a substance that is harmful or poisonous according to the
MSDS standards
Uncontaminated - means not containing harmful quantities of pollutants
that exceed state or federal guidelines.
Wastewater - means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
Stormwater, discharged from a facility. From the standpoint of source, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with any incidental groundwater, surface water
and stormwater that may be present.
Waters of the State - means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise,
lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of the State,
and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or nonnavigable,
and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies
of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the State
or inside the jurisdiction of the State.
Water Quality Standard - means the designation of a body or segment of
surface water in the State for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical
criteria deemed by State or Federal regulatory standards to be necessary to
protect those uses.
Waters of the United States - means all waters which are currently used,
used in the past, or susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce,
including all waters which are subject to the ebb and the flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate
or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as
waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters
identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this
definition; and any waters within the federal definition of “Waters of the
United States” at 40 CFR Section 122.2; but not including any waste
treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the
requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland - means any area that is inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Yard Waste – means leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks
or debris that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance or land
clearing operations.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
3-7-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) Prohibitions
(1) No person shall release or cause to be released into the storm
drainage system any discharge that is not composed entirely of
uncontaminated stormwater, except as allowed in Section 3-7-2(B)
below. Common stormwater contaminants include rubbish, garbage,
yard waste, herbicides and lawn chemicals, animal waste,
wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint
products, hazardous waste, sediment and other toxic substances.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3-7-2(B), any discharge
shall be prohibited by this Section if the discharge in question has
been determined by the Director to be a source of pollutants to the
storm drainage system.
(3) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the Storm Drainage System is prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the
time of connection. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(4) No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic
sewage or industrial waste, to the Storm Drainage System, or allow
such a connection to continue.
(5) No person shall knowingly or recklessly destroy or interfere with
BMPs implemented pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 2278,
08/02/2011)
(B) Exemptions
(1) The following non-stormwater discharges are deemed acceptable
and not a violation of this Chapter:
(a) A discharge authorized by and in compliance with a CDPS
or NPDES permit, other than the CDPS permit for
discharges from the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System. This type of discharge must receive advance
approval by the City before the CDPS permit can be issued;
(b) Waterline flushing and other infrequent discharges from
potable water sources and waterline repair work as necessary
to protect public health and safety;
(c) Intermittent uncontaminated discharge from landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, and irrigation return flows;
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(d) Discharge from the occasional non-commercial washing of
vehicles on properties zoned residential, or occasional notfor-
profit car washing events;
(e) Uncontaminated discharge from foundation, footing or crawl
space drains, sump pumps and air conditioning condensation
drains;
(f) Uncontaminated groundwater, including rising groundwater,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration into storm drains (as
defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)), uncontaminated pumped
groundwater and springs;
(g) Diverted stream flows and natural riparian habitat or wetland
flows;
(h) A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not
contain oil or hazardous substances or materials;
(i) Water incidental to street sweeping (including associated
sidewalks and medians) and that is not associated with
construction;
(j) De-chlorinated and uncontaminated swimming pools and hot
tubs may be drained to the storm drain system;
(k) Intermittent uncontaminated discharges from land zoned
for and used for agriculture;
(l) Grading or an excavation below finished grade for
basements, footings, retaining walls, or other structures on
parcels zoned R1, R-2 or R3 of less than one (1) acre in
size, unless otherwise required by this Chapter;
(m) A sidewalk or driveway authorized by a valid permit;
(n) Gravel, sand, dirt or topsoil removal as authorized pursuant
to approval of the Colorado Mined Land Reclamation
Board, provided that said approval includes an erosion plan
that meets the minimum standards specified by this
Chapter;
(o) Sites smaller than one (1) acre which are not a part of a
larger development and which constitute infill of an
established older development within the City, unless
otherwise required by this Chapter;
(p) Intermittent uncontaminated discharge from landscape
irrigation, lawn watering, or irrigation return flows;
(q) Discharges approved by the Director as being necessary to
protect property and/or public health and safety, such as
flows from fire protection activities;
(r) Street wash water after mechanical cleanup (sweeping)
has taken place;
(s) City activities as determined necessary by the Director,
such as Spring Cleanup and Fall Leaf Pickup programs. The
intent of these activities is to reduce pollution in the storm
drain system. For this exemption to apply, the participant(s)
must comply with the directions and specified time frame
determined by the Director;
(t) Where the Director certifies in writing that the planned work
and the final structures or topographical changes will not
result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation and
will not interfere with any existing drainage course in
such a manner as to cause damage to any adjacent property
or result in the deposition of debris or sediment on any
public way; will not present any hazard to any persons or
property; and will have no detrimental influence upon the
public welfare or upon the total development of the
watershed;
(u) Notwithstanding the foregoing exemptions in this
Section, those operations and construction activities
which are exempted from obtaining permits must
nevertheless comply with the rules and regulations
concerning grading and erosion specified in this Chapter,
and other applicable provisions of the Official Code of the
City of Montrose as the same may be amended from time to
time, and shall provide appropriate controls to retain soil
erosion on the subject construction site.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(C) Requirements Applicable to Certain Dischargers
(1) Private Drainage System Maintenance. The owner of any private
drainage system shall maintain the system to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants. This maintenance shall include, but is not
limited to, sediment removal, bank erosion repairs, maintenance of
vegetative cover, and removal of debris from pipes and structures.
(2) Minimization of Irrigation Runoff. A discharge of irrigation water
that is of sufficient quantity to cause a concentrated flow in the
storm drainage system is prohibited. Irrigation systems shall be
managed to reduce the discharge of water from a site.
(3) Cleaning of Paved Surfaces Required. The owner of any paved
parking lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as required to
prevent the buildup and discharge of pollutants. The visible buildup
of mechanical fluid, waste materials, sediment or debris is a
violation of this Chapter. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry
sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and treatment of wash
water or other methods in compliance with this Chapter. This
Section does not apply to pollutants discharged from construction
activities, which are regulated by Section 3-7-3. (Ord. 2278,
08/02/2011)
(4) Mobile commercial cleaning operations shall not discharge to the
storm drainage system in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 2278,
08/02/2011)
(5) Maintenance of Equipment. Any leak or spill related to equipment
maintenance in an outdoor, uncovered area shall be contained to
prevent the potential release of pollutants. Vehicles, machinery and
equipment must be maintained to reduce leaking fluids.
(6) Materials Storage. In addition to other requirements of this Chapter,
materials shall be stored to prevent the potential release of
pollutants. The uncovered, outdoor storage of unsealed containers of
hazardous substances is prohibited. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(7) Animal Waste. Animal waste shall be disposed of as solid waste or
sanitary sewage in a timely manner, to prevent discharge to the
Storm Drainage System.
(8) Pesticides, Herbicides, Fungicides and Fertilizers. Pesticides,
herbicides, fungicides and fertilizers shall be applied in accordance
with manufacturer recommendations and applicable laws. Excessive
application shall be avoided.
(9) Prohibition on Use of Pesticides, Herbicides and Fungicides Banned
from Manufacture. Use of any pesticide, herbicide or fungicide, the
manufacture of which has been either voluntarily discontinued or
prohibited by the Environmental Protection Agency, or any Federal,
State or City regulation, is prohibited.
(10) Open Drainage Channel Maintenance. Every person owning or
occupying property through which an open drainage channel passes
shall keep and maintain that part of the drainage channel within the
property free of garbage, rubbish, debris, excessive vegetation, and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or retard the flow of
water through the drainage channel. In addition, the owner or
occupant shall maintain existing privately owned structures adjacent
to a drainage channel, so that such structures will not become a
hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the drainage
channel.
(D) Release Reporting and Cleanup
Any person responsible for a known or suspected release of materials
which are resulting in, or may result in, illegal discharges to the Storm
Drainage System shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, abatement and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of a hazardous material, said person shall comply with all state,
federal, and local laws requiring reporting, cleanup, containment, and any
other appropriate remedial action in response to the release.
(E) Authorization to Adopt and Impose Best Management Practices
The City may adopt and impose requirements identifying BMPs for any
activity, operation, or facility, which may cause a discharge of pollutants to
the storm drainage system. Where specific BMPs are required, every
person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such
facility shall implement and maintain these BMPs at their own expense.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
3-7-3: STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION
ACTIVITIES
(A) General Requirements for Construction Sites
(1) The owner of a construction site, including subdivision
developments, shall be responsible for compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter and to any BMPs adopted by the City
as set forth above. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(2) Waste Disposal. Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste, rubbish
and any other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall be
controlled through the use of BMPs. Waste or recycling containers
shall be provided and maintained by the owner or contractor on
construction sites where there is the potential for release of waste.
Uncontained waste, rubbish and other pollutants or toxins that may
blow, wash or otherwise be released from the site are prohibited.
(3) Concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning of vehicles or
equipment containing or used in transporting or applying concrete
shall be contained on construction sites for proper disposal. Release
of these materials is prohibited. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(4) Erosion and Sediment Control. BMPs shall be implemented to
prevent the release of sediment from construction sites. Disturbed
areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed, and
construction site entrances shall be managed to prevent sediment
tracking. Sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed
immediately at the owner’s expense.
(B) Construction Sites Requiring Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan Review
and a CDPS Permit
(1) Prior to the final approval of any subdivision plat or final Planned
Development for the subdivision or other development of lands
within the City, and/or prior to the commencement of any
construction activities, land disturbance activity, or other
development upon or in connection with such lands, the applicant,
builder, landowner and/or developer, as the case may be, shall, at
such person's expense, submit to the Department of Public Works a
detailed written Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan and such
other plans, applications and drainage reports as may be required
by this Chapter and the ordinances and regulations of the City, for
review by the Director. Such plan(s) shall set forth, at a minimum,
detailed construction plans for the design, construction, installation
and ongoing maintenance of all on-site and off-site stormwater
facilities required to convey stormwater runoff from such lands to
existing or planned drains, culverts, channels, streams, detention
or retention ponds or other points or facilities, in conformity
with this Chapter and the City of Montrose’s Drainage and
Erosion Control Standards, as the same may be amended from
time to time. Such plans shall be reviewed by the Director within
a reasonable time for compliance with this Chapter and
implemented as follows:
(a) The preparation and implementation of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan must comply with this Chapter.
(b) The disturbed area, the area to be included in the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan, shall be assumed to include the
entire property area, unless all applicable plans specifically
exclude certain areas from disturbance.
(c) In the case of subdivision developments, Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plans must be provided for all phases of
development, including sanitary sewer construction, storm
drainage system construction, waterline, street and sidewalk
construction, general grading, installation of utilities and the
construction of individual homes.
(d) The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan must be provided
by the owner and submitted to the City for review.
(e) The Director will review the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan submitted for the site and will return either
an accepted Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan or a
request for revisions, within a reasonable time of submission
of the Plan.
(f) Construction activity, including any soil disturbance or
removal of vegetation, shall not commence on the site until
the Director has reviewed the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan and the Director has accepted the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan under the above Subsection
(e)
(g) The owner bears the responsibility for implementation of,
and monitoring for compliance with, the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan and for notification of all
contractors and utility agencies on the site regarding the
same.
(h) The owner bears the responsibility for implementation of the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan for all construction
activity within the development. An owner shall provide a
copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan to all
utility agencies, subcontractors and other agencies or persons
prior to their working within the construction site or
subdivision development. Minor alterations to the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, as determined by the
Director, are permissible.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or conduct
construction activities, land disturbance activity or other
development without first obtaining a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan review and a CDPS Permit on sites which are one
(1) acre in size or larger, and sites smaller than one (1) acre if they
are a part of a larger common plan of development or subdivision that
is larger than one (1) acre in size. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(C) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
(1) Preparation and implementation of Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Plans for construction activity shall, as a minimum:
(a) Be prepared under the direction of a qualified person, as
defined in Section 3-7-1 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(b) Provide the name, address and phone number of the project
owner for purposes of correspondence and enforcement.
(c) Identify existing natural resources such as streams, forest
cover and other established vegetative cover.
(d) Specify and provide detail for all BMPs necessary to meet the
requirements of this Chapter, including any applicable BMPs
that have been adopted and imposed by the City. (Ord. 2278,
08/02/2011)
(e) Specify when each BMP will be installed, and for how long it
will be maintained within the construction sequence. Multiple
plans may be required for major phases of construction such
as rough grading, building construction and final grading.
(f) Delineate all anticipated disturbed areas and specify the
vegetative cover that must be established in those areas to
achieve final stabilization. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(g) Comply with any additional CDPS requirements not
specifically identified here. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(D) Implementation of Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
(1) BMPs shall be installed and maintained by qualified persons.
(2) The owner or their representative shall maintain a copy of the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan on site during construction.
(3) The owner or their representative shall inspect all BMPs in
accordance with CDPS inspection frequencies.
(4) Based upon inspections performed by the owner or by authorized
City personnel, modifications to the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan shall be necessary if at any time the specified BMPs
do not meet the objectives of this Chapter.
(5) Where a major modification is required, the owner shall meet with
authorized City personnel to determine the appropriate
modifications. All major modifications shall be recorded on the
owner’s copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, and shall
be completed in a timely manner, as determined by the nature of the
changes, following the referenced inspection.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(E) Permanent BMPs
(1) Permanent BMPs shall be installed and maintained by qualified
persons, as defined in Section 3-7-1.
(2) The owner or the owner’s representative shall maintain a copy of the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan on site during construction.
(3) Outstanding water quality is exceedingly important to the
environmental health and continuing watershed integrity of lands
comprising the City of Montrose, the State of Colorado, and the
United States of America.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
3-7-4: ENFORCEMENT
(A) Right of Entry. Whenever the Director has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises, any condition which
constitutes a violation of this Chapter, the Director shall have the right to
enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the discharger is
complying with all requirements of this Chapter. In the event that the
owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the
City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent
jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(B) Sampling. The Director shall have the right to set up on the property of any
discharger to the storm drainage system such devices that are necessary to
conduct sampling of discharges.
(C) Notice of Violation. Whenever the Director determines that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Chapter, City
enforcement personnel may order compliance first by oral Notice of
Violation; and if necessary, then by written Notice of Violation to the
responsible person. The written Notice of Violation shall identify:
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(1) The name of the responsible person;
(2) The date and location of the violation;
(3) A description of the violation;
(4) Actions that must be taken by the responsible person to remedy the
violation;
(5) The deadline within which the required actions must be
completed; and
(6) Enforcement actions that may be taken by the City.
(D) Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the Notice to the
Director. The written appeal must be received by the Director within two
(2) City business days of the Notice date. The Director will affirm, modify
or rescind the Notice in writing, within one (1) City business day of the
date of receipt of the appeal by the Director. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(E) Action Without Prior Notice. Any person who violates a prohibition or
fails to meet a requirement of this Chapter will be subject, without prior
notice, to one or more of the enforcement actions identified herein, when
attempts to contact the person have failed and the enforcement actions are
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present imminent danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the Storm Drainage System. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(F) Enforcement Actions. Any person who fails to comply with a Notice of
Violation pursuant to Section 3-7-4 (C) shall be subject to any of the
following:
(1) Stop Work Order. The Director may issue a Stop Work Order to the
owner and contractors on a construction site, by posting the order at
the construction site and distributing the order to all City
departments whose decisions may affect any activity at the site.
Unless express written exception is made, the Stop Work Order shall
prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar any
further inspection or approval necessary to commence or continue
construction or to assume occupancy at the site. A Notice of
Violation shall accompany the Stop Work Order, and shall define the
compliance requirements.
(2) Abatement of an Illicit Connection. The Director may order City
representatives to terminate an illicit connection to the Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System. Any expense related to such
abatement by City representatives shall be fully reimbursed by the
property owner.
(3) Abatement of a Violation on Private Property. When a property
owner is not available, not able or not willing to correct a violation,
the Director may order City representatives to enter private property
to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall
be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of
any premises to refuse to allow City representatives to enter upon the
premises for these purposes. Any expense related to such
abatement by City representatives shall be fully reimbursed by the
property owner.
(4) Recovery of Costs. Within forty-five (45) days after abatement by
City representatives, the Director shall notify the property owner of
the costs of abatement, including administrative costs, and the
deadline for payment. If the amount due is not paid, the charges
shall become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A
copy of the charges shall be turned over to the County Assessor so
that the Assessor may enter the amounts of the assessment against
the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the
amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the
parcel of land. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(5) Performance Security. Where necessary for the reasonable
implementation of this Chapter, the Director may, by written notice,
order any owner of a construction site or subdivision development to
post cash or an approved letter of credit, in a sum determined by the
Director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this
Chapter. The City may deny approval of any building permit,
subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other City permit or
approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to
assume occupancy, until such security has been filed. (Ord. 2278,
08/02/2011)
(G) Criminal Prosecution. Any person who violates or continues to violate a
prohibition or requirement of this Chapter shall be liable to criminal
prosecution, and shall be subject to criminal penalties. (Ord. 2278,
08/02/2011)
(H) The violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed a municipal
offense. Any person violating this Chapter shall, upon an adjudication of
guilt or a plea of guilty or no contest, be fined according to Section 1-2-3 of
the Official Code of the City of Montrose. Each separate day on which a
violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
(I) Other Legal Action. Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures
available to the City, if any person discharges into the Storm Drainage
System in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, the
City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and equitable
relief, including damages and costs. The City Attorney may seek a
preliminary or permanent injunction or both which restrains or compels the
activities on the part of the discharger. (Ord. 2278, 08/02/2011)
Chapter 3-8
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM
Sections:
3-8-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION
3-8-2 REQUIREMENTS
3-8-3 COLORADO DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND
ENVIRONMENT CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL MANUAL
3-8-4 METER YOKES
3-8-5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
3-8-6 STANDARDS FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES
3-8-7 INSTALLATION
3-8-8 TESTING AND MAINTENANCE
3-8-9 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
3-8-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICATION
This Chapter is promulgated to implement the City’s program for control of cross
connections and requirements for containment devices which include, but are not limited
to, double check and reduced pressure assemblies and Approved Backflow Prevention
Assemblies, and to meet requirements of state regulations found in Article 12 of 5 C.C.R.
1003-1.
3-8-2: REQUIREMENTS
(A) The City shall take steps to identify potentially uncontrolled hazardous
service cross connections.
(B) All water system customers shall install, maintain, and replace City
approved containment devices on any uncontrolled hazardous service
connection consistent with the degree of hazard imposed by the
uncontrolled cross connection in accordance with guidelines established by
the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.
(C) The installation of all containment devices shall be approved by the City
following installation, prior to use.
(D) Containment devices shall be properly inspected or tested and maintained
by the customer, at the customer’s expense at installation and at least
annually by a certified cross connection control technician. Test results
shall be submitted to the City.
(E) The City shall retain maintenance and inspection records of containment
devices for three (3) years, which shall be available for inspection by
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment personnel.
(F) The City shall notify Colorado Department of Public Health and
Environment of any cross connections discovered by the City, as defined by
Section 1.22(12) of the State regulations, and require correction of the
problem with due diligence.
(G) City customers shall comply with applicable City ordinances, and Section 6
of the State Plumbing Code, to properly install and maintain containment
devices, and to perform annual inspections and tests, provide the City with
inspections and test reports, and maintain a copy of their inspections and
test reports.
3-8-3: COLORADO DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND
ENVIRONMENT CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL MANUAL
The City may utilize provisions of the Colorado Department of Public Health and
Environment’s Cross Connection Control Manual to identify hazardous service
connections, determine required containment devices for various types of installation, and
assist in administration and interpretation of the program and interpretation.
3-8-4: METER YOKES
Residential service lines are generally considered to be low-hazard connections, unless a
hazardous activity is present. Meter yokes with a dual check valve assembly will be
installed on all new taps and service upgrades. Additional protection is required for
irrigation systems or other hazardous situations.
3-8-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(A) Plumbing plans must be submitted to the City and approved, prior to the
activation of water service. PLANS MUST SHOW:
(1) Water services type, size and location
(2) Meter size and location
(3) Backflow prevention assembly size, type and location
(4) Fire sprinkling system(s) service line, size and type of backflow
prevention assembly if applicable
(B) Backflow prevention assemblies are to be installed in an accessible location
to facilitate maintenance, testing and repair. Drawings must show various
installations.
(C) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed immediately
downstream of the water meter.
(D) Before installing a backflow prevention assembly, pipelines should be
thoroughly flushed to remove foreign material.
(E) In no case will it be permissible to have connections or tees between the
meter and service line backflow prevention assembly.
(F) Backflow prevention valves are not to be used as the inlet or outlet valve of
the water meter. Test cocks are not to be used as supply connections. (Not
applied to residential dual check installations.)
(G) In order to insure that backflow prevention assemblies continue to operate
satisfactorily, it will be necessary that they be tested at the time of
installation and on an annual schedule thereafter. Such tests will be
conducted in accordance with A.S.S.E. and / or U.S.C.-C.C.C. and H.R.
performance standards and field test procedures as directed by the Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment. (Not applied to residential
dual check installations. Dual checks will be tested at intervals set by the
Board.)
(H) The City will require inspection of all containment system installations.
(I) All costs for design, installation, maintenance, repair, and testing are to be
borne by the customer.
(J) No grandfather clause exists. All laws and regulations apply regardless of
the age of the facility.
(K) All fire sprinkling lines shall have a minimum protection of an approved
double check valve for containment of the system.
(1) All glycol, ethylene, propylene, and other chemical antifreeze
systems shall have an approved Reduced Pressure Zone assembly for
containment.
(2) Dry fire systems shall have an approved Double Check Valve
installed upstream of the air pressure valve.
(3) Single-family residence with a fire sprinkler system and domestic
water combined shall have a double check valve when no chemicals
are used.
(L) All fire sprinkler systems shall conform to the following sections of the
National Fire Protection Association Pamphlets Number Thirteen and
Twenty-Four: Pamphlet Number Thirteen, section 1-11.2 Hydrostatic
Testing, and section 1-1.2.2 Allowable Leakage and Pamphlet Number
Twenty-Four, "Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances",
Section 8.4.
3-8-6: STANDARDS FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES
(A) Any backflow prevention assembly required for containment under this
Chapter shall be of a model and size approved by the City. The term
"Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly" shall mean an assembly that
has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established
by the latest version of the Colorado Department of Public Health and
Environment Cross Connection Control Manual and by the City. Final
approval shall be evidenced by a "Certificate of Approval" issued by an
approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment standards and A.S.S.E.
and/or USC FCCC & HR specifications. Provided however, containment
within a residential meter pit may be accomplished with an assembly not
approved by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research, but approved by the American Society of Sanitary and
Mechanical Engineers as designated by the City. The following testing
laboratory is qualified to test and certify backflow prevention assemblies.
A backflow prevention assembly being listed on their periodic approved list
shall be deemed to meet all of the above requirements:
A.S.S.E. American Society of Sanitary Engineering, 28901
Clemens Road, Suite 100, Westlake, Ohio 44145.
USC Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research, University of Southern California, OHE 430-D
University Park-MC 1453 Los Angeles, California 90089-
14534.2
(1) Only Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies shall be used.
(B) Containment devices and backflow prevention assemblies currently
installed, which are not approved, shall be replaced with an approved
device at the time they are discovered.
(C) Backflow prevention assemblies used on fire lines shall have O.S. & Y.
(outside stem & yoke) valves and be listed by the National Fire Protection
Association.
3-8-7: INSTALLATION OF CONTAINMENT DEVICES
(A) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with
the City requirement.
(B) All backflow prevention assembly installations shall be inspected and
approved for use by the City.
(C) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in the horizontal
position. Vertical installation shall be acceptable when approved by
A.S.S.E. and / or USC FCCC & HR specifications.
(D) A pressure vacuum breaker shall be used where the backflow prevention
assembly is never subject to backpressure if installed a minimum of twelve
(12) inches above the highest piping or outlet downstream of the assembly
in a manner to preclude back pressure.
(E) Atmospheric vacuum breakers are not allowed.
(F) A single check valve is not considered to be a backflow prevention
assembly, and must be replaced with an approved containment device.
(G) Double check valve assemblies may be installed in below grade vaults only
if the vault is properly constructed and insulated to prevent freezing.
(H) Reduced pressure backflow prevention assemblies must be installed above
ground. The device should be placed at least twelve inches (12) above the
finish grade to allow clearance for the repair work. A concrete slab at
finish grade is recommended. Proper drainage should be provided for the
relief valve and may be piped away from the location provided it is readily
visible from above grade and provided the relief valve is separated from the
drain line by a minimum of double the diameter of the supply line. A
modified vault installation may be used if constructed with ample side
clearances and adequate drainage.
3-8-8: TESTING AND MAINTENANCE
(A) At least once per year, it will be the duty of the customer where any
containment device is installed to have a certified inspection or test made of
those devices. In those specific instances where the City deems the hazard
to be great enough, certified inspections or tests at more frequent intervals
may be required. These inspections or tests shall be at the expense of the
customer and shall be performed by a certified technician approved by the
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.
(B) As necessary, the containment devices shall be repaired or replaced at the
expense of the customer whenever the containment devices are found to be
defective. Records of all such inspections, tests, repairs or replacement
shall be kept by customer and the City.
(C) Existing containment devices shall be sealed by the technician performing
the inspection or test at the completion of the inspection or test.
(D) All testing equipment used in testing of containment devices shall be
checked for accuracy at least annually, and proof of compliance shall be
submitted to the City upon request.
(E) The City retains the right to inspect or test the installation and operation of
any containment device at anytime to assure proper operation.
3-8-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
This Program shall be enforced and administered pursuant to applicable provisions of the
City Code, City Building Code and the State Plumbing Code, including but not limited
to, rights of entry and inspection, water shut-off, abatement of nuisances, and prosecution
in municipal court. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this Chapter. Any person convicted of such violation may be punished as provided in
Section 1-2-3 of the Official City Code of the City of Montrose. Each separate day on
which a violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(D) Containment devices shall be properly inspected or tested and maintained
by the customer, at the customer’s expense at installation and at least
annually by a certified cross connection control technician. Test results
shall be submitted to the City.
(E) The City shall retain maintenance and inspection records of containment
devices for three (3) years, which shall be available for inspection by
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment personnel.
(F) The City shall notify Colorado Department of Public Health and
Environment of any cross connections discovered by the City, as defined by
Section 1.22(12) of the State regulations, and require correction of the
problem with due diligence.
(G) City customers shall comply with applicable City ordinances, and Section 6
of the State Plumbing Code, to properly install and maintain containment
devices, and to perform annual inspections and tests, provide the City with
inspections and test reports, and maintain a copy of their inspections and
test reports.
3-8-3: COLORADO DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND
ENVIRONMENT CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL MANUAL
The City may utilize provisions of the Colorado Department of Public Health and
Environment’s Cross Connection Control Manual to identify hazardous service
connections, determine required containment devices for various types of installation, and
assist in administration and interpretation of the program and interpretation.
3-8-4: METER YOKES
Residential service lines are generally considered to be low-hazard connections, unless a
hazardous activity is present. Meter yokes with a dual check valve assembly will be
installed on all new taps and service upgrades. Additional protection is required for
irrigation systems or other hazardous situations.
3-8-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(A) Plumbing plans must be submitted to the City and approved, prior to the
activation of water service. PLANS MUST SHOW:
(1) Water services type, size and location
(2) Meter size and location
(3) Backflow prevention assembly size, type and location
(4) Fire sprinkling system(s) service line, size and type of backflow
prevention assembly if applicable
(B) Backflow prevention assemblies are to be installed in an accessible location
to facilitate maintenance, testing and repair. Drawings must show various
installations.
(C) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed immediately
downstream of the water meter.
(D) Before installing a backflow prevention assembly, pipelines should be
thoroughly flushed to remove foreign material.
(E) In no case will it be permissible to have connections or tees between the
meter and service line backflow prevention assembly.
(F) Backflow prevention valves are not to be used as the inlet or outlet valve of
the water meter. Test cocks are not to be used as supply connections. (Not
applied to residential dual check installations.)
(G) In order to insure that backflow prevention assemblies continue to operate
satisfactorily, it will be necessary that they be tested at the time of
installation and on an annual schedule thereafter. Such tests will be
conducted in accordance with A.S.S.E. and / or U.S.C.-C.C.C. and H.R.
performance standards and field test procedures as directed by the Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment. (Not applied to residential
dual check installations. Dual checks will be tested at intervals set by the
Board.)
(H) The City will require inspection of all containment system installations.
(I) All costs for design, installation, maintenance, repair, and testing are to be
borne by the customer.
(J) No grandfather clause exists. All laws and regulations apply regardless of
the age of the facility.
(K) All fire sprinkling lines shall have a minimum protection of an approved
double check valve for containment of the system.
(1) All glycol, ethylene, propylene, and other chemical antifreeze
systems shall have an approved Reduced Pressure Zone assembly for
containment.
(2) Dry fire systems shall have an approved Double Check Valve
installed upstream of the air pressure valve.
(3) Single-family residence with a fire sprinkler system and domestic
water combined shall have a double check valve when no chemicals
are used.
(L) All fire sprinkler systems shall conform to the following sections of the
National Fire Protection Association Pamphlets Number Thirteen and
Twenty-Four: Pamphlet Number Thirteen, section 1-11.2 Hydrostatic
Testing, and section 1-1.2.2 Allowable Leakage and Pamphlet Number
Twenty-Four, "Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances",
Section 8.4.
3-8-6: STANDARDS FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES
(A) Any backflow prevention assembly required for containment under this
Chapter shall be of a model and size approved by the City. The term
"Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly" shall mean an assembly that
has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established
by the latest version of the Colorado Department of Public Health and
Environment Cross Connection Control Manual and by the City. Final
approval shall be evidenced by a "Certificate of Approval" issued by an
approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment standards and A.S.S.E.
and/or USC FCCC & HR specifications. Provided however, containment
within a residential meter pit may be accomplished with an assembly not
approved by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research, but approved by the American Society of Sanitary and
Mechanical Engineers as designated by the City. The following testing
laboratory is qualified to test and certify backflow prevention assemblies.
A backflow prevention assembly being listed on their periodic approved list
shall be deemed to meet all of the above requirements:
A.S.S.E. American Society of Sanitary Engineering, 28901
Clemens Road, Suite 100, Westlake, Ohio 44145.
USC Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research, University of Southern California, OHE 430-D
University Park-MC 1453 Los Angeles, California 90089-
14534.2
(1) Only Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies shall be used.
(B) Containment devices and backflow prevention assemblies currently
installed, which are not approved, shall be replaced with an approved
device at the time they are discovered.
(C) Backflow prevention assemblies used on fire lines shall have O.S. & Y.
(outside stem & yoke) valves and be listed by the National Fire Protection
Association.
3-8-7: INSTALLATION OF CONTAINMENT DEVICES
(A) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with
the City requirement.
(B) All backflow prevention assembly installations shall be inspected and
approved for use by the City.
(C) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in the horizontal
position. Vertical installation shall be acceptable when approved by
A.S.S.E. and / or USC FCCC & HR specifications.
(D) A pressure vacuum breaker shall be used where the backflow prevention
assembly is never subject to backpressure if installed a minimum of twelve
(12) inches above the highest piping or outlet downstream of the assembly
in a manner to preclude back pressure.
(E) Atmospheric vacuum breakers are not allowed.
(F) A single check valve is not considered to be a backflow prevention
assembly, and must be replaced with an approved containment device.
(G) Double check valve assemblies may be installed in below grade vaults only
if the vault is properly constructed and insulated to prevent freezing.
(H) Reduced pressure backflow prevention assemblies must be installed above
ground. The device should be placed at least twelve inches (12) above the
finish grade to allow clearance for the repair work. A concrete slab at
finish grade is recommended. Proper drainage should be provided for the
relief valve and may be piped away from the location provided it is readily
visible from above grade and provided the relief valve is separated from the
drain line by a minimum of double the diameter of the supply line. A
modified vault installation may be used if constructed with ample side
clearances and adequate drainage.
3-8-8: TESTING AND MAINTENANCE
(A) At least once per year, it will be the duty of the customer where any
containment device is installed to have a certified inspection or test made of
those devices. In those specific instances where the City deems the hazard
to be great enough, certified inspections or tests at more frequent intervals
may be required. These inspections or tests shall be at the expense of the
customer and shall be performed by a certified technician approved by the
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.
(B) As necessary, the containment devices shall be repaired or replaced at the
expense of the customer whenever the containment devices are found to be
defective. Records of all such inspections, tests, repairs or replacement
shall be kept by customer and the City.
(C) Existing containment devices shall be sealed by the technician performing
the inspection or test at the completion of the inspection or test.
(D) All testing equipment used in testing of containment devices shall be
checked for accuracy at least annually, and proof of compliance shall be
submitted to the City upon request.
(E) The City retains the right to inspect or test the installation and operation of
any containment device at anytime to assure proper operation.
3-8-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
This Program shall be enforced and administered pursuant to applicable provisions of the
City Code, City Building Code and the State Plumbing Code, including but not limited
to, rights of entry and inspection, water shut-off, abatement of nuisances, and prosecution
in municipal court. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this Chapter. Any person convicted of such violation may be punished as provided in
Section 1-2-3 of the Official City Code of the City of Montrose. Each separate day on
which a violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
TITLE IV
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Building Regulations
2 Flood Plain Management Regulations
3 Electrical Code
4 Zoning Regulations
5 Television and Radio Receiving Antennas
(Rep. By Ord. 1044, 8-2-79)
6 Radio Interference Prohibited
7 Subdivision Regulations
8 Gas Code (Rep. By Ord. 926, 4-7-77)
9 Housing Code
10 Annexations (Rep. By Ord. 956, 12-5-77)
11 Street, Lot and Building Designations
12 Mobile Home and Travel Home Regulations
13 Outdoor Lighting
14 Adult Business Regulations
Chapter 4-1
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Sections:
4-1-1 ADOPTION AND APPLICATION OF CODES
4-1-2 ADMINISTRATION
4-1-3 DELETIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS TO THE
CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
4-1-4 LICENSES
4-1-5 PLUMBING PERMITS (Rep By Ord. 1257, 11-15-84)
4-1-6 APPEALS
4-1-7 ENFORCEMENT
4-1-8 REPEALER (Rep. by Ord. 1257, 11-15-84)
4-1-9 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
4-1-10 HOUSING MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
4-1-11 SUPPLEMENTAL BUILDING, STRUCTURE AND FENCE
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
4-1-12 SITE DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
4-1-13 USE OF CITY RIGHT OF WAY FOR PARKING
4-1-14 CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND
PAVING
4-1-15 SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR
HIGHWAY CORRIDORS
4-1-16 SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR
LARGE RETAIL DEVELOPMENT
4-1-1: ADOPTION AND APPLICATION OF CODES
(A) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare The International
Building Code, 2003 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795;
the subject matter of which is regulations governing, the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure than structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupations and use; the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy, and use and the demolition of such structures; and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore.
(Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(B) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
protect persons and property The International Mechanical Code, 2003
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West
Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795; the subject matter of
which is regulations governing the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems and the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore.
(Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(C) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
protect persons and property The International Residential Code, 2003
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West
Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795; the subject matter of
which is regulations governing the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and
demolition of detached and two family dwellings and multiple single family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate
means of egress and the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore.
(Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(D) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
protect persons and property The International Fuel Gas Code, 2003
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West
Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795; the subject matter of
which is regulations governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances
and the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore.
(Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(E) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
protect persons and property The International Plumbing Code, 2003
Edition, including Appendix F, as published by the International Code
Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795;
the subject matter of which is regulations governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefore. (Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(F) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
protect persons and property The International Existing Building Code,
2003 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West
Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795; including Appendix
“B” and Resource “A”; the subject matter of which is regulations governing
the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of
existing buildings, including historic buildings, and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore.
(Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(G) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
protect persons and property The International Energy Conservation Code,
2003 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West
Flossmoor Road, County Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795; including the
Appendix; the subject matter of which is regulations governing energy
efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical,
lighting and power systems, and providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefore, with additions, insertions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Sections 4-1-3 (A), (B), and (P). (Ord. 2199, 07-17-2008)
(H) There is herby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
protect persons and property, “The IESNA (Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America) Guidelines,” and the “IESNA Illumination
Handbook,” 9th Edition, which establishes guidelines for outdoor lighting in
order to promote efficient and cost-effective lighting, while preventing light
trespass in all areas of the City. (Ord. 1924, 12-05-2002)
(I) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
protect persons and property The International Property Maintenance Code,
2003 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West
Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795; the subject matter of
which is regulations governing, the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure than structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupations and use; the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy, and
use and the demolition of such structures; and providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefore. (Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(J) Pursuant to C.R.S. 12-23-104, the electrical code, as amended and enforced
by the State of Colorado from time to time shall apply to all electrical work
within the City. (Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(K) One copy of each of the above codes is on file in the office of the City
Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. Additional
copies are available for purchase. (Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
4-1-2: ADMINISTRATION (Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(A) The City Manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Chapter,
and the Codes adopted herein by reference. He may appoint a Building
Official or one or more inspectors who shall enforce, interpret and
administer the provisions of this Chapter, and the Codes adopted herein by
reference. Provided, however, the state electrical code shall be
administered and enforced in accordance with State law by the State
Electrical Inspector.
(B) The City Manager and State Electrical Inspector and their designated
representatives shall have the right of entry to inspect and enforce the
provisions of this Chapter, the state electrical code and any of the Codes
adopted herein by reference in accordance with the procedures and
provisions of Subsection 104.6 of The International Building Code in
addition to any other provisions provided by law.
(C) Whenever, in any of the Codes adopted or applied in this Chapter, it is
provided that anything must be done, subject to the approval or discretion
of an inspector or official, this shall be construed to give such official or
inspector only the discretion to determine whether rules or standards
established by such Codes have been complied with, and no such
provisions shall be construed as giving any official or inspector any
arbitrary or discretionary power to require conditions not prescribed by said
Codes or to enforce the Codes in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner.
(D) Permit and related fees for the codes adopted by reference herein shall be as
adopted by City Council Resolution.
(E) The owner, lessee, manager, sublessee and occupant of property shall be
jointly and severely responsible and liable for compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter and the codes adopted by reference herein,
notwithstanding any lease or agreement among them.
(F) The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt additional regulations for
the interpretation, administration and enforcement of this Chapter and any
other codes adopted by reference herein.
4-1-3: DELETIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS TO THE
CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE (Ord. 2199, 07-17-2008)
(A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in The International
Building Code, The International Energy Conservation Code, or other
Codes adopted by the City all structures regulated by this Code shall be
insulated in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
(1) All windows shall be double-glazed.
(2) Upper Level ceilings or the roof on residences shall be insulated to a
minimum R-38.
(3) Common wall between the garage and dwelling unit shall be
insulated to a minimum of R-19.
(4) Walls shall be insulated to a minimum of R-19.
(5) All doors leading to unheated areas shall have weather stripping.
(6) Floors in contact with an unheated crawl space shall be insulated to a
minimum of R-19. Stem walls shall be insulated to a value of R-20
when the crawl space is not vented to the outside and a continuous
vapor barrier is installed to cover the exposed earth in the crawl
space.
(7) Slabs on grade intended for living space shall be insulated to R-10
when there is an in-floor heat system, and otherwise with R-9 rigid
insulation. Minimum horizontal insulation width to be 48 inches.
(Ord. 2199, 07-17-2008)
(B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in The International
Residential Code, The International Energy Conservation Code or other
Codes adopted by the City, single-family dwellings and duplexes insulated
in accordance with the following minimum requirements shall be deemed
acceptable:
(1) All windows shall be double-glazed.
(2) Upper Level ceilings or the roof on residences shall be insulated to a
minimum R-38.
(3) Walls shall be insulated to a minimum of R-19.
(4) All doors leading to unheated areas shall have weather stripping.
(5) Floors in contact with an unheated crawl space shall be insulated to a
minimum of R-19. Stem walls shall be insulated to a value of R-20
when the crawl space is not vented to the outside and a continuous
vapor barrier is installed to cover the exposed earth in the crawl
space.
(6) Slabs on grade intended for living space shall be insulated to R-10
when there is an in-floor heat system, and otherwise with R-9 rigid
insulation. Minimum horizontal insulation width to be 48 inches.
(Ord. 2199, 07-17-2008)
(C) The International Building Code, 2003 Edition, is amended as follows:
(1) References to jurisdiction in Section 101.1 and elsewhere mean the
City of Montrose.
(2) The flood insurance study and maps referred to in Section 1612 are
as adopted by Chapter 4-2 of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose, Colorado.
(3) Chapter 13 and Sections 101.4.1, 101.4.5, 103, 104.7, 104.8, 108.3,
108.4, 108.6, 112, 113.1, 113.3, 113.4, and 3410.2 are deleted.
(Ord. 2075, 07-21-2005)
(4) Section 105.2 is amended to exempt the following from permit
requirements:
(a) Uncovered decks and platforms.
(b) Replacement of sinks, faucets, showers, tubs, water heaters,
dishwashers, garbage disposals and lawn sprinkler systems.
(c) Window and door replacement.
(d) Fences
(5) All foundations submitted for habitable structures or additions to
habitable structures, excluding patio covers and carports shall be site
specific, stamped and signed by an engineer registered in the state of
Colorado. One story detached accessory use structures less than 500
square feet in floor area, patio covers and carports need only comply
with the requirements illustrated in the Figure set out in Sub-section
4-1-3(J).
(6) Swing and opening force. Exit doors serving an occupant load of 10
or more shall be of the pivoted, balanced, or side hinged swinging
type. Exit doors shall swing in the direction of the path of exit
travel. The door shall swing to the fully open position when an
opening force not to exceed thirty (30) pounds (133.45N) is applied
to the latch side. Doors shall not project over public sidewalks.
(7) A Second point of egress meeting the requirements of Section R310
(IRC) and Section 1025 (IBC) shall be provided in all basements at
the time of initial construction of the basement.
(8) Common wall between a garage and residence must be one hour
rated. Door between a garage and a residence must be solid core
minimum 1 3/8” thick.
(9) Party walls between dwelling units shall be constructed in accordance
with figures in subsections 4-1-3(K); 4-1-3(L); or 4-1-3(M).
(10) The exception from permit requirements for accessory buildings in
IBC Section 105.2, is amended to read as follows:
Building:
1. No more than one, one-story detached accessory structure for
each premises as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and
similar uses provided the floor area cannot exceed 200 square
feet.
(D) The International Residential Code is amended as follows:
(1) Chapters 11 and 33 through 42, and Sections G2447.2 and R103,
R104.7, R104.8, R108.3, R108.5, R112, R113.1, R113.3 and R113.4
are deleted. (Ord. 2075, 07-21-2005)
(2) Swing and opening force. Exit doors serving an occupant load of 10
or more shall be of the pivoted, balanced, or side hinged swinging
type. Exit doors shall swing in the direction of the path of exit
travel. The door shall swing to the fully open position when an
opening force not to exceed thirty (30) pounds (133.45N) is applied
to the latch side. Doors shall not project over public sidewalks.
(3) A Second point of egress meeting the requirements of Section R310
(IRC) and Section 1025 (IBC) shall be provided in all basements at
the time of initial construction of the basement.
(4) Common wall between a garage and residence must be one hour
rated. Door between a garage and a residence must be solid core
minimum 1 3/8” thick.
(5) Party walls between dwelling units shall be constructed in
accordance with figures in subsections 4-1-3(K); 4-1-3(L); or 4-1-
3(M).
(6) Section R105.2 is amended to exempt the following from permit
requirements:
(a) Uncovered decks and platforms.
(b) Replacement of sinks, faucets, showers, tubs, water heaters,
dishwashers, garbage disposals and lawn sprinkler systems.
(c) Window and door replacement.
(d) Fences
(7) All foundations submitted for habitable structures or additions to
habitable structures, excluding patio covers and carports shall be site
specific, stamped and signed by an engineer registered in the state of
Colorado. One story detached accessory use structures less than 500
square feet in floor area, patio covers and carports need only comply
with the requirements illustrated in the figure in sub-section 4-1-3(J).
(8) Add a new subsection R907.7 to read as follows:
“R907.7 Attic ventilation shall be made to be in compliance with
Section 1203.2 of the International Building Code.”
(9) References to jurisdiction in Section R101.1 and elsewhere mean the
City of Montrose.
(10) Subsection P2603.6.1 is amended to specify “12 inches below
finished grade…” and “4 inches below grade….”
(11) Subsection P3103.1 is amended to specify “12 inches above the
roof…” and “2 inches above anticipated snow….”
(12) The exception from permit requirements for accessory buildings in
sub-section R105.2 is amended to read as follows:
Building:
1. No more than one, one-story detached accessory structure per
premises, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square
feet.
(E) The International Plumbing Code is amended as follows:
(1) Sections 103, 104.4, 104.8, 106.6.2, 106.6.3, 108.1, 108.2, 108.3,
108.4, 108.5, 108.6, 109, and 305.6.1 are deleted.
(2) References to “jurisdiction” in Section 101.1 and elsewhere shall
mean the City of Montrose.
(3) Section 904.1 is amended to specify “12 above the roof….”
(4) Section 106.2 is amended to exempt the following from permit
requirements: Replacement of sinks, faucets, showers, tubs, water
heaters, dishwashers, garbage disposals and lawn sprinkler systems.
(5) Section 604.8 of the International Plumbing Code is amended to
read as follows: Excessive water pressure; for all new construction
with water services, a water pressure regulator, conforming to ASSE
1003, preceded by an adequate strainer shall be installed to reduce
the static pressure to eighty (80) pounds per square inch (552 kPa) or
less. This regulator must be installed in an accessible place and in
no case greater than 15 feet from a crawl space access.
(F) The International Mechanical Code is amended as follows:
(1) Sections 103, 104.4, 104.8, 106.5.2, 106.5.3, 108.1, 108.2, 108.3,
108.4, 108.5, 108.6, and 109 are deleted.
(2) References to “jurisdiction” in Section 101.1 and elsewhere shall
mean the City of Montrose.
(G) The International Fuel Gas Code is amended as follows:
(1) Reference to “jurisdiction” in Section 101.1 and elsewhere shall
mean the City of Montrose.
(2) Sections 103, 104.4, 104.8, 106.5.2, 106.5.3, 108.1, 108.2, 108.3,
108.4, 108.5, 108.6, and 109 are deleted.
(H) Subsections 3103 and 3408 of the International Building Code are amended
to read as follows:
MOVED BUILDINGS AND TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
(1) Buildings or structures moved into or within the City shall comply
with the provisions of this code for new buildings or structures,
except as otherwise provided herein.
(2) Temporary structures such as reviewing stands and fences used for
the protection of the public around and in conjunction with
construction work may be erected by special permit from the
building official for a limited period of time. Such buildings or
structures need not comply with the type of construction or fireresistive
time periods required by this code. Such temporary
buildings or structures shall be completely removed upon the
expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.
(3) (a) Temporary permits may be issued for certain structures and
mobile homes which meet the criteria of this paragraph,
subject to the conditions and criteria set out herein.
(b) The maximum period of any temporary permit unless
otherwise authorized by a City Council approved permit, shall
be the lesser of the following:
Six months within any calendar year; six continuous months
including time within a prior calendar year; or a number of
months so that the total number of months for all temporary
structures on the premises in any calendar year does not
exceed six months. At the end of the permitted period, the
entire structure must be removed from the premises or taken
down and properly stored out of view.
(c) Unless otherwise authorized by a City Council approved
permit, the use of any structure permitted herein is limited to
use for retail sales, storage, pool or tennis court covers or
accessory uses to residences. These structures shall not be
permitted for manufacturing, repair, welding, painting or
workshop uses.
(d) All structures shall comply with all applicable provisions of
City ordinances and regulations and state and federal law,
including but not limited to building setback, off-street
parking and other provisions of City sign, zoning and land use
regulations, State Electrical Code and City Sales and Use Tax
Regulations. Provided however, temporary off-street parking
spaces need not be paved.
(e) Any manufactured structure shall be erected and maintained
in accordance with the manufacture's recommendations and
instructions. All temporary structures shall be constructed,
erected and maintained in a good and workmanlike manner,
in a good and safe condition and shall create no fire or safety
hazard, or nuisance.
(f) When required by applicable laws, permanent restrooms shall
be available complying with applicable laws. If water and
sewer is provided, nonrefundable purchase of taps with
payment of system investment and connection charges is
required.
(g) Applications for temporary permits shall be submitted on
forms provided by the City, which may require all
information necessary and convenient for the administration
of these provisions including a Site Plan and Construction
Plans, and shall be accompanied by an application fee as set
forth in Section 3-1 of the City of Montrose Regulations
Manual and payment of City sales and use tax due on the
structure, and any equipment or taxable personal property to
be used on the premises. The permit shall be issued subject to
conditions necessary to insure compliance with all applicable
laws and this Paragraph (3). No use or occupancy shall be
made of the structure until it has been inspected and an
Occupancy Permit issued as being in apparent compliance
with terms and conditions of the permit. Permits may be
revoked following reasonable notice and hearing by the City
Manager on account of a failure to comply with the
conditions of the permit, this paragraph (3) or any applicable
laws. Following revocation of any permit, no similar permit
shall be issued to the Permittee, or for the affected premises
for a period of three years.
(h) The Building Official may issue permits pursuant to this
section except when Council approval is also required as set
out herein above. Council approved permits are limited to
temporary uses incidental to construction projects and the
uses set out above.
5. Tents and fabric canopies, erected for less than five days, or with less
than 120 square feet of roof area, may be erected and used without a
permit.
(I) The City Council shall appoint five members to the Board of Appeals for
staggered terms.
(J)
(K)
(L)
(M)
(N) The International Property Maintenance Code is amended as follows:
(1) Reference to “jurisdiction” in Section 101.1 and elsewhere shall
mean the City of Montrose.
(2) Sections 103, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 104.8, 106, 107.1, 107.2,
107.3, 107.4, 109.6, 110.2, and 111 are deleted.
(O) The International Existing Building Maintenance Code is amended as
follows:
(1) Reference to “jurisdiction” in Section 101.1 and elsewhere shall
mean the City of Montrose.
(2) Sections 103, 104.4, 104.5, 104.7, 104.8, 108, 112, and 113 are
deleted.
(P) The International Energy Conservation Code, 2003 Edition, is amended as
follows (Ord. 2199, 07-17-2008):
(1) References to jurisdiction in Section 101.1 and elsewhere mean the
City of Montrose.
(2) Zone 13 of table 502.2.4(3) entitled “Prescriptive Building Envelope
Requirements, Detached One- and Two-Family Dwellings- Window
Area 15 Percent of Gross Exterior Wall Area” shall be amended to
read as follows:
MAXIMUM MINIMUM
ZONE
HEATING
DEGREE
DAYS
Glazing
U-Factor
Ceiling
R-Factor
Exterior Wall
R-value
Floor
R-value
Basement wall
R-value
Slab perimeter
R-value
Crawl Space Wall
R-value
13 6,000-6,499 0.35 R-38 R-19 R-19 R-10 R-9, 4 ft. R-20
(3) Zone 13 of Table 602.1 entitled 602.1 entitled “Simplified
Prescriptive Building Envelope Thermal Component Criteria;
Minimum Required Thermal Performance (U-Factor and R-Value)”
shall be amended to read as follows:
MAXIMUM MINIMUM
ZONE
HEATING
DEGREE
DAYS
Glazing
U-Factor
Ceiling
R-Factor
Exterior Wall
R-value
Floor
R-value
Basement wall
R-value
Slab perimeter
R-value
Crawl Space Wall
R-value
13 6,000-6,499 0.35 R-38 R-19 R-19 R-10 R-9, 4 ft. R-20
4-1-4: LICENSES
(A) Gas fitters' license:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, extend,
repair, or improve any gas appliance, facility or piping unless he has
a current gas fitters' license issued by the City.
(2) All licenses issued shall expire on December 31, of each year and
must be renewed each year.
(3) No license shall be granted until the applicant has:
(a) Submitted an application and annual fee as set by Resolution
and referred to in the City Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1944,
04/10/2003)
(b) (Rep. by Ord. 1292, 1-9-86)
(c) Filed proof of an adequate current liability insurance policy,
approved by the City Clerk, in the minimum amounts of
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) personal injury,
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per occurrence and fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.00) property damage.
(d) Presented proof of possessing a current Master Plumber's
License issued by the State of Colorado or, alternatively,
passed an examination as to his competence and skill given
by the City. A fee as set by Resolution and referred to in the
City Regulations Manual must be paid to take the exam. A
re-exam will not be required for the holder of a previous
license, unless such license was not renewed for two (2)
years. An applicant failing the exam may not retake the exam
for a period of three (3) months. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(B) Plumbers' License:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, extend, repair
or improve any drain or plumbing fixtures, piping or appliances
except upon a persons' own residence unless he has a current
plumbers’ license issued by the City. A person may make only
minor repairs upon his own property, other than his residence,
without a license.
(2) All licenses issued shall expire on December 31 of each year and
must be renewed each year.
(3) No license shall be granted until the applicant has:
(a) Submitted an application and annual license fee as set by
Council Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations
Manual. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(b) Provided proof that he holds a valid State plumber’s license.
(C) Any license or permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the City Council following notice and a hearing, for failure of
the holder to comply with the provisions of this Chapter on the codes
adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 926, 4-7-77)
4-1-5: PLUMBING PERMITS (Rep By Ord. 1257, 11-15-84)
4-1-6: APPEALS
(A) The decision of the City Manager or his designated official or inspector
may be appealed to the Board of Appeals by filing a written appeal on
forms provided by the City with said official or inspector within fifteen (15)
days of the date he renders his decision.
(B) Such appeal should set in full the reasons for the appeal, and specify the
relief requested.
(C) The Inspector shall review the appeal and forward it to the Board of
Appeals attaching thereto his written recommendations and reasons for his
decision.
(D) The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be final.
(E) The Board of Appeals shall have no authority to grant any variance.
(Ord. 926, 4-7-77)
4-1-7: ENFORCEMENT (Ord. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(A) It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this Chapter, the state
electrical code, any of the Codes adopted by reference herein, or any stop
order or other order issued by the City pursuant to said Codes or this
Chapter. Any person convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than one (1)
year or by both fine and imprisonment; provided, however, no person under
the age of eighteen (18) years shall be sentenced to any term of
imprisonment in excess of ten (10) days, except for contempt of Court.
Each day during which any violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall be considered as a separate offense.
(B) Continuing violation of the provisions of this Chapter or the Codes adopted
herein by reference, the state electrical code, or of any order issued
pursuant to this Chapter or the Codes adopted by this Chapter is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and may be abated in accordance with law.
(C) In addition to any other remedy the City may have, it may maintain an
action in a Court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of any
provision of this Chapter, the state electrical code, or of the Codes adopted
herein by reference.
(D) The City may refuse to issue any permits required by this Chapter, or by the
Codes adopted herein by reference if the applicant is in violation of any
provisions of this Chapter, the state electrical code, any of the Codes
adopted herein by reference, or any stop order or other order issued
pursuant thereto.
4-1-8: REPEALER (Rep. by Ord. 1257, 11-15-84)
4-1-9: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
(A) No building, structure, or antenna, whether a receiver or transmitter, shall
be constructed at a height in violation of the obstruction limitations as
defined by part 77 of the Federal Aviation Administration Regulations for
the Montrose County Airport, as amended from time to time.
(B) No antenna, whether a receiver or transmitter, shall be constructed at such a
height that there is any possibility that it could fall upon a power line,
telephone line, or property owned by parties other than that person
constructing, owning, or maintaining the antenna in the event it were to
topple from its base. Provided, however, this limit shall not apply to the
power or telephone service lines to the property owned by the owner of the
antenna. (Ord. 1044, 8-2-79).
4-1-10: HOUSING MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS: (Ord. 1508, 5-5-94)
(A) All structures used for dwelling purposes by persons shall be maintained in
accordance with the following minimum requirements:
(1) Each room of the dwelling shall be safely wired for electrical lights
and outlets consistent with state electrical code requirements.
(2) Each room of the dwelling must have an operable window or
mechanical ventilation. Provided, however, this shall not apply to
closets, halls, storage spaces, rooms which are substantially open to
other rooms with such windows or ventilation, or similar spaces.
(3) The dwelling shall be provided with adequate trash cans and trash
collection service shall be provided at least weekly.
(4) Every dwelling shall have adequate facilities and utilities for heating
in at least one-half (½) of the habitable rooms.
(5) The dwelling shall have a lawful public water supply available for
use and shall be able to lawfully discharge wastewater to a public
sewer system, a private sewer system authorized pursuant to state
law, or a lawful individual sewage disposal system maintained in
compliance with state regulations.
All water supply and wastewater plumbing and fixtures shall be
maintained in operable condition, good repair, free of significant
leaks and in compliance with applicable provisions of the
International Plumbing Code. (Ord 2069, 07-21-2005)
(6) Every dwelling unit shall have a safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level.
(7) The dwelling shall be weather-tight and dry inside.
(8) All dwellings shall have a hot water supply.
(9) Dwellings shall be maintained in sanitary condition and free of any
substantial infestation of any insects, rodents or other pests.
(10) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred square feet
(100 sq. ft.) of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least
fifty (50) additional square feet of floor space for each additional
occupant.
(11) The following minimum plumbing fixtures shall be provided within
the dwelling:
(a) Sinks with hot and cold running water: 1 per 10 occupants or
fraction thereof.
(b) Toilets: 1 per 10 occupants or fraction thereof.
(c) Showers or bathtubs with hot and cold water: I per 10
occupants or fraction thereof.
(d) Kitchen sinks with hot and cold running water: 1 per kitchen
or other food preparation area.
(12) All gas piping and fixtures shall be maintained in safe condition, free
of leaks.
(13) All flues, chimneys, exhaust pipes and fixtures shall be maintained
in safe, operable condition, free of leaks.
(B) This Section shall not apply to the lawful use of travel homes pursuant to
Section 4-12-3 of the Montrose City Code.
(C) Whenever any ordinance or regulation of the City provides other
requirements, the more stringent requirement shall be applicable. These
requirements shall be the minimum acceptable for all existing or new
dwellings.
4-1-11: SUPPLEMENTAL BUILDING, STRUCTURE AND FENCE
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
(Ord. 1508, 5-5-94)
(A) All buildings, structures and fences shall be constructed so that all exterior
surfaces exposed to the weather are constructed of weather-resistant
materials or adequately treated or painted for water resistance. Plywood,
pressboard, waferboard, chipboard and other similar materials, panels or
sheeting shall not be used for exterior surfaces on any buildings, structures
or fences unless allowed by the building codes and adequately treated or
painted to prevent deterioration or delimitation from weather and shall be
appropriately braced to prevent warping.
(B) All buildings, structures and fences shall be constructed and maintained so
they do not create a safety hazard.
(C) All buildings, structures and fences shall be maintained in good repair. It
shall be prima facie evidence that a building, structure or fence is not being
maintained in good repair if any of the following conditions significantly
exist over a significant period of time.
(1) Missing, broken or loose siding, boards, mortar, masonry, nails or
other fasteners.
(2) Chipped or peeling paint.
(3) Warped or delaminated boards, siding or sheeting.
(4) Non-weather resistant materials exposed to the weather which are
not properly treated or painted.
(5) Missing shingles or roofing or leaking roofs.
(6) Missing or broken glass, windows or glazing.
(7) Graffiti which is not removed or painted over.
(D) Structures on the federal or state register of historic places maintained
consistent with their historic character shall not be subject to the provisions
of Subsection (A) or (C) above.
(E) It shall be unlawful to erect, maintain or use any outhouse, privy, or
portable toilet, except that portable toilets complying with applicable state
or federal regulations may be utilized, on a temporary basis, at a
construction site during the construction period, at a civic or special event
during public attendance of the event, when necessary in an emergency
caused by the unexpected failure of regular toilet facilities or in similar
circumstances if authorized by a temporary permit approved by the City
Council.
4-1-12: SITE DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
(A) No building permit for new construction shall be issued until a site
development plan has been approved pursuant to this Section, except for
single-family residences, farms or ranches, or additions less than twentyfive
percent (25%) of the existing building size and less than 4,000 square
feet. (Ord. 2303, 10/16/2012)
(B) The site development plan shall be submitted on forms provided by the City
and fees paid as set forth in Section 3-1 of the City of Montrose
Regulations Manual with a building permit application and comply with the
following requirements (Ord 1999, 04-15-2004):
(1) Plans and specifications shall be submitted, drawn to a scale
adequate to clearly show all required features and not less than 1”
equals 40 feet, for the construction of the following improvements
consistent with city construction standards, specifications and design
standards.
(a) Installation of new, or repair of damaged, curb, gutter and
sidewalk along abutting streets, except in subdivisions where
it is not required by current subdivision regulations.
(b) Required off-street parking spaces, including landscaped
areas, and maneuvering areas, adequate to avoid the necessity
of backing onto the developed part of adjoining streets, and
adequate to meet all applicable requirements.
(c) Site drainage adequate to avoid damage or adverse 1 effects
to improvements, structures, and property on and off the site.
(d) Landscaping, including provisions for trees and shrubs,
subject to the following minimum requirements:
(i) At least 25% of the linear frontage of the site abutting
public street rights-of-way to a minimum width of
fifteen feet, unless the City approves an alternative
plan as more effectively presenting a landscaped view
from the abutting street rights-of-way, and
(ii) Inclusive of the above frontage requirement,
landscaping shall be required in at least 15% of that
part of the site not covered by buildings for sites
located in Residential Zoning Districts; at least 8% of
that part of the site not covered by buildings for sites
located in Commercial Zoning Districts; and at least
4% of that part of the site not covered by buildings for
sites located in Industrial Zoning Districts.
(iii) In addition, property within the defined highway
corridor of Section 4-1-15 shall also meet the
requirements therein.
(e) Driveways, culverts and curb cuts.
(f) The site development plan shall include an outdoor lighting
plan and shall otherwise comply with Chapter 4-13.
(Ord. 1924, 12-05-2002)
(2) The current deed to the property or other evidence of title shall be
submitted with the plan.
(3) If the abutting street is not paved, a recordable covenant binding the
property for assessments for the cost of paving must be properly
executed and submitted.
(C) In those cases where the grade for curb, gutter and sidewalk cannot be
established by the City or immediate construction is impractical, a
recordable covenant binding the property to pay for such improvements
may be accepted by the City in lieu of immediate construction of the curb,
gutter or sidewalk.
(D) Any improvement, the construction of which has been secured pursuant to
City Subdivision Regulations or by other contract, need not be provided as
part of the site development plan.
(E) Following review, revision and approval by the City, the plan and
specifications as approved by the City shall be revised in final form,
stamped with City's approval and filed with the City. Thereafter a building
permit may be issued.
(F) No occupancy permit shall be issued until the required improvements are
constructed and approved by the City in compliance with the approved
plans or secured for completion within 6 months, and a recordable
maintenance covenant running with the land on forms provided by the City
is executed, approved by the City and recorded.
(G) All required improvements and landscaping shall be maintained in good
repair and safe condition. Violation of this provision is hereby declared to
be a nuisance which may be abated by the City in any lawful manner.
(H) (1) Variances by the Planning Commission may be granted from the
requirements of Subsection (B)(1) above if it determines following
the review procedure of Section 4-4-29 of City Zoning Regulations
that all the criteria of this Subsection (H) are met:
(a) The variance is requested for an addition to an existing
building or construction of a purely accessory structure.
(b) The variance will not adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare.
(c) The addition or structure will have a de minimus effect on
traffic, parking and drainage.
(d) The variance requested is the minimum variance that will
afford relief.
(e) The variance will not result in development incompatible
with other property or buildings in the area and will not affect
or impair the value, use or development of other property.
(f) Strict compliance is technically infeasible or the cost of the
required site improvements is substantially more than the cost
of the addition or structure or the scope of the addition or
structure is insignificant with respect to the structures already
on the premises.
(2) Published notice of the hearing as specified in Subsection 4-4-
29(D)(2) is not required.
(I) Following approval of a site development plan, requests for amendments
may be filed with the City and shall be reviewed in accordance with the
provisions of Paragraphs (B), (C), (D), (E) and (F) above.
4-1-13: USE OF CITY RIGHT OF WAY FOR PARKING
(A) No part of the public rights-of-way or other City property may be
developed or used for parking except under the following circumstances:
(1) The parking is developed or sponsored by the City.
(2) The proposed parking shall be located within the Downtown
Transition Areas Parking Strategy Core and Transition Boundaries,
as shown on the map set forth in subsection 4-1-13 (A)(4), below.
The proposed parking shall be authorized pursuant to a right-of-way
Encroachment Permit issued by the City pursuant to Chapter 9-8
herein, and the parking shall meet the standards set forth in
Subsection (B) below, and shall receive written approval from the
City prior to the initiation of construction. (Ord. 2246, 03-18-2010)
(3) The parking is authorized pursuant to Subsection (B) below.
(4) Angled parking in the City right-of-way may be installed to the
inside of the red line, shown on the Downtown Transition Areas
Parking Strategy Boundary map: (Ord. 2246, 03-18-2010)
(B) The City may authorize parking within rights-of-way, in accordance with
City specifications, on collector and local streets with rights-of-way
sufficient to accommodate in-street parking. Curb-cut parking may be
allowed for local and collector streets with rights-of-way width of at least
100 feet. Parallel parking may be allowed on local and collector streets
with rights-of-way width of at least 60 feet. All in-street parking shall
comply with the following criteria:
(1) Angled parking in the City right-of-way must meet the design
standards in the adopted Downtown Transition Areas Parking
Strategy and applicable sections of the City of Montrose Engineering
Specifications. (Ord. 2246, 03-18-2010)
(2) Parking in all such spaces shall be open to the public.
(3) The spaces shall be defined by curb, gutter, and sidewalk to be
constructed at the expense of the party in interest, in accordance with
City specifications as described in the Downtown Transition Areas
Parking Strategy, as amended from time to time, and applicable
sections of the City of Montrose Engineering Specifications and Site
Development Standards. (Ord. 2246, 03-18-2010)
(C) The City Manager or its designee may allow deviation from the criteria in
Subsection (B) above, only upon a finding that:
(1) Unusual hardship exists; and
(2) Alternative designs will effectively and safely provide for public
parking; and
(3) All such deviations shall require a restrictive covenant, enforceable
by the City, to be recorded in the County Clerk and Recorder’s
Office on forms approved by the City, limiting the duration and use
of the parking accordingly. The interested party shall be responsible
for bringing any allowed deviations into full compliance with City
specifications in accordance with the terms of the covenant.
(4) Should the interested party desire to appeal a decision of the City
Manager or its designee, the request for deviation from the criteria
set forth in Subsection (B) above shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission for a public hearing. The burden shall be upon the
interested party to provide evidence meeting the criteria set forth in
subsections (1) through and including (3) of this Section. Any
appeal from a decision of the Planning Commission shall be as set
forth in § 4-4-29 for hearings de novo.
(Ord. 2246, 03-18-2010)
(D) All parking, other than permitted angled parking in the right-of-way, must
be designed so that said parking does not necessitate vehicles parked
therein to back out of said parking onto the travelled portion of the
roadway. (Ord. 2246, 03-18-2010)
(E) All parking in the right-of-way shall be paved in accordance with the City
of Montrose Engineering Specifications. A one (1) parking space credit
toward the off-street parking requirements may be allowed for every two
(2) spaces of parking within the rights-of-way abutting the property
affected, if said spaces meet the criteria set forth herein. (Ord. 2246, 03-18-
2010)
(F) No vested rights to any part of the public rights-of-way or improvements
made thereon shall result from development of such parking, and the City
may take, use, or dispose of such spaces and improvements at any time as it
may decide in its sole discretion. Any resulting shortage in off-street
parking because of the removal of parking from the right-of-way by the
City shall result in a non-conforming situation subject to the provisions of
Section 4-4-25 of the City Code. (Ord. 2246, 03-18-2010)
4-1-14: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND
PAVING
(A) No occupancy permit for any new residence shall be granted unless curb,
gutter and sidewalk, and paving of and along the abutting streets is installed
in accordance with City standards and specification and is in good repair,
unless the construction has been secured pursuant to City Subdivision
Regulations or by other contract, or unless the lot is in a subdivision where
curb, gutter or sidewalk is not required by current subdivision Regulations.
(B) In those cases where the City cannot establish the grade for curb, gutter,
sidewalk or paving or determines that immediate construction is
impractical, a recordable covenant binding the property for assessments to
pay for the cost of the improvements may be accepted by the City in lieu of
immediate construction.
4-1-15: SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR
HIGHWAY CORRIDORS
(A) Property located within 400 feet of a right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 50,
east of Hillcrest and north of North 9th Street: of U.S. Highway 550, south
of East Oak Grove Road; and of Highway 90 west of the Uncompahgre
River; and of North San Juan Avenue between Main Street and Townsend
Avenue, shall be subject to the following Supplemental Site Development
Standards in addition to other applicable requirements. Whichever City
ordinance or regulation requires the more stringent or restrictive
requirement shall apply. (Ord. 1926, Amended, 10/03/02)
(1) No building or structure other than fences may be constructed within
50 feet of a highway right-of-way, except in the following
circumstances:
(a) A variance is granted pursuant to Sections 4-4-26 and 4-4-29
of the City Zoning Regulations.
(b) The property is on a lot approved as part of a City subdivision
which provides for different setbacks or setbacks in
accordance with City zoning dimensional standards.
(2) No fence, freestanding wall, or berm located within 50 feet of a
highway right-of-way shall exceed 4 feet in height above grade,
except for screening required by state or federal law or City
ordinances or regulations.
(3) No building or structure shall exceed 40 feet in height or the
maximum height set out in City zoning dimensional requirements,
whichever is more restrictive, unless a variance is granted pursuant
to Sections 4-4-26 and 4-4-29 of the City Zoning Regulations.
(4) Building façades which are constructed of smooth-face concrete,
smooth-face concrete block, metal siding, or similar monolithic
building materials in a flat plane, shall be designed to include other
surface materials (in a minimum amount of twenty-five percent
(25%) of the building’s wall area facing or clearly visible from a
public right-of-way, public park, or public open space), which may
include, but are not limited to, contrasting materials such as brick,
stucco, wood or stone veneers. Other architectural elements must
also be included in the design which include but are not limited to
architectural projections such as dormers, roof overhangs, protective
canopies, and creatively shaped window openings. (Ord. 2303,
10/16/2012)
(5) Exterior mechanical equipment shall either be incorporated in the
overall form of the building or screened from view from any street
by materials consistent with the landscaping and the main building.
(6) Refuse collection containers and areas shall be screened from view
from any street or residential area by materials consistent with the
landscaping and building.
(7)
(a) Landscaping shall be installed and maintained to a minimum
depth of 15 feet along 70% of the State Highway frontages,
excluding driveways and sidewalks. Such landscaping shall
consist of trees, shrubs, and ground covers, and may include
up to a maximum 20% coverage in inert materials such as
decorative paving stones, lava rock, pea gravel, etc.
(b) Landscaping shall be installed and maintained to a minimum
depth of 15 feet along a minimum of 25% of the secondary
street frontages, excluding driveways and sidewalks. Such
landscaping shall consist of trees, shrubs, and ground covers,
and may include up to a maximum 20% coverage in inert
materials such as decorative paving stones, lava rock, pea
gravel, etc.
(c) Parking areas located on the front or side of a building with
25 or more spaces shall incorporate landscaped islands
disbursed throughout the parking with areas totaling a
minimum of 6% of the parking area.
(B) The regulations of this section shall apply to the entire building, lot, parcel
or contiguous lots or parcels which constitute a single site, when any part
thereof is located within 400 feet of the right-of-way of the highway
segments described in Subsection (A) above.
(C) The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt regulations as may be
appropriate to interpret and administer the provisions of this Section.
(D) The standards of this Section shall be applied to all Site Development Plans
processed by the City pursuant to Section 4-1-12.
(E) Any use, parcel, building or structure which at the effective date of this
Section or at the time of annexation, if annexed subsequent to the effective
date of this Section, was lawfully existing and maintained in accordance
with the previously applicable County or City regulations and ordinances
but which does not conform or comply with all of the regulations provided
in this Section, may continue to be maintained and used as a lawful nonconforming
use only in compliance with the provisions and limitations
imposed by Subsection 4-4-25(C ). Uses, parcels, structures or buildings
which were unlawful or illegal and not in compliance with previously
applicable regulations shall remain unlawful, illegal, and subject to
abatement or other enforcement action.
4-1-16: SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR
LARGE RETAIL DEVELOPMENT (Ord. 1838, 03-22-2001)
(A) The following standards shall apply to large retail developments within the
City of Montrose. These standards shall apply to all projects or
developments for retail establishments of more than 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area. (Ord. 1939, 03-06-2003)
(B) The regulations of this section shall apply to the entire building(s), lot,
parcel or contiguous lots or parcels that constitute a singular site
development.
(C) No building permit for new construction of large retail establishments, or
additions to existing retail establishments which would increase the gross
square feet of floor area by fifty percent (50%) or more and result in the
creation of a large retail establishment, shall be approved unless a site
development plan for large retail establishment has been reviewed and
approved by the City in accordance with the review process as defined
herein.
(D) These standards shall supplement existing site development standards and
other applicable requirements. Whichever City ordinance or regulation
requires the more stringent or restrictive requirement shall apply.
(E) The site development plan shall be submitted in compliance with the
following requirements:
(1) The site development plan shall be at a scale of not less than 1"= 40',
showing conformance with the regulations and standards as provided
herein. A copy of the site plan reduced to 11" x 17" is also required.
(2) Building elevations of all facades shall be provided, at a scale of not
less than 1" = 30'. A copy of each building elevation showing all
facades shall also be reduced to 11" x 17" is also required.
(3) Detailed drawings and other documents, as necessary for review of
the site development plan, shall also be submitted, together with a
filing fee set forth in Chapter 3-1 of the City of Montrose
Regulations Manual. (Ord. 2005, 05-20-2004)
(4) Upon submittal of the complete site development plan with all
supporting documentation as may be required, the City Land Use
Staff shall provide review of the same. The plan shall then be
forwarded to the City Planning Commission for review,
accompanied by any comments and recommendations by the City
Land Use Staff.
(5) Following review, revision and approval by the City, the site plan
and supporting documentation shall be revised in final form,
stamped with City's approval and filed with the City. A building
permit shall then be issued, if all other applicable requirements and
permitting processes have been properly completed.
(6) No occupancy permit shall be issued until the required
improvements are constructed and approved by the City in
compliance with the approved plans or secured for completion
within six months, and a recordable maintenance covenant running
with the land or forms provided by the City is executed, approved by
the City and recorded.
(F) The site plan shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall
incorporate wall plan projections or recesses having a depth of at
least 3% of the length of the facade and extending at least 20% of
the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facades that
face public streets shall exceed 100 horizontal feet. Ground floor
facades that face public streets shall have arcades, display windows,
entry areas, awnings, or other such features comprising no less than
60% of their horizontal length. Building facades shall include color
changes and texture changes as more specifically set forth in City
Regulations. For purpose of these provisions, "facade" shall be
defined as the portion of any exterior elevation on the building
extending the entire length of the building.
(2) Roofs shall be designed to include parapets to conceal flat roofs and
rooftop equipment such as HVAC units. Roofs shall be designed
with sloped planes and overhanging eaves as more specifically set
forth in City Regulations.
(3) (Reserved for future use – Ord. 2303, 10/16/2012)
(4) Off-street parking shall be designed so that no more than sixty
percent (60%) of the total off-street parking for the site devoted to
the large retail establishment is located between the front façade of
the large retail establishment and the abutting street, unless all of the
conditions and standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section are
met;
(a) Up to eighty percent (80%) of the total off-street parking for
the site devoted to the large retail establishment may be
located between the front façade of said establishment and the
abutting street, when the City determines that all design
standards set forth below have been met:
(i) Landscaping shall be increased to twelve percent
(12%) of the large retail establishment’s site, not
including area(s) of the site occupied by building
footprint(s); and
(ii) Two (2) to four (4) foot undulating berms shall be
provided directly adjacent to a minimum of eighty
percent (80%) of the parking lot boundaries that abut
public streets; and
(iii) Every third parking aisle shall be provided with a
continuous eight (8) foot dedicated pedestrian path
through the parking lot. Unless specifically stated
otherwise in a plat note or agreement with the City,
maintenance of said pedestrian path(s) shall be the
responsibility of the owner or occupant of the large
retail site.
(Ord. 2125, 8-17-2006)
(5) Any retail establishment or development having greater than twentyfive
thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area shall be subject
to a thirty-five (35) foot setback from the establishment’s or
development’s façade to the nearest property line.
(Ord. 2101, 1-19-2006)
(6) Where the large retail establishment adjoins residential uses, an
earthen berm, no less than six feet in height, containing evergreen
trees so as to provide effective visual screening of the establishment,
shall be provided.
(7) Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection, loading or
other such uses shall be effectively screened from abutting streets.
(8) Sidewalks at least six feet (6') in width shall be provided along all
sides of the site that abuts a public street. Continuous internal
pedestrian sidewalks, no less than six feet (6') in width shall be
provided from those sidewalks along public streets to the principal
customer entrance. Sidewalks no less than eight feet (8') in width
shall be provided along the full length of the building along any
facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting
parking areas. All sidewalks shall remain unobstructed.
(9) All outdoor and exterior lighting shall comply with Chapter 4-13.
(Ord. 1924, 12-05-2002)
(G) All required improvements shall be maintained in good repair and safe
condition. Violation of this provision is hereby declared to be a nuisance
which may be abated by the City in any lawful manner.
(H) Variances by the Planning Commission may be granted from the
requirements of this Section if it determines that all of the criteria below are
met:
(1) The variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(2) Unusual physical circumstances shall exist, such as unusual lot size
or shape, topography or other physical conditions peculiar to the site
which make it infeasible to develop or use the site in conformity
with the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) The unusual circumstances have not been created as a result of the
action or inaction of the applicant, other parties in interest with the
applicant, or predecessor in interest.
(4) The variance requested represents the minimum variance that will
afford relief and allow for reasonable use of the property.
(5) The variance will not result in development incompatible with other
property or buildings in the area, and will not affect or impair the
value or use or development of other property.
(6) An alternative site planning and building design approach has been
submitted which substantially meets the objectives of the standards
and regulations as provided herein.
(I) The burden shall be on the applicant to show that these criteria have been
met. The review procedures as set forth in §4-4-29 shall apply.
(J) The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt regulations as may be
appropriate to interpret and administer the provisions of the Section.
(K) Any use, parcel, building or structure which at the effective date of this
Section or at the time of annexation, if annexed subsequent to the effective
date of this Section, was lawfully existing and maintained in accordance
with the previously applicable County or City regulations and ordinances
but which does not conform or comply with the regulations as provided in
this Section, may continue to be maintained and used as a lawful nonconforming
use only in compliance with the provisions and limitations
imposed by §4-4-25(C). Uses, parcels, structures or buildings which were
unlawful or illegal and not in compliance with previously applicable
regulations shall remain unlawful, illegal, and subject to abatement or other
enforcement action.
Chapter 4-2
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Sections:
4-2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-2-2 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
4-2-3 DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
4-2-4 STANDARDS
4-2-5 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS IN FLOODWAY
4-2-6 VARIANCES
4-2-7 ADOPTION OF MAPS
4-2-8 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 4-2
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Sections:
4-2-1 DEFINITIONS
4-2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-2-3 ADMINISTRATION
4-2-4 PERMIT PROCEDURES
4-2-5 VARIANCE PROCEDURES
4-2-6 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
4-2-7 ENFORCEMENT
4-2-8 ADOPTION OF MAPS
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS
100-YEAR FLOOD - A flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent (1%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (1-percent-annual-chance
flood). The terms "one-hundred-year flood" and "one percent chance flood" are
synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will
necessarily happen once every one hundred years.
100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN - The area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result
of the occurrence of a one-hundred-year flood.
500-YEAR FLOOD - A flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance
of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood).
The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred
years.
500-YEAR FLOODPLAIN - The area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result
of the occurrence of a five-hundred-year flood.
ADDITION - Any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square
footage of an existing structure.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING - A fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream
that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a
tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and
boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed
by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and
other stream processes.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING - A designated Zone AO or AH on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet, where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) - The elevation shown on a FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30,
AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting
from a flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding that level in
any given year.
BASEMENT - Any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on
all sides.
CHANNEL - The physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream
banks, existing in a variety of geometries.
CHANNELIZATION - The artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream
channel.
CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR) - The codification of the general and
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and
agencies of the Federal government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad
areas subject to Federal regulation.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR) - FEMA's comment on a
proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon
construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and
thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain.
CRITICAL FACILITY - A structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which
it is situated, as specified in § 4-2-6 (H) herein, that if flooded may result in significant
hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the
City of Montrose at any time before, during and after a flood.
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
DFIRM DATABASE - Database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that
accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA mapping specifications and guidelines outline
requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) - FEMA digital floodplain
map. These digital maps serve as “regulatory floodplain maps” for insurance and
floodplain management purposes.
ELEVATED BUILDING - Non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in
FIRM Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or
shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to
impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In the case of FIRM Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood
waters.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL REGISTER - The official daily publication for Rules, proposed Rules, and
notices of Federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other
presidential documents.
FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for
administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD OR FLOODING - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from: (i) overflow of water from channels and
reservoir spillways; or (ii) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source; or (iii) mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that
is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the
surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and
deposited along the path of the current).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) - The official report provided by FEMA. The
report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding
sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA - Any land area susceptible to being
inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would
flow from the spillway of a reservoir.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR - The City Manager, or designee, is who shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT - A permit required before construction
or development begins within any Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). If FEMA has not
defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all
proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of
manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other
development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that
proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this Chapter.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - The operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations and ordinances.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS - Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOOD CONTROL STRUCTURE - A physical structure designed and built expressly
or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a
particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in
conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural or non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY) - The channel of a river or other
watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all
newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (six (6) inches). Letters of Map Revision to
existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the
time of the existing floodway delineation.
FREEBOARD - The vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation
intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such
as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the
watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE - A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes
only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE - The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE - A structure that is: (i) listed by the Secretary of the Interior
as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; or (ii)
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or (iii) individually listed on a state
inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of Interior; or (iv) individually listed on a local inventory of
historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or have been certified directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
LEVEE - A man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of
water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be
reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must
meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10, as amended.
LEVEE SYSTEM - A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and
operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR) - FEMA's official revision of an effective
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or
both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect
the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the
modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations
(BFEs), or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F) - FEMA’s
modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM), based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory
floodway.
LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking
and eating or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could
be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a
determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does
not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL - For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which Base Flood
Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET (MSDS) - A form with data regarding the
properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and
workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with
procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes
information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity,
health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spillhandling
procedures.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP) - FEMA’s program of flood
insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the
Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable
Federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of Ordinance 2290, adopting
this Chapter.
NO-RISE CERTIFICATION - A record of the results of an engineering analysis
conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A
No-Rise Certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered
Colorado professional engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the
standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
(FBFM).
PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR) - FEMA’s action whereby one (1) or more map
panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones,
floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - means a vehicle which is: (i) built on a single chassis;
(ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the
100-year floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION - The date the building permit was issued, including
Substantial Improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage
of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for basement, footings, piers or foundations or erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a Substantial
Improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the building’s external dimensions.
STRUCTURE - A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank,
which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the structure before "Start of Construction" of the improvement.
The value of the structure shall be determined by the City of Montrose; if an independent
appraiser or the like is required, the property owner shall bear the cost thereof. This
includes structures which have incurred "Substantial Damage", regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (i) a project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by officials having jurisdiction
over such matters, and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or (ii) any alteration
of an "historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an "historic structure."
THRESHOLD PLANNING QUANTITY (TPQ) - A quantity designated for each
chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by
facilities to the State that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements.
VARIANCE - A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this Chapter when
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore,
permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Chapter.
VIOLATION - Is the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the City of Montrose's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5)
of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION - The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
4-2-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) Lands to which this Chapter applies. This Chapter shall apply to all Special
Flood Hazard Areas, and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance
of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) within the
jurisdiction of the City of Montrose, Colorado.
(B) Basis for establishing the Special Flood Hazard Area. The Special Flood
Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in
a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for
Montrose County and Incorporated Areas", effective January 6, 2012, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-
Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. These
Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping
are the minimum area of applicability of this Chapter and may be
supplemented by studies designated and approved by the City Council. The
Floodplain Administrator shall keep a copy of the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS), DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and available for public
inspection.
(C) Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. A Floodplain
Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
(D) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or
have its use changed within the Special Flood Hazard Area without full
compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations.
Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Montrose from taking such lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. This Chapter
meets the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water
Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program, and was
imposed upon the City of Montrose by those agencies.
(E) This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter
and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(F) In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
the State Constitution, State statutes, the Montrose City Charter, nor
local ordinances and regulations.
(G) The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes, and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will
occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This Chapter does not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard
Area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damage. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Montrose or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
(H) This Chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this Chapter be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this Chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
4-2-3: ADMINISTRATION
(A) The City Manager, or designee, is hereby appointed as Floodplain
Administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
Chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(B) The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this Chapter, including the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new or substantially improved structures and any
floodproofing certificate required by § 4-2-4 herein, in accord with
the City of Montrose's Records Retention Schedule, as amended.
(2) Review, approve, or deny all applications for Floodplain
Development Permits required by this Chapter.
(3) Review Floodplain Development Permit applications to determine
whether a proposed building site, including the placement of
manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or
local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from
which prior approval is required.
(5) Require “as-built” plans sealed by a registered Colorado professional
engineer, showing compliance with all provisions of this Chapter,
including proper elevation of the structure.
(6) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Area (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation.
(7) When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with § 4-2-2 (B) herein, the Floodplain Administrator
shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation
data and Floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other
source, in order to administer the provisions of § 4-2-6 herein.
(8) For waterways with Base Flood Elevations for which a regulatory
Floodway has not been designated, no New Construction,
Substantial Improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the City of
Montrose’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at
any point within the City of Montrose.
(9) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, the City of Montrose
may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the
City of Montrose’s FIRM which increases the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one-half (1/2) foot,
provided that the City of Montrose first applies for a conditional
FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map
Revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established
under the provisions of Section 65.12 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations and receives FEMA approval.
(10) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State
Coordinating Agency, which is the Colorado Water Conservation
Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to FEMA.
(11) Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
4-2-4: PERMIT PROCEDURES
(A) Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by the City of Montrose, and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to a
Special Flood Hazard Area. Additionally, the following information is
required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved
structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered Colorado professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of § 4-2-6 (B)(2) herein; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.
(B) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all such
information in accordance with the City of Montrose’s Record Retention
Schedule.
(C) Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this Chapter and the
following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges,
and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the City of Montrose
Comprehensive Plan for that area.
4-2-5: VARIANCE PROCEDURES
(A) The Planning Commission shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this Chapter. A de novo hearing may be
requested from a decision of the Planning Commission in accord with the
provisions of § 4-4-29 of the Official Code of the City of Montrose; said de
novo hearing shall be held in accord with the provisions of § 4-4-29.
(B) The Planning Commission shall hear and render judgment on a variance
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this Chapter.
(C) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving a variance, and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
(D) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration
of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in
the remainder of this Chapter.
(E) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(F) Variances may be issued for New Construction and Substantial
Improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size,
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in § 4-2-4 herein
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half
(1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance shall
increase.
(G) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(H) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
Chapter, the Planning Commission may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
Chapter.
(I) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the Base Flood Elevation, and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(J) Variances may be issued by the City of Montrose for New Construction and
Substantial Improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a Functionally Dependent Use, provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in § 4-2-3 (B) are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
4-2-6: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
(A) General Standards. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following
provisions are required for all New Construction and Substantial
Improvements:
(1) All New Construction or Substantial Improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
(2) All New Construction or Substantial Improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All New Construction or Substantial Improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(4) All New Construction or Substantial Improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
(5) All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
State requirements, as well as those set forth in the International
Building Code currently adopted by the City of Montrose, as
amended;
(6) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(7) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
(8) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(B) Specific Standards. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where base flood
elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) § 4-2-2 (B), (ii) § 4-2-3
B(7), or (iii) § 4-2-6 (F), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential Construction
(a) New Construction and Substantial Improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of
the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a
registered Colorado professional engineer, architect, or land
surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(2) Nonresidential Construction
(a) With the exception of Critical Facilities, outlined in § 4-2-6
(H) herein, New Construction and Substantial Improvements
of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood level
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
designed so that at one (1) foot above the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having
the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy.
(b) A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall
develop and review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. Such
certification shall be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator, in accord with the City of Montrose’s Records
Retention Schedule.
(3) Enclosures
(a) New Construction and Substantial Improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding,
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect, or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(i) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area
of not less than one (1) square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided.
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
(1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured Homes
(a) All manufactured homes that are placed or Substantially
Improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the City of
Montrose’s FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home
park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has
incurred "Substantial Damage" as a result of a flood, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home is elevated to one (1) foot above
the base flood elevation and securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
(b) All manufactured homes that are to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing mobile home park or
subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the City of
Montrose’s FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the
above paragraph, shall be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is one (1)
foot above the base flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six
(36) inches in height above grade and that are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational Vehicles
(a) All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the City of Montrose’s FIRM shall either:
(i) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; or
(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(iii) Meet the permit requirements of § 4-2-4, and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection “4-2-6 (B)(4)”.
(b) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
(6) Prior Approved Activities: any activity for which a Floodplain
Development Permit was issued by the City of Montrose, or a
CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to the effective date of
Ordinance 2290 of the City of Montrose, may be completed
according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or
CLOMR issuance, and will not be considered in violation of this
Chapter if it meets such standards.
(C) Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
(1) Located within the Special Flood Hazard Area established in § 4-2-2
(B) herein, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one
(1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist
and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity
of flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow. The following provisions apply in these areas:
(a) Residential Construction
(i) All New Construction and Substantial Improvements
of residential structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth
number specified in feet on the City of Montrose’s
FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is
specified). Upon completion of the structure, the
elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall
be certified by a registered Colorado professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such
certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain
Administrator.
(b) Nonresidential Construction
(i) With the exception of Critical Facilities, outlined in §
4-2-6 (H), all New Construction and Substantial
Improvements of non-residential structures, must have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above
the depth number specified in feet on the City of
Montrose’s FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth
number is specified), or together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure
is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base
flood level with wall substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads, and the effects of buoyancy. A
registered Colorado professional engineer or architect
shall submit a certification to the Floodplain
Administrator that the standards of this Section, as
proposed in § 4-2-4 herein, are satisfied.
(ii) Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes are required to guide flood
waters around and away from proposed structures.
(D) Floodways
(1) Floodways are administrative limits, and tools used to regulate
existing and future floodplain development. The State of Colorado
has adopted Floodway standards that are more stringent than the
FEMA minimum standard (see definition of “Floodway” in § 4-2-1
herein). Located within Special Flood Hazard Area established in §
4-2-2 (B) herein, are areas designated as Floodways. Since the
Floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, New
Construction, Substantial Improvements and other
development within the adopted regulatory Floodway unless
it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed by a licensed Colorado professional
engineer and in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in
any increase (requires a No-Rise Certification) in flood levels
within the City of Montrose during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
(b) If § 4-2-6 (D)(1) above is satisfied, all New Construction and
Substantial Improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of § 4-2-6 herein.
(c) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of
the National Flood Insurance Regulations, the City of
Montrose may permit encroachments within the adopted
regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in Base
Flood Elevations, provided that the City of Montrose first
applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA.
(E) Alteration of a Watercourse
(1) For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a
Special Flood Hazard Area, the following standards apply:
(a) Channelization and flow diversion projects shall
appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion,
deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate
potential problems through the project as well as upstream
and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed
analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability
should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in
determining the most appropriate design.
(b) Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the
residual 100-year floodplain.
(c) Any channelization or other stream alteration activity
proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its
impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance
with all applicable Federal, State and local floodplain rules,
regulations and ordinances.
(d) Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by
a registered Colorado professional engineer or certified
professional hydrologist.
(e) All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all
applicable Federal, State and City of Montrose floodplain
requirements and regulations.
(f) Within the Regulatory Floodway, stream alteration activities
shall not be constructed unless the project proponent
demonstrates through a Floodway analysis and report, sealed
by a registered Colorado professional engineer, that there is
no rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing
conditions in the Floodway resulting from the project,
otherwise known as a No-Rise Certification, unless the City
of Montrose first applies for a CLOMR and Floodway
revision in accordance with § 4-2-6 (D) herein.
(g) Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated
portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.
(F) Properties Removed from the Floodplain by Fill
A Floodplain Development Permit shall not be issued for construction of a
new structure or addition to an existing structure, on a property removed
from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision
Based on Fill (LOMR-F), with a lowest floor elevation placed below the
Base Flood Elevation, when one (1) foot of freeboard existed prior to the
placement of fill.
(G) Standards for Subdivision Proposals
(1) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding.
If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone
area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet
Floodplain Development Permit requirements of § 4-2-2 (C); § 4-2-
4; and the provisions of § 4-2-6 of this Chapter.
(3) Base Flood Elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement
of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise
provided pursuant to § 4-2-2 (B) or § 4-2-3 (B) of this Chapter.
(4) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(H) Standards for Critical Facilities: a Critical Facility is a structure or related
infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6
of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that
if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or
interrupt essential services and operations for the City of Montrose at any
time before, during, or after a flood.
(1) Classification of Critical Facilities
(a) It is the responsibility of the Floodplain Administrator to
identify and confirm that specific structures in the City of
Montrose meet the following criteria:
(i) Critical Facilities are classified under the following
categories: (a) Essential Services; (b) Hazardous
Materials; (c) At-risk Populations; and (d) Vital to
Restoring Normal Services.
(ii) Essential services facilities include public safety,
emergency response, emergency medical, designated
emergency shelters, communications, public utility
plant facilities, and transportation lifelines.
(iii) These facilities consist of: Public safety (police
stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle
and equipment storage, and, emergency operation
centers); Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance
service centers, urgent care centers having emergency
treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical
structures but excluding clinics, doctors offices, and
non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide
these functions); Designated emergency shelters;
Communications (main hubs for telephone,
broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite
dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and
other emergency warning systems, but excluding
towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); Public
utility plant facilities for generation and distribution
(hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping
stations for water, power and gas, but not including
towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines,
transmission lines, distribution lines, and service
lines); and Air Transportation lifelines (airports
(municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures
serving emergency functions, and associated
infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic
control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft
hangars).
(iv) Specific exemptions to this category include
wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable
water treatment and distribution systems, and
hydroelectric power generating plants and related
appurtenances.
(b) Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Floodplain
Administrator that the facility is an element of a redundant
system for which service will not be interrupted during a
flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant
facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or
available through an intergovernmental agreement or other
contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either
located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant
with the provisions of this Chapter, and an operations plan is
in effect that states how redundant systems will provide
service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence
of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator on an as-needed basis upon request.
(c) Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce
or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic or waterreactive
materials.
(i) These facilities may include: chemical and
pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical
manufacturing); laboratories containing highly
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or waterreactive
materials; refineries; hazardous waste storage
and disposal sites; and above-ground gasoline or
propane storage or sales centers.
(2) Facilities shall be determined to be Critical Facilities if they produce
or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a
facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) to keep a Material Safety Data Sheet
(MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place,
AND the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than
the Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that
facility shall be considered to be a Critical Facility. The TPQ for
these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ
listed (whichever is lower) for the chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. §
302, as amended, also known as Extremely Hazardous Substances
(EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical.
This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable
chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and
Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29
C.F.R. § 1910, as amended. The Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) regulation “Designation, Reportable Quantities, and
Notification,” 40 C.F.R. § 302, as amended, and OSHA regulation
“Occupational Safety and Health Standards,” 29 C.F.R. § 1910, as
amended, are incorporated herein by reference.
(a) Specific exemptions to this category include:
(i) Finished consumer products within retail centers and
households containing hazardous materials intended
for household use, and agricultural products intended
for agricultural use.
(ii) Buildings and other structures containing hazardous
materials for which it can be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the City of Montrose by hazard
assessment and certification by a qualified professional
(as determined by the City of Montrose) that a release
of the subject hazardous material does not pose a
major threat to the public.
(iii) Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution
centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical
products.
(iv) These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other
structures that also function as Critical Facilities under
another category outlined in this Section.
(3) At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care,
and schools.
(a) These facilities consist of: elder care (nursing homes);
congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day
care and assisted living); public and private schools (preschools,
K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care
serving twelve (12) or more children; and facilities vital to
restoring normal services including government operations.
(b) These facilities consist of: essential government operations
(public records, courts, jails, building permitting and
inspection services, community administration and
management, maintenance and equipment centers); essential
structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories,
offices, and classrooms only).
(c) These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the
Floodplain Administrator that the facility is an element of a
redundant system for which service will not be interrupted
during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that
redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same
entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or
other contract), the alternative facilities are either located
outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this
Chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how
redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in
the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator on an as-needed
basis upon request.
(4) Protection for Critical Facilities
(a) All new and Substantially Improved Critical Facilities and
new additions to Critical Facilities located within the Special
Flood Hazard Area shall be regulated to a higher standard
than structures not determined to be Critical Facilities. For
the purposes of this Chapter, protection shall include one (1)
of the following:
(i) Location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area; or
(ii) Elevation or floodproofing of the structure to at least
two (2) feet above the Base Flood Elevation.
(5) Ingress and Egress for New Critical Facilities
(a) New Critical Facilities shall, when practicable as determined
by the Floodplain Administrator, have continuous noninundated
access (ingress and egress for evacuation and
emergency services) during a 100-year flood event.
4-2-7: ENFORCEMENT
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
Chapter. Any person convicted of such a violation may be punished
pursuant to § 1-2-3 of the Official Municipal of the City of Montrose. Each
day any violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(B) The City of Montrose may maintain an action in any court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin or abate any violation of the requirements of this
Chapter.
(C) Any property, building, or structure existing or maintained in violation of
the requirements of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance which
may be abated in accordance with law.
4-2-8: ADOPTION OF MAPS
(A) The “The Flood Insurance Study for Montrose County and Incorporated
Areas”, effective January 6, 2012, with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM)
and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this Chapter.
(B) For reference, a copy of the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for the City
of Montrose is reproduced below; larger copies showing greater detail shall
be available to the public through the Internet, or through the City of
Montrose Clerk’s Office upon request.

Chapter 4-3
ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:
4-3-1 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR TO BE APPOINTED
4-3-2 STATE ELECTRICAL CODE APPLIES
4-3-3 RIGHT OF ENTRY
4-3-4 EMERGENCY DISCONNECTIONS
4-3-5 RULES AND REGULATIONS
4-3-6 ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED
4-3-7 PERMIT FEES
4-3-8 STATE LICENSE REQUIRED
4-3-9 INSPECTIONS
4-3-10 CHANGES AFTER INSPECTION
4-3-11 FAILURE TO COMPLY
4-3-12 APPEALS
4-3-13 CONDUIT AND OVER CURRENT REQUIREMENTS (Rep. By Ord.
1220, 12-1-83)
4-3-14 REPAIRS OR ALTERATIONS
4-3-15 CHANGE IN USE
4-3-16 RESPONSIBILITY NOT ASSUMED BY THE CITY
4-3-17 EXEMPTION TO CHAPTER
4-3-18 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
Chapter 4-3
ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:
4-3-1 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR TO BE APPOINTED
4-3-2 STATE ELECTRICAL CODE APPLIES
4-3-3 RIGHT OF ENTRY
4-3-4 EMERGENCY DISCONNECTIONS
4-3-5 RULES AND REGULATIONS
4-3-6 ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED
4-3-7 PERMIT FEES
4-3-8 STATE LICENSE REQUIRED
4-3-9 INSPECTIONS
4-3-10 CHANGES AFTER INSPECTION
4-3-11 FAILURE TO COMPLY
4-3-12 APPEALS
4-3-13 CONDUIT AND OVER CURRENT REQUIREMENTS (Rep. By Ord.
1220, 12-1-83)
4-3-14 REPAIRS OR ALTERATIONS
4-3-15 CHANGE IN USE
4-3-16 RESPONSIBILITY NOT ASSUMED BY THE CITY
4-3-17 EXEMPTION TO CHAPTER
4-3-18 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
4-3-1: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR TO BE APPOINTED
The City Manager shall appoint an Electrical Inspector who shall be responsible for the
administration, interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this and other laws
relating to electrical matters in the City. (Ord. 923, 2-17-77)
4-3-2: STATE ELECTRICAL CODE APPLIES
As provided in C.R.S. 12-23-104, as amended, the Electrical Code and standards adopted
therein and pursuant thereto, shall be the Electrical Code and standards applicable within
the City of Montrose, such as are in effect and amended from time to time. (Ord. 1220,
12-1-83)
4-3-3: RIGHT OF ENTRY
(A) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions
of this chapter, or whenever the Electrical Inspector or his authorized
representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any
building or premises any electrical condition which makes such building or
premises unsafe, the Electrical Inspector or his authorized representatives
may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the
same or perform any duty imposed by this Chapter.
This chapter previously supplemented 1061; 164; 565; 369; 569; 1169; 975
(B) Prior to entry, he shall identify himself and demand entry to the occupant or
person in charge of the premises if they can be found by reasonable efforts.
If entry is refused the Electrical Inspector shall have recourse to any
remedy provided by law to secure entry.
4-3-4: EMERGENCY DISCONNECTIONS
In case of emergency, the Electrical Inspector shall have authority to disconnect or cause
the disconnection of any electrical equipment, and to enter upon the affected premises if
necessary for that purpose.
4-3-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Electrical Inspector is hereby authorized to make such additional rules and
regulations as may be deemed necessary for the interpretation or administration of this
Chapter or for protection of life and property.
4-3-6: ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to install or construct electric wires,
cables, fittings, apparatus or other electrical fixtures or poles or towers
supporting the same, within the City without procuring an electrical permit
for each and every installation or construction job.
(B) In order to produce a permit for electrical work covered by this Chapter, the
individual shall, before beginning any such work, submit an application to
the Electrical Inspector on forms furnished by the City.
(C) If permit to do electrical work covered by this Chapter is not obtained
before such work is started, all fees pertaining to the issuance of the
required permit shall be doubled; but the payment of such doubled fee shall
not relieve any party obtaining a permit from complying with the
requirements of this Chapter, nor from any other penalties prescribed
in this chapter.
(D) All applications for permits shall be accompanied by the applicable fee.
(Ord. 923, 2-17-77)
(E) No permit shall be issued to anyone except electricians, licensed in
accordance with State law, or property owners doing there own work upon
there own property if the Electrical Inspector has determined that they are
competent to do such work. (Ord. 945; 9-15-77)
4-3-7: PERMIT FEES
The schedule of permit fees as specified by the State law shall apply and the applicable
fee shall be submitted with application for a permit to the Electrical Inspector unless the
Council shall provide a separate schedule of fees. (Ord. 923, 2-17-77)
4-3-8: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform any electrical work for
which a permit is required, except for an owner doing work on his home, without a State
license. (Ord. 945, 9-15-77)
4-3-9: INSPECTIONS
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the Electrical
Inspector in the discharge or his duties.
(B) Upon completion of any electrical work covered by permit the Electrical
Inspector shall be notified that such electrical work is ready to inspect and
it shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector, or his qualified
representative, to inspect all such work within twenty four (24) hours after
receipt of such note if possible. (Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays not
included).
(C) Upon inspection, if the work complies with all provisions of this Chapter, a
green OK tag shall be placed at the service entrance or other conspicuous
place. If the work is found to be defective, incomplete or otherwise not
complying, a red tag shall be placed in a conspicuous place, and the person
doing such work shall be notified for reinspection, and if work then
complies with this Chapter a tag shall be issued.
(D) All tags or labels shall bear the signature of the Electrical Inspector and the
date of inspection. No electric current shall be turned on or connection
made for use until final inspection has been made of all work covered by
this Chapter and until a certificate of approval is issued, provided the
Electrical Inspector may issue a temporary permit for use of current during
the course of construction or alterations of any building or other structure,
and said permit shall automatically expire with the failure to construct the
work and install the materials in conformity with the requirements of this
Chapter.
(E) On completion of any work in accordance with all the provisions of this
Chapter, the electrical Inspector shall issue a certificate of approval.
(F) No person shall insulate, sheetrock, lath, or otherwise cover from view any
work covered by this Chapter that has not been inspected and finally
approved by the Electrical Inspector or his qualified representatives.
(G) All steam and gas fittings, furnace work, plumbing and any “signal” wiring
shall be in place before the electrical wiring for light, heat, power or
communications is completed and no such wiring shall be considered
completed until the work referred to above is in place.
4-3-10: CHANGES AFTER INSPECTION
In the event, any wires, cables, fittings, apparatus, or other electrical fixtures are in such a
position as to interfere with the completion of the building following the acceptance of
said electric work by the Electrical Inspector, the electrical contractor or owner shall
notify the Electrical Inspector of any change in the electrical work after the Electrical
Inspector has accepted the original work, and the Electrical Inspector shall reinspect the
electrical construction or installation and shall charge an additional inspection fee for said
inspection.
4-3-11: FAILURE TO COMPLY
Any person who fails to promptly correct any defect in his work, after having been duly
notified by the Electrical Inspector shall not receive any further permits until such defect
or defects have been corrected.
4-3-12: APPEALS
Should any person disagree with the decision of the Electrical Inspector such person may
file with the City Clerk exceptions to the decision, within ten (10) days after being
notified of it. The Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing within two (2) weeks to
determine the matter. Their decision shall be final. (Ord. 923, 2-17-77)
4-3-13: CONDUIT AND OVER CURRENT REQUIREMENTS (Rep. By Ord.
1220, 12-1-83)
4-3-14: REPAIRS OR ALTERATIONS
(A) All electrical work done for repair of damage or deterioration or for
alteration or remodeling, or otherwise shall be done in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
(B) When additional alterations or repairs to a building exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the values of the existing structure during any twelve (12) month
period, the entire building or structure shall be made to conform to the
requirements of this Chapter.
(C) The Electrical Inspector may require repairs or alterations to electric wiring
or fixtures not meeting the requirements of this Chapter to the extent
necessary to alleviate conditions hazardous to person or property.
4-3-15: CHANGE IN USE
It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building without notifying the Electrical
Inspector and obtaining his approval of the electrical facilities of the building as safe for
the new use.
4-3-16: RESPONSIBILITY NOT ASSUMED BY THE CITY
This Chapter shall not be construed to relieve or reduce the responsibility of any person
installing or constructing any electrical wires, cables, fitting, apparatus, appliance or
other electrical fixtures, for damage to anyone injured by any defect therein, nor shall the
City or any agent thereof be held liable by reason of the inspection authorized herein, or
the certificate of approval issued by the Electrical Inspector.
4-3-17: EXEMPTION TO CHAPTER
(A) It shall not be necessary for the City or other Governmental entities to
obtain a permit or remit permit fees. However, they should notify the
Electrical Inspector of any such work and all electrical work shall be done
in accordance with this Chapter. (Ord. 923, 2-17-77)
4-3-18 : VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
(A) It shall be unlawful to violate any provisions of this Chapter, or of the
electrical codes and standards of the State of Colorado which apply within
the City, and any person convicted of such a violation shall be punished by
a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or a jail sentence of up to
one (1) year or both. Provided, however, no person under the age of
eighteen (18) years may be sentenced to any term of imprisonment except
for contempt of court. (Ord.1614, 12-19-96)
(B) Any violation of this Chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and may be
adapted in accordance with law.
(C) Upon notice and hearing before the City Council, the license issued
pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked by the Council for a violation of
this Chapter.
(D) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin any violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 923, 2-17-77)
Chapter 4-4
ZONING REGULATIONS
Sections:
4-4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-4-2 DEFINITIONS
4-4-3 ZONING MAP
4-4-4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
4-4-4.2 "RL" RURAL LIVING DISTRICT
4-4-4.4 "R-1" VERY LOW DENSITY DISTRICT
4-4-5 "R-1A" LARGE ESTATE DISTRICT AND "R-1B" SMALL
ESTATE DISTRICT
4-4-6 "R-2" LOW DENSITY DISTRICT
4-4-7 "R-3" MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT
4-4-7.5 "R-3A" MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT
4-4-8 "R-4" HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT
4-4-8.1 "REDO" REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
4-4-8.3 UNCOMPAHGRE RIVER BUFFER OVERLAY ZONE
4-4-8.5 "R-5" LOW DENSITY / MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
4-4-8.7 "R-6" MEDIUM DENSITY / MANUFACTURED HOUSING
DISTRICT
4-4-9 "MHR" MOBILE HOME-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4-4-10 "MR" MEDICAL-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4-4-10.5 "OR" OFFICE-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
4-4-11 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
4-4-12 "B-1" CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
4-4-12.5 "B-1A" COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
4-4-13 "B-2" HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
4-4-13.5 "B-2A" REGIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
4-4-14 "B-3" GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
4-4-15 "B-4" NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
4-4-16 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
4-4-17 "I-1" LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
4-4-18 "I-2" GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
4-4-19 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
4-4-20 OFF-STREET PARKING
4-4-21 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (P.D.)
4-4-22 SIGN REGULATIONS
4-4-23 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
4-4-24 CONDITIONAL USES
4-4-25 NONCONFORMING USES
4-4-26 VARIANCES
4-4-27 AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING
MAP
4-4-28 AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER
4-4-29 REVIEW PROCEDURE
4-4-30 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
4-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) This Chapter, as amended from time to time, and the Official Zoning Map
(adopted by Section 2 of Ordinance 1077,) as amended from time to time,
may be cited as the City’ s zoning regulations or Zoning Ordinance.
(B) The purpose of these zoning regulations is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare.
(C) The City hereby declares that the regulation and development of land,
including regulation by these zoning regulations, is exclusively a matter of
local and Municipal concern, and any provisions of any statute or
regulation of the State in conflict with the provisions of these zoning
regulations, or any limitation imposed by any statute or regulation of the
State otherwise applicable are hereby superseded; provided, however, the
City shall retain all powers authorized by State law with respect to land
development regulations and zoning even though not specified within this
Chapter, and such powers may be exercised in any lawful manner free from
any limitations imposed by State Statute or regulation.
(D) No business or use involving the sale or distribution of products or services,
or the pursuit of activities, whether for profit or not for profit, which is in
contravention of any Federal, State or local law or regulation, shall be
considered a “use by right”, a “conditional use”, or a “lawful nonconforming
use” under this Chapter, in any zoning district within the city
limits of the City of Montrose. (Ord. 2267, 02/15/2011)
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS
The following words and terms shall be defined as follows for the purpose of these
zoning regulations:
ACCESSORY USE: A use which is subordinate to, clearly incidental to,
customarily in connection with, and ordinarily located on the
same premises as the permitted use. A child care facility shall
be considered an accessory use to a residence in all districts,
provided no more than eight (8) children under thirteen (13)
years of age are present on the premises at any one time,
including children of the family living in the residence; a
child care facility shall not be considered an accessory use to
a residence when a greater number of children is present on
the premises at any one time.
Home occupations which meet the criteria set out in
subsection 4-4-23 (A) shall be considered an accessory use to
a residence in all districts. (Ord. 2130, 10-5-2006)
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to a property line beyond which no exposed
portion of a building other than its eaves extends.
CHILD CARE
FACILITY: Any, facility, including a residence, which provides care and
supervision for children other than children of the family
living in the residence, including foster homes, day care
homes and centers, but excluding schools. CONDITIONAL
USE: A use which is permitted only after review and
approval pursuant to Section 4-4-24 and 4-4-29.
DUPLEX: A residence with two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: An area in a building containing cooking, living and sanitary
facilities designed for use and used by a single family for
residential purposes.
FAMILY: One or more individuals occupying a single dwelling unit and
living as a single housekeeping unit with a maximum of eight
(8) adults.
GAS STATION: Any building or lot having facilities for the sale of gasoline
for use by motor vehicles, and which may include incidental
facilities for service and minor repair of motor vehicles.
GOVERNMENT
BUILDINGS
AND FACILITIES: Any building or facility owned and operated by the United
States of America, the State of Colorado, the City of
Montrose, or any agency or political subdivision thereof.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any commercial activity, whether for profit or nonprofit,
conducted within a dwelling unit.
HOMEOWNERS’
ASSOCIATION: Any entity whether a corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association, or other entity existing for the purpose of
maintaining commonly owned facilities or enforcing private
protective covenants whose members or shareholders are the
property owners involved.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE
PLAN: That portion of the master plan of the City of Montrose as
adopted by the City Council and amended from time to time,
which provides the major street plan of the City. Whenever
the terms “major arterial”, “minor arterial”, “arterial”,
“collector” or “local” street are used in this Chapter, such
terms shall refer to and be defined as they are defined by the
major thoroughfare plan.
MANUFACTURED
HOUSING: Manufactured Housing: Single Family Homes substantially
or entirely manufactured in a factory which are moved on site
in substantial component parts, including homes commonly
known as mobile homes or modular homes, and those
manufactured and certified pursuant to 42 USC 540 et seq. or
manufactured pursuant to other construction standards. (Ord.
1670, 9-3-98)
MOBILE HOME AND
MOBILE HOME PARK: Mobile home and mobile home park are defined as defined in
Chapter 12 of this Title.
MULTIPLE FAMILY
RESIDENCE: Any residence with three (3) or more dwelling units in a
single building.
NONCONFORMING
USE: A use which does not comply with the use regulations,
dimensional requirements or other regulations of these zoning
regulations.
PHARMACY: A business substantially devoted only to the sale of
pharmaceutical items, supplies and equipment such as
prescription drugs.
PUBLIC UTILITY
SERVICE FACILITIES: Transmission and distribution facilities for natural gas,
electricity, telephone, and cable television necessary to
provide service to customers located in the various districts of
the City, such as pipes, lines, mains, wires, transformers,
valves, and other related appurtenances, but not including
buildings, offices, and production or generation facilities.
SETBACK: The perpendicular distance between a property line and the
building line.
TRAVEL HOME AND
TRAVEL HOME PARK: Travel home and travel park are defined as defined in
Chapter 12 of this Title.
USE: The activity or purpose for which property, a building or
other structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or
maintained.
USE-BY-RIGHT: A use which is permitted or allowed in the district involved,
without review by the Review Board, and complies with the
provisions of these zoning regulations and other applicable
City Ordinances and regulations.
4-4-3: ZONING MAP
(A) The 1980 Revised Zoning Map of the City, (as adopted by section 2 of
Ordinance 1077), as such may be amended from time to time, may be
known or cited as the Official Zoning Map of the City.
(B) Amendments to the Official Zoning Map may be made by an ordinance
enacting a revised map or by an ordinance amending portions of the
Official Zoning Map by specifying the legal description of the property to
be rezoned. A copy of the official Zoning Map, as amended from time to
time, shall be maintained in the City Clerk’ s office available for public
inspection. Periodically copies of the Official Zoning Map, as amended,
may be reproduced and made available to the public.
(C) The regulations for the various residential, commercial and industrial
districts provided for in this Chapter shall apply within the boundaries of
each such district as indicated on the Official Zoning Map, shall be
construed to follow the center lines of streets, to follow platted lot lines or
the lines of undivided parcels of property, or to follow the City limits when
the boundary is shown as approximately in the vicinity of such lines.
Distances may be determined by the scale of the map.
4-4-4: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
The Residential Districts described in Section 4-4-5 through 4-4-10 are established to
promote stability in residential neighborhoods; to protect such property from
incompatible land uses; to protect property values; and to encourage the appropriate use
of such land. Certain other uses are permitted which are compatible with residences.
Dimensional requirements are set out in Section 4-4-19, and off-street parking
requirements are set out in Section 4-4-20 for each district.
4-4-4.2: "RL" RURAL LIVING DISTRICT
(A) The "RL" Rural Living District provides for overall very low density by
allowing farms and ranches and clustered development with open space and
is designed to dovetail with allowed County residential densities.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes.
(2) Public utility service facilities
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks, open space and recreation facilities owned or operated by a
homeowners’ association.
(5) Golf courses.
(6) Farms and ranches, excluding commercial greenhouses, and
commercial feedlots, fur farms, fish farms, poultry houses, hog
farms, dairies and similar operations with a high density of animals.
(7) Accessory uses. (Ord. #1693, March 4, 1999)
(C) Conditional Uses: Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
4-4-4.4: "R-1" VERY LOW DENSITY DISTRICT
(A) The "R-1" Very Low Density District provides for overall very low density
residential development.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes.
(2) Public utility service facilities
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks, open space and recreation facilities owned or operated by a
homeowners’ association.
(5) Golf courses
(6) Accessory uses. (Ord. #1693, March 4, 1999)
(C) Conditional Uses: Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
4-4-5: "R-1A" LARGE ESTATE DISTRICT AND "R-1B" SMALL
ESTATE DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “R-1A” Large Estate District and “R-1B” Small Estate District
are intended to provide an area of large single family residential lots with
semi-rural environment. Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes.
(2) Public utility service facilities.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowners’
association.
(5) Accessory uses.
(B) Conditional Uses:
(1) Churches.
(2) Schools.
(Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
4-4-6: "R-2" LOW DENSITY DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “R-2" Low Density District is intended to provide a quiet, low
density development for single family residences. Environmental
protection is provided by allowing only single family residences along with
certain other compatible land uses.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes.
(2) Public utility service facilities.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowners’
association.
(5) Accessory uses.
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Churches.
(2) Schools.
(Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
4-4-7: "R-3" MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “R-3" Medium Density District is intended to provide an area
which is suitable for single family homes and duplexes. The District
provides for other uses which are compatible with such uses.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes and duplexes.
(2) Public utility service facilities.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowners’
association.
(5) Churches.
(6) Accessory uses.
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Child care facilities which have no more than twelve (12) children
present at any time on the premises or which are located upon
church premises.
(2) Nursing homes for the aged, invalid, ill, or mentally impaired
excluding homes for patients with a primary diagnosis of mental
illness.
(3) Multiple family residences.
(4) “Bed and breakfast” operations operated solely by the residents of a
lot of at least six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet
providing no more than two (2) bedrooms for rent in the dwelling
unit, and the only meal provided on the premises shall be breakfast
to the renters. (Ord. 1391, 3-2-89)
(5) Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
4-4-7.5 "R-3A" MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “R-3A” Medium High Density District is intended to provide an
area which is suitable for single family homes, duplexes and multi-family
residences with intermediate overall density. This district provides for
other uses which are compatible with such residential uses.
(B) Uses by right:
(1) Single family homes, duplexes, multi-family residences.
(2) Public utility service facilities.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowners’
association.
(5) Churches.
(6) Accessory uses.
(C) Conditional uses:
(1) Child care facilities which have no more than twelve (12) children
present at anytime on the premises or which are located upon church
premises.
(2) Nursing homes for the aged, invalid, ill, or mentally impaired,
excluding homes for patients with a primary diagnosis of mental
illness. (Ord. 1108, 2-5-81)
(3) Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
4-4-8: "R-4" HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “R-4" High Density District is intended to provide for high
density multiple family residences and to allow variable densities. This
allows variety in the types of residences.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes, duplexes, and multiple family residences.
(2) Public utility service facilities.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowners’
association.
(5) Churches.
(6) Accessory uses. (Ord. 1077, 5-16-80)
(7) “Bed and Breakfast” operations operated solely by the residents of a
residence providing no more than four (4) bedrooms for rent in the
dwelling unit and the only meal provided on the premises shall be
breakfast to the renters. The lot shall be at least six thousand two
hundred and fifty (6,250) square feet and at least three thousand one
hundred and twenty five (3,125) square feet per rental bedroom.
(Ord. 1391, 3-2-89)
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Nursing homes for the aged, invalid, ill, or mentally impaired
excluding homes for patients with a primary diagnosis of mental
illness.
(2) Child care facilities.
(3) Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
4-4-8.1: “REDO” REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
(A) The “REDO” Overlay Zone is intended to encourage residential
development and redevelopment of existing properties in the core
downtown area, with allowances for increased densities compatible with
the character of the area. This overlay district allows reduced dimensional
standards and a larger variety of housing types than the underlying zoning.
Any development making use of the reduced dimensional requirements
must meet all applicable criteria in this Section.
(B) The “REDO” Overlay Zone is an optional set of provisions, which may be
utilized by owners of property within the boundaries of said Zone. The
“REDO” Overlay Zone’s provisions shall not be applicable to any property
within the boundaries of said Zone, unless the owner of property therein
shall deliver written notice to the City, on forms acceptable to the City, of
said owner’s intent to utilize the “REDO” Overlay Zone.
(1) The provisions of the “REDO” Overlay Zone shall have no effect
whatsoever unless selected in the manner set forth herein.
(2) When selected by a property owner in the manner set forth herein,
the “REDO” Overlay Zone shall supersede the provisions of the
underlying zone for all matters addressed by said “REDO” Overlay
Zone’s provisions; the provisions of the underlying zone shall
control all matters not addressed by the “REDO” Overlay Zone’s
provisions.
(3) The boundaries of the “REDO” Overlay Zone shall be as set forth by
Ordinance of the City Council, may be shown on the City’s Official
Zoning Map, and shall be fixed in the manner prescribed by the
Official Code of the City of Montrose, § 4-4-3. (Ord. 2289,
01/03/2012)
(4) The purpose of the “REDO” Overlay Zone is to alleviate certain
hardships associated with the redevelopment of lots or parcels
included within the area platted as lots and blocks on the “Map of
Montrose, Colorado with Additions and Subdivisions”, dated April,
1911; applications to re-zone lots or parcels, other than those
included on said plat, for the purpose of including them in the
“REDO” Overlay Zone, shall be denied.
(5) Any requests for use of these “REDO” Overlay Zone provisions that
involve private use of City property, including rights-of-way, shall
be entirely subject to the City’s discretion, and shall also be subject
to the City’s Ordinances and Regulations pertaining to
encroachments and permits for the same. (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(6) “Accessory dwelling unit” shall be defined, for the purposes of this
§ 4-4-8.1, as the residential dwelling unit on a lot closest to the alley
or rear of said lot; mobile homes, “park models”, and travel homes
shall not be included within the definition of “accessory dwelling
unit”. An accessory dwelling unit shall have a minimum footprint of
three hundred square feet (300 sq. ft.). (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(a) An accessory dwelling unit shall have no setback requirement,
and shall not be subject to the thirty percent (30%) rear yard
area coverage maximum. However, a ten foot (10’)
separation shall be required between the building lines of the
primary structure and the accessory dwelling unit. (Ord. 2289,
01/03/2012)
(C) Variance applications may be considered as to any requirements set forth in
subsections “F” and “G” of this Section. Use of the “REDO” Overlay Zone
is expressly declared to be elective on the part of the property owner, and is
entirely at the property owner’s discretion. (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(D) Lots equal to 6250 sq. ft. or greater. For lots within the “REDO” Overlay
Zone having a size equal to 6250 sq. ft. or greater, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Additional Uses by Right:
(a) One (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed in addition
to the primary dwelling unit. The accessory dwelling unit
may be located in a detached structure, or an attached
structure. The detached structure must meet all other
applicable dimensional standards in the underlying zoning
district, except as modified by this § 4-4-8.1, as well as all
building, and other codes. (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(b) Residential buildings containing up to six (6) dwelling units
and meeting the density standards of the underlying zone may
employ these “REDO” Overlay Zone provisions. (Ord. 2289,
01/03/2012)
(2) One (1) off-street parking space shall be required for each dwelling
unit, except for those located within an underlying “B-1” zoning
district. (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(a) For properties located within an underlying “B-1” zoning
district, the City may require that residential parking spaces
be leased to provide adequate parking, in the City’s sole
discretion. (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(E) Lots less than 6250 sq. ft., but greater than or equal to 3125 sq. ft. For lots
within the “REDO” Overlay Zone having a size of less than 6250 sq. ft.,
but greater than or equal to 3125 sq. ft., the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) Uses by Right:
(a) Single Family Homes
(2) Setbacks:
(a) Five foot (5’) side setback(s)
(b) Five foot (5’) front setback (if frontage is on a right-of-way
one hundred feet (100’) in width, except for major arterials;
otherwise, the front setback shall be fifteen feet (15’)).
(c) Fifteen foot (15’) rear setback; this requirement shall not
apply to an accessory dwelling unit. (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(3) Height
(a) The height of a building shall be as set forth in the underlying
zone. (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(4) One (1) off-street parking space shall be required for each dwelling
unit, except for those located within an underlying “B-1” zoning
district. (Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
(F) Design Criteria made applicable to all lots, regardless of size, within the
“REDO” Overlay Zone:
(1) When an alley is adjacent to the property, driveways and garages
may not face the street(s), nor may driveways and garages access the
street(s).
(2) All lots within the “REDO” Overlay Zone shall be required to have
not less than ten feet (10’) of street frontage. It is contemplated that
lots having a “panhandle” shape may be allowed.
(3) Use of the provisions of the “REDO” Overlay Zone shall require the
property owner to repair or replace any missing or damaged sections
of curb, gutter, and sidewalk adjacent to said owner’s lot(s) for
which use of the “REDO” Overlay Zone’s provisions is sought.
(4) Detached garages are encouraged. Detached garages are subject to
all applicable codes and regulations for accessory dwellings, except
as modified by this § 4-4-8.1. The corner setback may be reduced to
five feet (5’) where the sidewalks are set back at least fifteen feet
(15’) from the curb line.
(5) If an alley is present, any garage shall be set back a minimum of five
feet (5’), when practicable, from the nearest right-of-way line of said
alley.
(6) Please refer to § 3-5-12 (A)(1) of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose for the water tap fees, system investment (capacity) fees,
and unit charges for accessory dwelling units in need of new water
service, located on the same lot as the primary dwelling in the
“REDO” Overlay Zone.
(7) Please refer to § 3-5-12 (G)(4) of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose for the sewer tap fees, system investment (capacity) fees,
and unit charges for accessory dwelling units in need of new sewer
service, located on the same lot as the primary dwelling in the
“REDO” Overlay Zone.
(G) The subdivision of lots in configurations substantially similar to those
shown in figures “3”, “4”, and “5” shall be acceptable in the “REDO”
Overlay Zone:
(Ord. 2289, 01/03/2012)
Figure 1
• This conceptual site plan shows a possible layout with a detached 2-
car garage
• Actual dimensions may vary from those shown
• Note: 3-foot garage setback is not allowed on corner lots
Figure 2
• This conceptual site plan shows a possible layout with an attached 1-
car garage
• Actual dimensions may vary from those shown.
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
(Ord 2289, 01/13/2012)

4-4-8.3: UNCOMPAHGRE RIVER BUFFER OVERLAY ZONE
Definitions: the following words and terms shall be defined as follows for the purpose of
this § 4-4-8.3:
AVERAGE YEARLY
HIGH WATER MARK: The point on the bank, edge or channel at which the
Uncompahgre River’s waters reach their maximum
average height on an annual basis; sometimes referred
to as “HWM” herein. The average HWM shall be
calculated based upon the depth of the Uncompahgre
River at a cross-section on the subject property, using
a yearly peak flow rate of two thousand (2000) cubic
feet per second.
DISTURBANCE ENVELOPE: The area or areas which will be directly affected by a
proposed development located within the
Uncompahgre River Buffer Zone.
NATIVE VEGETATION: Species of plants considered indigenous to the State of
Colorado by government or reputable academic
sources; species of plants that are not listed as “nonnative”
by agencies of the State of Colorado or the
U.S. Bureau of Land Management.
UNCOMPAHGRE RIVER: The river flowing through Montrose County,
Colorado, shown on the United States Geological
Survey, National Hydrologic Survey Map, in the area
identified by Hydrologic Unit Code (basin) 14020006,
and labeled thereon as the “Uncompahgre River”; also
sometimes referred to herein as “the river”.
(A) The Uncompahgre River Buffer Zone (hereinafter sometimes referred to as
“URBZ”) applies to all land lying within one hundred feet (100’) of the
HWM of the Uncompahgre River, as defined above. The standards of the
URBZ and its two (2) sub-areas are not applicable to parcels to which
stricter standards may apply via separate agreements (e.g., a preannexation
agreement).
(1) The purpose of the URBZ is to establish minimal acceptable
requirements for the design of buffers to protect the Uncompahgre
River, its wetlands, and floodplains within the City limits of the City
of Montrose; to protect the water quality of the Uncompahgre River
within said jurisdiction; to protect riparian and aquatic ecosystems
within said jurisdiction; and to provide for the environmentally
sound use of land resources within said jurisdiction.
(a) Nothing in this § 4-4-8.3 shall be used as consideration in a
preannexation agreement or in a negotiation for annexation of
land into the City.
(2) Measurement of the one hundred foot (100’) URBZ, the two (2) subareas
within it, and all other related measurements shall be taken as
follows: distance is measured horizontally from the HWM, as
defined herein, to the location in question. The HWM location used
for any given measurement shall be taken from the side of the river
closest to the building or other development in issue.
(a) The following graphic illustrates how to measure the URBZ:
(B) The URBZ provisions shall apply to:
1) Any new development requiring a building permit, except for
additions less than twenty percent (20%) of the existing building size
that do not include any changes to an existing parking lot;
2) Any new development requiring site development approval;
3) Subdivision or the division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or
more parcels;
4) The improvement of property for any purpose involving
construction;
5) Combination of any two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels of
property for any purpose;
6) Placement of temporary structures that do not require a building
permit or site development plan from the City;
7) The preparation of land for any of the above purposes.
(C) Specific submittal requirements are listed in § 4-1-12 of the Official Code
of the City of Montrose, Colorado. Upon submittal of the complete
application, with all supporting documentation as may be required, the City
Land Use Staff shall provide a review of the same. Following City Land
Use Staff review, administrative approval may be granted if the
development proposal is an allowed use in the URBZ or applicable URBZ
sub-zone, or is a use by right in the URBZ or applicable URBZ sub-zone,
and meets all applicable standards. Development proposals which are not
allowed uses or uses by right in the URBZ or applicable URBZ sub-zone,
or do not meet all the applicable standards, shall be forwarded to the City
of Montrose Planning Commission for review and approval, under
procedures set forth below, accompanied by any comments and
recommendations from the City Land Use Staff.
(D) All proposals shall identify on a site plan the designated Disturbance
Envelope for that portion of the project that is proposed to encroach into
the URBZ.
(E) The applicant shall mark and identify the Disturbance Envelope on the
ground in the field and shall maintain construction barrier fencing around
the entire perimeter of the Disturbance Envelope throughout the period of
construction, until final landscaping is completed. The applicant shall
ensure that all surface disturbances are contained within the designated and
marked Disturbance Envelope.
(F) The URBZ consists of two (2) sub-areas, as follows:
(1) Streamside Zone: this area is intended to preserve the natural
riparian environment. In order to accomplish this goal, there is
hereby established a forty-foot (40’) buffer area, measured as
described above from the HWM. Development in the Streamside
Zone is subject to all other applicable permits. Setbacks created
herein for the Streamside Zone are in addition to any setbacks which
may be applied through the underlying zoning of a parcel.
(a) The following are subject to a forty-foot (40’) setback from
the HWM (i.e. the following shall not be placed or performed
within the forty-foot (40’) Streamside Zone):
(i) planting of non-native grass turf;
(ii) removal of Native Vegetation;
(iii) erection of fences;
(iv) construction of hard-surfaced trails that parallel the
river;
(v) construction of buildings, other than irrigation pump
houses;
(vi) construction of parking lots (paved or gravel);
(vii) construction or installation of lighting fixtures;
(viii) construction or installation of engineered/structural
water runoff treatment facilities (such as concrete
vaults);
(ix) concrete rip-rap;
(x) construction or installation of any other facility not
listed in the allowed uses below, and not reasonably
compatible with the riparian environment.
(b) The following actions, or construction of the following
facilities or structures, are permitted within the forty-foot
(40’) Streamside Zone:
(i) government buildings and facilities;
(ii) hard-surfaced trails roughly perpendicular to the river;
(iii) soft-surfaced trails (crushed gravel, etc.) whether
parallel or perpendicular to the river;
(iv) irrigation facilities (including pump houses)
(v) boat put-ins (boat ramps should be soft-surfaced)
(vi) planting of Native Vegetation;
(vii) bank stabilization, and river or wildlife habitat
restoration;
(viii) other uses may be permitted that are directly related to
the river, and that do not conflict with the intent of this
Section.
(c) Exceptions to the above regulations for the Streamside Zone
shall be granted or denied through the variance procedures set
forth in § 4-4-26 of the Official Code of the City of Montrose.
(2) Outer Zone: this area is intended to serve as a buffer between the
Streamside Zone, and areas outside the URBZ. Most uses allowed
within the underlying zoning district are permitted within the Outer
Zone, though certain uses have specific performance standards.
(a) Uses by right in the Outer Zone:
(i) water runoff treatment structures using swales, Native
Vegetation, and similar measures;
(ii) government buildings and facilities;
(iii) fences which allow the passage of wildlife; said fences
shall be designed as follows:
(1) No more than forty (40) inches in height;
(2) A smooth bottom wire at least 16 inches above
ground;
(3) At least twelve (12) inches between the top two
(2) wires;
(4) No sharp edges, barbs, or similar devices are
permitted;
(5) Sheep or woven-wire and wrought-iron style
fences with spiked tips are not permitted.
(iv) landscaping employing Native Vegetation types and
compatible with the riparian environment;
(v) single family homes;
(vi) recreation trails (all types);
(vii) buildings and facilities complying with the underlying
zoning district and complying with all of the following
performance standards:
(1) Structures with windows occupying a minimum
of fifty percent (50%) of the linear river
frontage of the building; and
(2) At least one public entrance directly facing the
river; and
(3) Outdoor common areas, seating and/or dining
areas; and
(4) High quality building finishes such as brick or
stone, or earth tone colors having matte
finishes; and
(5) Well concealed trash dumpsters; and
(6) Total building façade length shall be less than
fifty (50) feet in length parallel to the river; and
(7) Buildings and facilities complying with these
performance standards are exempt from the
river buffer screening requirements set forth
below.
(8) Single family homes are exempt from these
performance standards, except for 4-4-8.3
(F)(2)(a)(iii) above, as well as the Outer Zone
performance standards set forth below.
(b) The following uses shall not be considered a use by right in
the Outer Zone, and are subject to review as Conditional Uses
under § 4-4-24 of the Official Code of the City of Montrose:
(i) loading docks;
(ii) landscaping with non-Native Vegetation;
(iii) engineered or structural water runoff treatment
facilities (such as concrete vaults);
(iv) other industrial uses;
(v) water treatment facilities employing structural vaults
or similar technology are not permitted within the
Outer Zone;
(vi) parking lots, whether paved or gravel;
(vii) all other uses not listed in this subsection.
(c) Outer Zone Performance Standards. If the use or structure
does not meet the performance standards in § 4-4-8.3
(F)(2)(a)(vii), above, the following shall be required:
(i) A minimum thirty-foot (30’) wide vegetated buffer
with extensive vertical plantings of Native Vegetation.
Said vegetated buffer shall not overlap the forty-foot
(40’) Streamside Zone. Tree height at maturity shall
be as high or higher than the building(s) being
screened, and vegetation at maturity shall obscure any
buildings or other facilities to the maximum extent
possible. Said vegetated buffer shall be contiguous to
the Streamside Zone, and located between the
Streamside Zone, and any parking lot or building.
(d) General Standards Applicable within the Outer Zone:
(i) Removal of Native Vegetation is discouraged. Where
removal of Native Vegetation is unavoidable, the
removed area shall be mitigated by planting
replacement Native Vegetation, at a minimum 1:1 ratio
(measured in square feet, with a result that an equal
amount of vegetation is planted, as was removed)
within the URBZ.
(ii) All setbacks oriented toward the river, applicable to or
within the Outer Zone, shall be measured from the
boundary line between the Streamside Zone, and the
Outer Zone.
(1) For those zoning districts underlying the URBZ
with no side or rear setbacks, the minimum side
or rear setbacks shall be ten feet (10’).
(iii) New buildings, expansions to existing buildings, or
parking lots, or driveways shall have a minimum
setback of twenty feet (20’) from an existing or
proposed trail or path.
(e) Exceptions to the standards and requirements regarding the
Outer Zone shall be approved or denied through the
procedures applicable to Conditional Uses, as set forth in
§ 4-4-24 of the Official Code of the City of Montrose.
(G) The following uses and structures are prohibited within the URBZ and its
two sub-areas:
(1) confined animal feedlots;
(2) storage of hazardous materials or chemical fuels;
(3) aboveground or underground petroleum storage facilities;
(4) septic systems;
(5) solid waste landfills;
(6) junkyards, and salvage yards;
(7) land application of biosolids;
(8) subsurface discharges from wastewater treatment plants.
(H) All development within the URBZ shall obtain all applicable local, state
and federal permits prior to undertaking any construction or land disturbing
activity.
(I) The provisions of the URBZ shall supersede the provisions of the
underlying zone, and any other applicable overlay zone(s), when the
provisions of the URBZ are more restrictive.
4-4-8.5: "R-5" LOW DENSITY / MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The "R-5" Low Density / Manufactured Housing District is
intended to provide a quiet, low density development for single family
residences. Environmental protection is provided by allowing only single
family residences with certain other compatible land uses. Manufactured
housing meeting the performance standards of Subsection (D) below is
allowed.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes.
(2) Public utility service facilities.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowner's
association.
(5) Accessory uses.
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Churches.
(2) Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
(D) Performance Standards:
(1) Single family homes must have a minimum floor area of 1,200
square feet, a minimum roof pitch of 3.5:12, a minimum roof
overhang of eight inches (8"), a minimum length and width of 20
feet, wood, brick, masonry, stucco or cosmetically equivalent
exterior siding, and shall be mounted on a permanent foundation.
(Ord. 1831, 02-22-2001)
(2) Each single family home must have an accessory garage.
(Ord. 1670, 9/98).
4-4-8.7: "R-6" MEDIUM DENSITY / MANUFACTURED HOUSING
DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The "R-6" Medium Density / Manufactured Housing District is
intended to provide a quiet, medium-density development for single family
residences and duplexes. Environmental protection is provided by allowing
only single family residences and duplexes with certain other compatible
land uses. Manufactured housing meeting the performance standards of
Subsection (D) below is allowed. (Ord. 2047, 03-17-2005)
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes and duplexes. (Ord. 2047, 03-17-2005)
(2) Public utility service facilities.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowner's
association.
(5) Accessory uses.
(C) Conditional Uses (Ord. 2047, 03-17-2005):
(1) Child care facilities which have no more than twelve (12) children
present at any time on the premises or which are located upon
church premises.
(2) Nursing homes for the aged, invalid, ill, or mentally impaired
excluding homes for patients with a primary diagnosis of mental
illness.
(3) Multiple family residences.
(4) “Bed and breakfast” operations operated solely by the residents of a
lot of at least seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet
providing no more than two (2) bedrooms for rent in the dwelling
unit, and the only meal provided on the premises shall be breakfast
to the renters.
(5) Schools. (Ord 2295, 02/21/2012)
(D) Performance Standards:
(1) Single family homes must have a minimum floor area of 1,000
square feet, a minimum roof pitch of 3.5:12, a minimum roof
overhang of eight inches (8"), a minimum length and width of 20
feet, wood, brick, masonry, stucco or cosmetically equivalent
exterior siding, and shall be mounted on a permanent foundation.
(Ord. 1831, 02-22-2001).
(2) Duplexes must have a minimum floor area of 1000 square feet per
dwelling unit, a minimum roof pitch of 3.5:12, a minimum roof
overhang of eight inches (8”), a minimum length and width of 20
feet per dwelling unit, wood, brick, masonry, stucco or cosmetically
equivalent exterior siding, and shall be mounted on a permanent
foundation. (Ord. 2047, 03-17-2005)
4-4-9: "MHR" MOBILE HOME-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(A) Intent: This District is intended to provide a suitable environment for single
family conventional and mobile homes and is designed to allow a high
density of single family residences and related uses.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Single family homes.
(2) Mobile homes.
(3) Mobile home parks.
(4) Government buildings and facilities.
(5) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowners’
association.
(6) Churches.
(7) Public utility service facilities.
(8) Accessory uses.
(C) Conditional uses:
(1) Nursing homes for the aged, invalid, ill, or mentally impaired,
excluding homes for patients with a primary diagnosis of mental
illness.
(2) Rental storage units with a maximum rental unit size of two hundred
(200) square feet.
(3) Child care facilities.
(4) Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
(D) Mobile home parks shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 12 of
this Title, in addition to these zoning regulations. Chapter 12 of this Title
shall control with respect to any conflict with these regulations.
4-4-10: "MR" MEDICAL-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “MR” Medical-Residential District provides for a mixture of
medically oriented activities, clinics, pharmacies, and hospitals along with
residences. This district permits varied land uses which do not disturb a
quiet environment.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Doctors’ and dentists’ offices, clinics and pharmacies.
(2) Hospitals (not including animal hospitals, or hospitals devoted
substantially to treatment of the mentally ill).
(3) Single family homes.
(4) Government buildings and facilities.
(5) Churches.
(6) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowners’
association.
(7) Public utility service facilities.
(8) Accessory uses.
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Duplexes and multiple family residences.
(2) Floral shops.
(3) Nursing homes for the aged, invalid, ill, or mentally impaired
excluding homes for patients with primary diagnosis of mental
illness.
(4) Sanitariums, excluding those for patients with a primary diagnosis of
mental illness.
(5) Schools. (Ord 2295, 02/21/2012)
(D) Performance Standards: Doctors and dentists and clinics must be
architecturally compatible with the residential character of the area, present
the look of single family homes, and comply with City design standards.
4-4-10.5: "OR" OFFICE-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “OR” Office-Residential District is intended to allow for a mix
of offices and residences in areas adjacent to commercial zones or in areas
in transition from residential to commercial uses.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Offices for professional service providers including doctors, dentists,
chiropractors, lawyers, engineers, surveyors, accountants,
bookkeepers, secretarial services, title companies, social service
providers and other similar professional service providers.
(2) Single family homes.
(3) Duplexes.
(4) Government buildings and facilities.
(5) Churches.
(6) Parks and recreation facilities owned or operated by a homeowners’
association.
(7) Public utility service facilities.
(8) Child care facilities.
(9) Bed and Breakfast operations operated solely by the residents of a
residence providing no more than four (4) bedrooms for rent in the
dwelling unit and the only meal provided on the premises shall be
breakfast to the renters. The lot shall be at least six thousand two
hundred fifty (6,250) square feet of lot area per rental bedroom.
(10) Accessory uses.
(C) Conditional uses:
(1) Multi-family residences.
(2) Nursing homes for the aged, invalid, ill or mentally impaired,
excluding homes for patients with a primary diagnosis of mental
illness.
(3) Offices not allowed as a use by right. (Ord. 1456, 9-3-92)
(4) Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
(D) Performance Standards:
Buildings with offices must be architecturally compatible with the
residential character of the area, present the look of a residence, and comply
with City design standards. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
4-4-11: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
The Commercial Districts provided for in Sections 4-4-12 through 4-4-15 are established
to provide a location for convenient exchange of goods and services in a reasonable and
orderly manner. Dimensional requirements are set out in Section 4-4-19, and off-street
parking requirements are found in section 4-4-20.
4-4-12: "B-1" CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “B-1” District is intended as a shopping and business center for
the City and surrounding area. The most intensive commercial use of
buildings and land is encouraged with parking primarily of public concern.
No off-street parking is required, except where otherwise specified. This
District is oriented to pedestrian traffic.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Retail stores, business and professional offices and service
establishments which cater to the general shopping public.
(2) Libraries and museums.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Public utility service facilities.
(5) Private and fraternal clubs.
(6) Theaters.
(7) Restaurants and taverns.
(8) Gas stations which comply with the following criteria:
(a) All fuel storage shall be located underground.
(b) All gasoline pumps, lubrication and service facilities shall be
located at least twenty feet (20') from any street right-of-way
line.
(c) No major bodywork may be conducted on the premises.
(d) No curb cut may be any closer than thirty feet (30') from any
street intersection.
(e) A minimum lot frontage of one hundred and twenty five feet
(125') is required.
(f) The main building on the site shall be set back at least forty
feet (40') from any property line.
(9) Churches.
(10) Child care facilities.
(11) Accessory uses. (Ord. 1077, 5-16-80)
(12) Hotels and motels (off-street parking required). (Ord. 1167, 9-2-82)
(13) Single family homes, duplexes, and multiple family residences (offstreet
parking required). (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) (Rep. By Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(2) (Rep. By Ord. 1167, 9-2-82)
(3) Schools.
(4) Public transportation facilities.
(5) Bus stations with off-street loading and unloading facilities for all
buses at one time, and with direct access to a designated arterial
street.
(6) Parking facilities.
(7) Funeral homes.
(8) Parking and playgrounds.
(9) Building materials businesses if adjacent to the railroad.
(Ord. 1077, 5-16-80)
(10) Automobile and other vehicle sales or service establishments.
(11) Automobile body shops. (Ord. 1188, 6-3-83)
(12) Distribution, warehouse and wholesale operations.
(13) Automobile and other vehicle sales events, on a temporary basis, in
no case longer than ten (10) days per event. No more than two (2)
such temporary sales Conditional Use Permit(s) may be granted for
any single property per calendar year. (Ord. 2305, 10/16/2012)
(D) The following uses are not to be construed as a “use by right” or a
“conditional use” in the “B-1" Central Business District:
(1) Drive-in restaurants. (Ord. 1077, 5-16-80)
(2) (Rep. By Ord. 1188, 6-8-83)
(3) Farm implement sales or service establishments.
(4) Mobile homes sales or service establishments.
(5) Feed storage or sales establishments.
(6) Veterinary clinics. (Ord. 1077, 5-16-80)
(7) (Rep. By Ord. 1188, 6-2-83)
(8) Construction or contractor’s equipment storage facilities.
(9) Machine and welding shops.
(10) Aboveground storage of hazardous fuels.
(11) Manufacturing and industrial use.
(E) Storage facilities. Performance Standards:
(1) No use shall be established, maintained or conducted in any “B-1"
Central Business District that will result in any public or private
nuisance.
(2) All structures shall have exterior siding substantially constructed of
brick, masonry, glass or wood or shall have cosmetically equivalent
siding.
(F) Application for Conditional Uses under § 4-4-12 (C)(13) shall be made on
forms acceptable to the City. Said applications shall be reviewed and may
be approved or denied administratively, in writing, by the City Manger or
its designee.
(1) Request for an appeal from an administrative denial of an
application for a Conditional Use under § 4-4-12 (C)(13) shall be
made in writing by letter within five (5) business days of the dated
date of the administrative denial. Appeal hearings shall be
conducted de novo before the Planning Commission, and shall be
processed according to the standards for Conditional Uses set forth
in § 4-4-24, and § 4-4-29 of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose.
(Ord. 2305, 10/16/2012)
4-4-12.5: "B-1A" COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(A) The "B-1A" Community Commercial District is intended to provide for
businesses oriented toward the sale of convenience goods and personal
services which meet the daily needs of a multi-neighborhood area.
(Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Those listed in the "B-1" District as "uses by right".
(2) Coin-operated laundries.
(3) Bowling alleys.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) Convenience food stores.
(6) Car washes.
(7) Child care facilities.
(8) Veterinary clinics or hospitals for small animals.
(9) Nursing homes, sanitariums, and hospitals, including those for the
mentally ill.
(10) Retail building material supply businesses.
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Those "conditional uses" listed for the "B-1" District.
(2) Retail stores, businesses and service establishments serving the
general public but which also involved limited manufacturing of the
products supplied.
(3) Automobile and other vehicle sales events, on a temporary basis, in
no case longer than ten (10) days per event. No more than two (2)
such temporary sales Conditional Use Permit(s) may be granted for
any single property per calendar year. (Ord. 2305, 10/16/2012)
(D) The following uses are not to be construed as a "use by right" or
"conditional use" in the "B-1A" Community Commercial District:
(1) Feed storage and sales establishments.
(2) Farm implement, automobile and vehicle sales or service
establishments.
(3) Veterinary clinics or hospitals for large animals
(4) Construction and contractor’s equipment storage facilities.
(5) Machine and welding shops.
(6) Above ground storage facilities for hazardous fuels.
(7) Manufacturing and industrial uses except as allowed by Subsection
4-4-12.5(C)(2).
(8) Storage facilities.
(E) Performance Standards:
(1) No use shall be established, maintained or conducted in any "B-1A"
Community Commercial District that will result in any nuisance, or
is incompatible with other uses in the area.
(2) No development may encompass more than 10 acres.
(3) No building may exceed 80,000 square feet in floor area.
(4) All uses shall be easily accessible by pedestrians from surrounding
areas and shall provide appropriate sidewalk connections to the
surrounding sidewalk system.
(5) Common access and shared parking is required for multiple tenants
and encouraged for multiple parcels.
(F) Application for Conditional Uses under § 4-4-12.5 (C)(3) shall be made on
forms acceptable to the City. Said applications shall be reviewed and may
be approved or denied administratively, in writing, by the City Manger or
its designee.
(1) Request for an appeal from an administrative denial of an
application for a Conditional Use under § 4-4-12.5 (C)(3) shall be
made in writing by letter within five (5) business days of the dated
date of the administrative denial. Appeal hearings shall be
conducted de novo before the Planning Commission, and shall be
processed according to the standards for Conditional Uses set forth
in § 4-4-24, and § 4-4-29 of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose.
(Ord. 2305, 10/16/2012)
4-4-13: "B-2" HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “B-2" Highway Commercial District is intended to provide for
business oriented toward serving the vehicular customer. This District
provides for the convenient exchange of goods and services along the major
thoroughfares of the City.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Those listed in the “B-1" District as “uses by right”.
(2) Coin-operated laundries.
(3) Bowling alleys.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) Convenience food stores.
(6) Car washes.
(7) Child care facilities.
(8) Rental storage units with a maximum rental unit size of two hundred
(200) square feet.
(9) Veterinary clinics or hospitals for small animals.
(10) Nursing homes, sanitariums, and hospitals, including those for the
mentally ill.
(11) Retail building material supply businesses.
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Those “conditional uses” listed for the “B-1" District.
(2) Travel home parks.
(3) Retail stores, business and service establishments serving the general
public but which also involve limited manufacturing of the products
supplied.
(4) Automobile and other vehicle sales events, on a temporary basis, in
no case longer than ten (10) days per event. No more than two (2)
such temporary sales Conditional Use Permit(s) may be granted for
any single property per calendar year. (Ord. 2305, 10/16/2012)
(D) The following uses are not to be construed as a “use by right” or
“conditional use” in the “B-2" Highway Commercial District:
(1) Feed storage and sales establishments.
(2) Farm implement sales or service establishments.
(3) Veterinary clinics or hospitals for large animals.
(4) (Rep. By Ord. 1188, 6-2-83)
(5) Construction and contractor’s equipment storage facilities.
(6) Machine and welding shops.
(7) Above ground storage facilities for hazardous fuels.
(8) Manufacturing and industrial uses except as allowed by Subsection
4-4-13(C)3.
(9) Storage facilities (small rental storage units are allowed see Section
4-4-13(B)8.
(E) Performance Standards: No use shall be established, maintained or
conducted in any “B-2" Highway Commercial District that will result in
any public or private nuisance.
(F) Application for Conditional Uses under § 4-4-13 (C)(4) shall be made on
forms acceptable to the City. Said applications shall be reviewed and may
be approved or denied administratively, in writing, by the City Manger or
its designee.
(1) Request for an appeal from an administrative denial of an
application for a Conditional Use under § 4-4-13 (C)(4) shall be
made in writing by letter within five (5) business days of the dated
date of the administrative denial. Appeal hearings shall be
conducted de novo before the Planning Commission, and shall be
processed according to the standards for Conditional Uses set forth
in § 4-4-24, and § 4-4-29 of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose.
(Ord. 2305, 10/16/2012)
4-4-13.5: "B-2A" REGIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(A) "B-2A" Regional Commercial District is intended for a full spectrum of
retail and services uses including both convenience goods and general
merchandise. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Uses listed as "uses by right" in the "B-2" and "B-1" Districts.
(2) Automobile and vehicle sales or service establishments.
(3) Farm implement sales or service establishments.
(4) Mobile home sales or service establishments.
(5) Building materials sales establishments.
(6) Rental businesses.
(7) Veterinary clinics or hospitals for large animals.
(8) Automobile body shops.
(9) Automotive repair and service establishments.
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Uses listed as conditional uses in the "B-1" and "B-2" Districts.
(2) Warehouses and storage facilities.
(3) Manufacturing uses allowed in the “I-1” Light Industrial District.
(Ord. 2296, 03/05/2012)
(D) The following uses are not to be construed as a "use by right" or a
"conditional use" in the "B-2A" Regional Commercial District:
(1) Manufacturing and industrial uses, except as allowed by Subsections
4-4-13.5(C)(1), and 4-4-13.5(C)(3). (Ord. 2296, 03/05/2012)
(2) Above ground storage facilities for hazardous fuel.
(3) Construction and contractor’s equipment storage facilities.
(4) Feed storage and sales establishments.
(E) Performance Standards: No use shall be established, maintained, or
conducted in any "B-2A" Regional Commercial District that will result in
any public or private nuisance.
(1) Manufacturing and storage associated with manufacturing shall be
indoors.
(2) No use may create a nuisance to other property by reasons of dust,
odor, noise, light, smoke, or vibration or other adverse effects which
cannot be effectively confined on the premises.
(Ord. 2296, 03/05/2012)
(F) Application for Conditional Uses under § 4-4-13.5 (C)(3) shall be made on
forms acceptable to the City. Said applications shall be reviewed and may
be approved or denied administratively, in writing, by the City Manager or
its designee.
(1) Request for an appeal from an administrative denial of an
application for a Conditional Use under § 4-4-13.5 (C)(3) shall be
made in writing by letter within five (5) business days of the dated
date of the administrative denial. Appeal hearings shall be
conducted de novo before the Planning Commission, and shall be
processed according to the standards for Conditional Uses set forth
in § 4-4-24, and § 4-4-29 of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose.
(Ord. 2296, 03/05/2012)
4-4-14: "B-3" GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “B-3" General Commercial District is intended for a large
variety of uses that require large storage areas to conveniently serve
customers.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Uses listed as “uses by right” in the “B-1”, “B-2” and “B-2A”
Districts. (Ord. 2296, 03/05/2012)
(2) Automobile and vehicle sales or service establishments.
(3) Farm implement sales or service establishments.
(4) Mobile home sales or service establishments.
(5) Building materials sales establishments.
(6) Rental businesses.
(7) Feed storage and sales establishments.
(8) Veterinary clinics or hospitals for large animals.
(9) Automobile body shops.
(10) Automotive repair and service establishments.
(11) Construction and contractor’s office and equipment storage
facilities.
(12) Above ground storage facilities for hazardous fuels.
(C) Conditional Uses:
(1) Uses listed as conditional uses in the “B-1”, “B-2” and “B-2A”
Districts. (Ord. 2296, 03/05/2012)
(2) Warehouses and storage facilities.
(D) The following uses are not to be construed as a “use by right” or a
“conditional use” in the “B-3" General Commercial District: manufacturing
and industrial uses except as allowed by subsection 4-4-14(C)1.
(E) Performance Standards: No use shall be established, maintained, or
conducted in any “B-3" General Commercial District that will result in any
public or private nuisance.
(1) Manufacturing and storage associated with manufacturing shall be
indoors.
(2) No use may create a nuisance to other property by reasons of dust,
odor, noise, light, smoke, or vibration or other adverse effects which
cannot be effectively confined on the premises
(Ord. 2296, 03/05/2012)
(F) Application for Conditional Uses under § 4-4-13.5 (C)(3) shall be made on
forms acceptable to the City. Said applications shall be reviewed and may
be approved or denied administratively, in writing, by the City Manager or
its designee.
(1) Request for an appeal from an administrative denial of an
application for a Conditional Use under § 4-4-13.5 (C)(3) shall be
made in writing by letter within five (5) business days of the dated
date of the administrative denial. Appeal hearings shall be
conducted de novo before the Planning Commission, and shall be
processed according to the standards for Conditional Uses set forth
in § 4-4-24, and § 4-4-29 of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose.
(Ord. 2296, 03/05/2012)
4-4-15: "B-4" NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “B-4" Neighborhood Shopping District is intended to provide
for retail shopping and services on a parcel or parcels of land collectively
no greater than approximately three (3) acres in size, with a convenient
location relative to residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 2083, 9/15/2005)
(B) Uses by Right (Ord. 2083, 9/15/2005):
(1) Government buildings and facilities.
(2) Public utility service facilities.
(3) Retail stores, business and professional offices and service
establishments which cater to the general shopping public.
(4) Restaurants not holding any class of liquor license.
(5) Grocery stores.
(6) Self-service laundries.
(7) Churches.
(8) Single family homes, duplexes, and multiple family residences.
(9) Child care facilities (Ord. 2145, 1-18-2007)
(C) Conditional Uses (Ord. 2083, 9/15/2005):
(1) Gas stations or other retail uses having gasoline pumps.
(2) Drive-in restaurants.
(3) Car washes.
(4) Rental storage units with a maximum rental unit size of two hundred
(200) square feet.
(5) Restaurants holding one or more of the following classes of liquor
licenses: “Hotel and Restaurant License”, “Brew Pub License”,
“3.2% Beer License On Premise”, “Vintner’s Restaurant License”,
or an “Optional Premises License” held in conjunction with a “Hotel
and Restaurant License”.
(a) Approval of a Conditional Use Permit for a restaurant holding
any class of liquor license shall not constitute approval by the
City of said restaurant’s liquor license. All relevant
provisions of the Montrose Municipal Code, and the Colorado
Revised Statutes shall apply independently, and shall be
unaffected by any approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
(6) Schools. (Ord. 2295, 02/21/2012)
(D) The following uses are not to be construed as a “use by right” or a
“conditional use” in the “B-4" Neighborhood Shopping District (Ord. 2083,
9/15/2005):
(1) Automobile or vehicle sales or service establishments
(2) Farm implement sales or service establishments.
(3) Trailer home or mobile home sales or service establishments.
(4) Feed storage and sales establishments.
(5) Veterinary clinics or hospitals.
(6) Automobile body shops.
(7) Construction and contractor’s equipment storage facilities.
(8) Machine and welding shops.
(9) Aboveground and storage facilities for hazardous fuels.
(10) Warehouse and storage facilities (small rental storage units are
allowed - see Section 4-4-15(C)(4)).
(11) Manufacturing and industrial uses.
(E) Performance Standards (Ord. 2083, 9/15/2005):
(1) No use shall be established, maintained or conducted in any "B-4"
neighborhood shopping district that will create any nuisance or be
incompatible with surrounding residential uses.
(2) All uses shall be easily accessible by pedestrians from surrounding
areas and shall provide appropriate sidewalk connections to the
surrounding sidewalk system.
(3) Common access and shared parking is required for multiple tenants
and encouraged for multiple parcels.
(4) Building size shall be limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet
per separate building in the “B-4” zoning district; buildings or
proposed buildings exceeding said building size, which would
otherwise comply with regulations regarding uses by right or
conditional uses, as well as the performance standards, all as set
forth in this Section 4-4-15, shall be considered as Conditional Uses,
and shall be processed according to the standards for Conditional
Uses set forth in Section 4-4-24 of the Montrose Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2145, 1-18-2007)
(5) Landscaping shall be reasonably compatible with that existing in the
neighborhood. (Ord. 2145, 1-18-2007)
(6) Buildings shall be architecturally compatible with the residential
character of the area, present the look of a residence, and comply
with City design standards. (Ord. 2145, 1-18-2007)
4-4-16: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
The Industrial Districts provided for in Sections 4-4-17 and 4-4-18 provide for normal
manufacturing activities and related uses as indicated. These Districts do not permit
residential and other non-compatible uses. Off-street parking requirements are set out in
Section 4-4-20 and dimensional requirements are set out in Section 4-4-19.
4-4-17 : "I-1" LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The purpose of the Light Industrial District is to accommodate a
limited group of research and manufacturing uses which need adequate
space, light, and air, and whose operations are quiet and clean. This
promotes the creation and maintenance of an environment which will serve
the mutual interests of the community as a whole, of any adjacent
residential areas and of the occupants of the industrial park area.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Uses which meet the intent of subsection (A) and the performance
standards of subsection (C) of this section are uses by right. Typical
examples of such manufacturing and non-manufacturing uses
include: food processing; metal finishing and fabrication; power
generation and transformer stations; paper, plastic and wood
manufacturing (excluding processing of any raw materials), fabric
manufacturing and similar activities.
(2) Parks and open spaces.
(3) Government buildings and facilities.
(4) Public utility service facilities.
(5) Warehouse and wholesale distribution centers. (Ord. 2145, 1-18-
2007
(6) Accessory Uses. (Ord. 2145, 1-18-2007)
(C) Performance Standards:
(1) No use shall be established, maintained or conducted in any Light
Industrial District that will result in any public or private nuisance.
(2) No structure shall be constructed within one hundred feet (100') of
an existing residential zone.
(D) Conditional Uses: Any commercial use other than the uses by right which
complies with the performance standards of Subsection (C) and is
consistent with the intent of Subsection (A) above.
4-4-18: "I-2" GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
(A) Intent: The “I-2" General Industrial District allows most industrial and
manufacturing uses, provided that they do not create a nuisance to other
property by reasons of dust, odor, noise, light, smoke, or vibration or other
adverse effects which cannot be effectively confined on the premises.
(B) Uses by Right:
(1) Those uses which are uses by right in “I-1" District.
(2) Industrial uses such as:
(a) Chemical manufacturing or storage facilities.
(b) Brick, tile, or cement block manufacturing facilities.
(c) Fertilizer manufacturing facilities.
(d) Grain elevator and feed mills.
(e) Automobile wrecking and salvage yards.
(f) Petroleum manufacturing, refining, or storage facilities.
(g) Sawmills or planing mills.
(h) Sugar refining. (Ord. 1708, July 1, 1999)
(i) Warehouses and wholesale distribution centers. (Ord. 2145,
1-18-2007)
(C) Conditional Uses: Any industrial or commercial use, other than the uses by
right listed above, which comply with the performance standards.
(D) Performance Standards:
(1) No structure shall be constructed within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential or commercial district.
(2) The maximum lot coverage by buildings shall be forty percent
(40%).
(3) No use shall be established or maintained in the “I-2" District which
results in an unreasonable hazard to the community or creates a
public or private nuisance. (Ord. 1077 5-16-80)
4-4-19: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
(A) Tabulated requirements for uses by right are as follows: (All dimensions
in feet or square feet unless otherwise noted.) (Ord. 2047, 03-17-2005)
Minimum Lot Minimum Setbacks
Dist Use
Width at
Bldg Line Depth Size Front Rear Side
Crn
Lot
Max.
Bldg Ht.
Min.
Floor Area
RL All 100 150 * * * * 25 20 10 20 35 1200/du
R-1 All 100 150 1 acre 25 20 10 20 35 1200/du
R-1A All 100 150 ½ acre* 25 20 10 20 35 1200/du
R-1B All 100 150 1/3 acre* 25 20 10 20 35 1200/du
R-2 All N/A N/A 7500 25 20 6 20 35 1000/du
Single family N/A N/A 6250 15 25 5 15 35 700/du
R-3
all others N/A N/A 9375 15 25 5 15 35 600/du
Single family N/A N/A 6250 15 25 5 15 35 700/du
R-3A Duplex N/A N/A 9375 15 25 5 15 35 600/du
All others N/A N/A lgr 9375 or
2900/unit 15 20 10 15 35 600/du
Single family N/A N/A 6250 15 25 5 15 35 700/du
R-4 Duplex N/A N/A 9375 15 25 5 15 35 600/du
All others N/A N/A lgr 9375 or
2300/unit 15 20 10 15 35 600/du
R-5 All 100 120 12,000 25 20 10 20 35 1,200
Single
Family N/A N/A 7,500 25 20 6 20 35 1,000
R-6
All Others N/A N/A 9375 25 20 6 20 35 1000/du
MHR All except
MH Parks** N/A N/A 6250 12
*** 10 5
*** 12 35 400/du
Single
Family 50 100 6250 15 15 5 15 35
700/du
(single
MR family)
All others 75 100 9375 15 25 5 15 35 N/A
OR
Duplexes
All Others
50
50
100
100
9375
6250
15
15
15
15
5
5
15
15
35
35
700/du
700/du
B-1 no
requirements no req. no req.
see
subsection
4-4-12(B)(8)
no
req. no req. no
req.
no
req.
no
req. N/A
B-1A
All
* * * * *
50 100 N/A 15 N/A N/A 15 N/A N/A
B-2
All
* * * * *
50 100 N/A 15 N/A N/A 15 N/A N/A
B-2A
All
* * * * *
50 100 N/A 25 N/A N/A 25 35 N/A
Minimum Lot Minimum Setbacks
Dist Use
Width at
Bldg Line Depth Size Front Rear Side
Crn
Lot
Max.
Bldg Ht.
Min.
Floor Area
B-3
All
* * * * *
50 100 N/A 25 N/A N/A 25 35 N/A
B-4 All
* * * * * N/A N/A N/A 25 N/A N/A 25 35 N/A
I-1 All N/A N/A ½ acre 25 N/A N/A 25 N/A 2000
I-2 All N/A N/A ½ acre 25 N/A N/A 25 N/A 2000
* In large or small estate subdivisions minimum lot size shall be governed by City Subdivision Regulations.
** Dimensional requirements for mobile home parks are controlled by Chapter 4-12. These provisions shall
apply subject to nonconforming use regulations
*** The front setback or one of the side setbacks shall be a minimum to twenty ft. (20').
**** A minimum lot size shall be determined as a condition of initial zoning of property as "RL". Such lot size
shall be designed to limit overall residential units per acre to no more than allowed by Montrose County in
comparable areas in the County where sewer is available, and to implement the City master plan as feasible
while remaining economically competitive with allowed County densities.
***** Residential uses shall comply with the applicable dimensional requirements as set out for the "R-3A" zone.
(B) Proper dimensional requirements for conditional uses shall be determined
in accordance with Section 4-4-24 and 4-4-29, provided, that as a general
rule, they shall be no less strict than the dimensional requirements specified
for uses-by-right in the district concerned or as specified for the use
concerned in a zone in which it is a use-by-right. Provided, further, that the
following minimum lot sizes shall apply to duplexes and multi-family
residences when allowed as a conditional use:
District Use Minimum Lot Size
R-3 & R-6 Multi-Family Residence the larger of 9375
or 2900 per dwelling unit
MR Duplex 9375
MR Multi-Family Residence the larger of 9375
or 2900 per dwelling unit
OR Multi-Family Residence the larger of 9375
or 2900 per dwelling unit
(Ord. 2047, 03-17-2005)
(C) Additional Dimensional Requirements:
(1) Residential uses in "B-4" Districts shall comply with the
dimensional requirements set out for the "R-4" District.
(2) Gas stations must comply with the dimensional requirements set out
in subsection 4-4-12(B)8 in any district.
(3) Accessory use structures or buildings in residential districts may be
located on those rear and side property lines which do not abut a
street, if the structure is at least ten feet (10') to the rear of the
building line of the principal structure and does not occupy more
than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard area.
(4) In a block where a setback line has been established by existing
structures for more than fifty percent (50%) of the block, the average
setback of the existing buildings may be used as the minimum
setback.
4-4-20: OFF-STREET PARKING
(A) The intent of off-street parking requirements is to alleviate the need of
residents, customers, employees or visitors of any use to park on the street
in order to improve the safe and convenient movement of traffic on City
streets. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(B) Each lot or leased premises shall provide a minimum number of off-street
parking spaces equal to the greater of the following calculations:
(1) One space for each 3,000 square feet, rounded up, of the lot or
premises, except residential premises shall have two spaces per
dwelling unit.
(2) One space for every 300 square feet, rounded up, of gross floor area
of all buildings, including outdoor seating areas, but excluding
secondary or ancillary buildings which do not result in any increased
occupancy of persons, such as storage facilities and equipment
garages.
(3) The number of spaces specified for the uses on the premises in
Subsection (C) below (rounded up); or
(4) Adequate spaces to reasonably handle the anticipated parking
requirements for the use involved. (Ord 1776, 05-25-2000)
(C)
Residential Uses
Hospitals, nursing homes, group homes,
assisted living facilities
1 space for every 3 beds
Churches 1 space for every 6 seats in main
Chapel area
All other residential 2 spaces for every dwelling unit
Commercial Uses
Retail stores, service establishments,
general office, general business
1 space for every 300 square feet of
gross floor areas
Restaurants and lounges (table service) 1 space for every 100 square feet of
gross floor area
Drive-up restaurants (counter service) 1 space for every 50 square feet of
gross floor area
Hotels and Motels 1 space for every guest room
Bed and Breakfasts 1 space for every guest room, plus 2
spaces for each dwelling unit
Gas stations, auto service shops 4 spaces, plus 1 space for every
enclosed auto stall
Beauty shops and barber shops 2 spaces for each service chair
Bowling alleys 3 spaces for each lane
Medical clinics and offices 3 spaces for each examination room
Funeral Homes and Mortuaries 1 space for every 6 seats in main
Chapel area
Industrial Uses
All industrial; wholesale industrial 1 space for every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
(Ord. 1776, 05-25-2000)
(D) General Requirements:
(1) Parking spaces shall be sized and designed in accordance with
standard City specifications and the provisions of Section 4-1-12 of
this Code. All spaces and maneuvering areas shall be paved and
maintained in good and safe condition, subject to the following
exceptions:
(a) Spaces required for employee parking in industrial zoning
districts need not be paved if
(i) The employee parking area is delineated and
physically separated from the general public parking
areas;
(ii) The employee parking area conforms to City
specifications for street sub-base and base course, per
plans to be approved by the City Engineer, and
(iii) General public parking and access areas in all cases
shall be paved in accordance with City specifications.
(b) Equipment yards and storage areas in commercial and
industrial zoning districts need not be paved if
Such areas are delineated and physically separated from
general public parking areas;
(i) The equipment and storage areas conform to City
specifications for street sub-base and base course, per
plans to be approved by the City Engineer; and
(ii) General public parking and access areas in all cases
shall be paved in accordance with City specifications.
(2) Variances to these requirements shall only be allowed in strict
accordance with the provisions of Section 4-4-26 of this Code. All
variances shall require a restrictive covenant, enforceable by the
City, to be recorded on forms approved by the City, limiting the use
of the property accordingly.
(3) Shared parking lots are allowable as long as the aggregate spaces
required are provided, and a recorded covenant or lease agreement or
plat restriction, on forms approved by the City, allows for exclusive
use of the parking by the premises, and further allow the City to
enforce maintenance of the parking area.
(4) Off-street parking requirements may be subject to partial credit of
one space for every two spaces of lawfully developed on-street
parking within the public right-of-way adjoining the premises, on
local and collector streets, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 4-1-13 of this Code. (Ord. 1776, 05-25-2000)
4-4-21 : PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (P.D.)
(A) The intent of this Section is to encourage the development of tracts of land
in accordance with an overall development plan by providing flexibility
with respect to dimensional requirements and allowing clustering of
residential units, and to provide for procedures and requirements for multibuilding
residential development. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(B) General Provisions:
(1) A planned development must be in substantial conformity with the
City’s master plans. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
No development with more than one building, with one or more
dwelling units therein, may be erected on a single lot, tract, parcel or
site unless a PD Plan, providing therefore, is approved pursuant to
this Section, or unless the property is subdivided pursuant to City
Subdivision Regulations. Provided all other applicable Municipal
Code provisions are satisfied, this subsection is not intended to
prohibit the issuance of building permits for property that has
obtained:
(a) a PD Plan; or
(b) a Subdivision Preliminary Plat; or
(c) an approved Final Plat.
(2) A minimum of 20% of the gross area of the Planned Development
must be preserved as parks or open space.
(3) The PD Plan must reasonably preserve and protect rural character,
open space, scenic views, drainage areas and other valued resources.
(4) Approval of a Planned Development by the City is purely
discretionary. If the City and the applicant do not agree on all
required conditions and the plan, the City may deny approval, or the
City may unilaterally impose conditions. If the developer does not
accept all conditions, that development must adhere to standard
subdivision and zoning requirements.
(C) Permitted Uses in a PD:
(1) Parks, open space, growing of agricultural crops, golf courses; and
"uses by right" and "conditional uses" in the zone or zones in which
the PD is located shall be permitted when approved as part of the
Planned Development.
(2) Planned Developments in the "RL" zoning district must consider and
reasonably minimize adverse impacts on existing agricultural uses or
other property in the area. (Ord. 2231, 10-15-2009)
(3) Residences may be clustered, including the use of duplexes and
multi-family residences.
(a) Planned Developments containing six (6) or fewer units in a
single building located on any number of lots, may be
approved by following the administrative procedures set forth
in § 4-4-21 (C)(4) of the Official Code of the City of
Montrose, Colorado.
(b) The twenty percent (20%) open space requirement applicable
to Planned Developments shall be optional for those Planned
Developments meeting the standards set forth in subsection
4-4-21 (C)(3)(a) herein.
(c) Developments containing airspace units with undivided
interests in common areas, shall show and describe said
airspace units in three (3) dimensions on the plat thereof.
Developments of this type shall be known as
“Condominiums”, and shall be labeled as such on the plat
thereof.
(d) Developments having zero lot-line setbacks, but containing
non-airspace-only units, may not be required to show said
units in three (3) dimensions on the plat thereof, though
certain party wall details may be required, in the City’s sole
discretion. Developments of this type shall be known as
“Townhomes”, and shall be labeled as such on the plat
thereof. Townhomes shall include the underlying real
property, and shall typically include yard area not
encumbered by limited or general common elements, when
applicable.
(Ord. 2231, 10-15-2009)
(4) Administrative P.D. Procedures:
(a) All lots or tracts are adjacent to a dedicated and accepted
public street; and
(b) The lots are part of a subdivision or P.D. plat that has been
previously approved and/or accepted by the City and recorded
in the Montrose County Records; and
(c) All improvements required by applicable City ordinances and
regulations, including those related to P.D. Plans, are already
in existence and available to serve each lot, or secured; and
(d) No part of the Administrative P.D. has been approved as part
of an Administrative P.D. within three (3) years prior to the
date of submission of the Administrative P.D. plat; and
(e) No material changes to prior restrictions or easements are
proposed; and
(f) Provisions of §§ 4-7-9 (B) through and including (E) shall
apply.
(g) Approval of an Administrative P.D. by the City is purely
discretionary. If the City and the applicant do not agree on all
required conditions and the plan, the City may deny approval,
or the City may unilaterally impose conditions. If the
applicant does not accept all conditions, that development
must adhere to standard subdivision or P.D. requirements, and
proceed through the applicable approval process.
(Ord. 2231, 10-15-2009)
(D) Dimensional Requirements and Densities:
(1) Dimensional requirements, except those relating to overall
residential density, which would otherwise be required by the City
zoning regulations, or other city regulations for the district affected,
may be deviated from in accordance with the plan as approved, if the
Review Board determines that such deviations will promote the
public health, safety and welfare. The Review Board may impose
conditions as necessary or appropriate. The total number of
residential units shall not exceed the area of the site divided by the
minimum lot sizes specified for the zoning districts included.
(E) Review of Sketch, Preliminary and Final PD Plan
(1) The sketch plan, preliminary plan and final PD plans shall be
reviewed pursuant to the procedures and requirements for
subdivisions as set out in Chapters 4-7, except that a hearing shall be
held before the City Council, with notice provided similar to 4-4-
29(D) at the expense of the applicant prior to approval of any
preliminary PD plan or substantial amendment to a PD Plan.
(2) Conditions may be imposed as appropriate to assure that the PD plan
is consistent with the City’ s master plans and promotes the public
health, safety and welfare.
(3) The plan shall show the location, size, number of dwelling units, and
other uses, and shall further set out the location of all parks, open
space, parking areas, streets, sidewalks, trails, bike paths and other
improvements and structures. All information necessary to show
compliance with the requirements of this Section shall be submitted.
Where appropriate, in lieu of exact locations, numbers and sizes,
parameters or limits may be set out.
(4) The Planned Development Plan as approved shall be recorded.
(5) The final PD plan may be treated as a vested right if and only if the
following procedures are met:
(a) A landowner seeking to have the PD plan vested shall submit
a written application to the City requesting that the final PD
plan be vested in terms of the rights relative to the type and
intensity of usage thereof. The application for review and
approval of the PD plan for the purpose of vesting the
property may only be submitted and received by the City
subsequent to the City approval of the preliminary plat
concerning that same subdivision.
(b) If the requirements for the PD plan are otherwise met in
accordance with all applicable City regulations and
specifications, approval of the PD plan shall be deemed to
create a vested right in said plan which shall be subject to the
provisions and limitations of C.R.S. §§24-68-103, 104 and
105, as may be amended from time to time. For purposes of
these provisions, PD plan shall mean the same as a "site
specific development plan" as defined in the aforementioned
statutes.
(c) Vested rights shall include only the final PD plan as
approved, and shall not include the sketch plan or preliminary
plat thereof, architectural plans, construction plans, variances,
conditional uses, public utility filings and other related
documents.
(F) Required Improvements:
(1) All PD’ s shall provide the same improvements as required for
subdivisions in Chapter 4-7, and security therefore shall be provided
as set out in Section 4-7-8.
(2) All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standard
City design and construction specifications and standards, in
substantial conformity with the PD plan, and in accordance with
subdivision design standards as set out in Section 4-7 except as
modified by the plan.
(3) An entity shall be established or provided for ownership and
maintenance of all facilities and open spaces, which are approved for
common ownership or not dedicated to the City.
(4) Flexibility in the scope and design of required improvements and
design standards may be allowed to provide for innovative urban
design which promotes the public health, safety and welfare. A
public street shall be dedicated to the City and developed at the
Developer’s cost to provide direct access to each building with
residential units or to the parking lot serving the building.
(5) Enforcement and Amendments:
(a) The PD plan may be enforced in accordance with or in the
same manner as the provisions of the Planned United
Development Act of 1972, as amended, C.R.S. 1973, 24-67-
101, et seq. as amended or in any lawful manner. In addition,
no occupancy permit shall be issued for any building unless
all site improvements to serve that unit and any commonly
owned facilities have been completed and approved unless
security for completion is provided substantially similar to the
security required for subdivision improvements by Section 4-
7-8 of the City’s subdivision regulations, except that cash
must be placed in the escrow account prior to issuance of the
occupancy permit.
(b) Amended PD plans may be submitted for review and
approval in the same manner as the initial PD Plan.
(Ord. 1853, Amended, 06/27/2001)
4-4-22: SIGN REGULATIONS
(A) Purpose and Intent (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007):
(1) It is the purpose of this Section to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable,
consistent and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements.
The provisions in this Section are intended to:
(a) Enable the identification of places of residence and business.
(b) Allow for the communication of information necessary for
the conduct of commerce.
(c) Lessen hazardous situations, confusion and visual clutter
caused by proliferation, improper placement, illumination,
animation and excessive height, area and bulk of signs which
compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(d) Enhance the attractiveness and economic well-being of the
city as a place to live, vacation and conduct business.
(e) Protect the public from the dangers of unsafe signs.
(f) Permit signs that are compatible with their surroundings and
aid orientation, and preclude placement of signs in a manner
that conceals or obstructs adjacent land uses or signs.
(g) Encourage signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in
which they are located.
(h) Curtail the size and number of signs and sign messages to the
minimum reasonably necessary to identify a residential or
business location and the nature of any such business.
(i) Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot and
building on which the sign is to be placed or to which it
pertains.
(j) Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted
use of the site or adjoining sites.
(k) Regulate signs in a manner so as to not interfere with,
obstruct vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or
pedestrians.
(l) Preserve and enhance the natural and scenic characteristics of
this historic mountain community.
(2) On private property and traditional public fora, subject to the land
owner's consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be
substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message
or any duly permitted or allowed noncommercial message; provided,
that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without
consideration of message content. A noncommercial substitution of
message may be made without any additional approval or
permitting; a commercial substitution of message shall require
approval and permitting as set forth herein. This provision prevails
over any more specific provision to the contrary within this chapter.
The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring
of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of
any particular noncommercial message over any other
noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to
increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, nor does it affect
the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly
permitted. This provision shall not be construed to allow
commercial offsite signage, except when otherwise permitted herein;
the distinction between offsite and onsite signage is applicable only
to commercial messages.
(3) If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence,
phrase, clause, term, or word of this Section and/or any other
provisions are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the
declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of any other prohibition herein, including those
provisions related to offsite signage, and the provisions related to
coordinated sign plans, as contained herein.
(B) Definitions:
ALLEY SIGN: A secondary sign located at the rear of the building, facing
from an alley.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign or part of a sign which changes, or appears to
change, physical position by any movement or rotation,
including search lights, streamers, balloons, inflatable
signs and figures, and air or wind-driven signs.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
BULLETIN BOARD
SIGNS: A sign used for the purpose of notification to the public of
an event or occurrence of public interest such as a church
service, school activity, political rally, civic meeting or
other similar event.
CANOPY or
HANGING SIGN: A sign suspended from a permanent roofed structure.
Canopy or hanging signs are allowed in all zones.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
CONSTRUCTION
SIGN: Signs intended to meet the requirements of a construction
project, to identify the activity and contractor during the
construction period and/or meet contractual requirements
as specified for safety or by a regulating agency.
DISPENSER TYPE
DISPLAY: A facility whose primary purpose is to dispense goods and
products including gas pumps, beverage, candy or ice
machines, wiper blades, motor oil displays or similar
products.
ELECTRIC SIGN: Any sign containing electrical wiring, or including signs
illuminated by an exterior light source.
ELECTRONIC
READER BOARD: Any sign that displays text over a fixed background by
digital or electronic means.
(Ord. 2265, 02/15/2011)
ELECTRONIC SIGN: Any sign that contains a digital or electronic display that
can be changed, similar to a computer or television
screen.
(Ord. 2265, 02/15/2011)
FLASHING SIGN: Any illuminated sign, either stationary or animated, which
exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects
by any means whatsoever.
FREE STANDING
SIGN: A non-movable sign which is entirely supported by one or
more uprights, poles, braces, or base in or upon the
ground. Free standing signs are allowed in all zones.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
HOME OCCUPATION
SIGN: A sign intended to advertise a home occupation.
PORTABLE SIGN: Signs designed to be physically moved and changed
periodically to attract attention to a special circumstance,
price or sale situation.
PRIMARY SIGN: A sign related to or facing on a public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
PRINCIPAL STREET
FRONTAGE: The street or frontage with the highest functional
classification under the most current version of the City’s
comprehensive or master plan. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign (other than a wall sign) which projects from and is
supported by a wall of a building. Projecting signs are
allowed only within commercial zones.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign on the offered property which advertises the sale,
rental or lease of the premises upon which said signs are
located and are located entirely within the property lines
of the affected property.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon or constructed directly over any part
of the roof or parapet of a building whether or not actually
attached to the roof.
SIGN: An object or device which is used for the primary purpose
of conveying a message by means of letters, numbers,
figures, symbols, colors or other similar medium. The
sign definition shall exclude on premise directional signs
used for the sole purpose of providing information related
to access to the premise, house numbers, and any signs
which are required by local, State or Federal laws, so long
as the City determines that the intent of this Section is
maintained. Signs merely describing a secondary
commercial use or business within a structure shall not be
considered directional signs. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
SIGN AREA: (1) The area of signs with regular geometric shapes shall be
measured using standard mathematical formulas. Regular
geometric shapes shall include, but not be limited to,
squares, rectangles, triangles, parallelograms, circles, or
combinations thereof.
(2) The area of signs with irregular shapes or of individual
letter signs shall be the entire area within a single
continuous perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight
lines enclosing the extreme limits of the sign.
(3) The total measured area of a sign shall include the area of
all writing, representation, lines, emblems or figures
contained within all modules, together with any air space,
material or color, forming an integral part or background
of the display if used to differentiate such sign from the
backdrop or structure against which it is placed.
(4) For projecting signs, as defined herein, the total surface
area of all sign faces shall be counted and considered to be
part of the maximum total sign area allowance. On all
signs other than projecting signs, the sign area shall be
figured on one side only.
(5) The area of all freestanding signs shall include the area of
the sign face(s) as calculated in subsections (1) through (4)
above, together with any portion of the sign structure
which exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the area of the sign
face(s). The intent of this subsection is to encourage
architectural decoration, ornamentation, or embellishment
without deducting from the allowed sign area.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
SECONDARY SIGN: A sign on a public right-of-way or alley in addition to the
primary sign. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display
constructed of cloth, cardboard, wallboard, or other light
materials, with or without frames.
VEHICLE: “Vehicle” means any device which is capable of moving
itself, or of being moved, from place to place upon wheels
or endless tracks. “Vehicle” includes any bicycle, but
such term does not include any wheelchair, or any device
moved by muscular power or moved exclusively over
stationary rails or tracks or designed to move primarily
through the air. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
VEHICLE-MOUNTED
SIGNS: Any sign affixed to or mounted upon any type of Vehicle,
as the term “Vehicle” is defined herein.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached to or erected with the exposed face of
the sign parallel to the wall of a building or structure.
Wall signs are allowed in all zones.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
WINDOW SIGN: A temporary or permanent sign attached to the window of
a building.
(C) General Provisions:
(1) All allowed signs, except window and portable signs, real estate and
construction signs up to six (6) square feet, and dispenser type
displays, shall require a sign permit, on forms acceptable to the City,
issued by the City Manager or its designee following the same
procedure as a building permit, and with administrative fees as set
forth in the City of Montrose Regulation Manual. Said permits shall
include an elevation drawing of all proposed and existing signs, and
a plot plan showing the proposed location of the subject sign(s) on
the permittee’s property. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(2) Off premise signs not included within a coordinated sign plan are not
allowed, except signs within the boundary of a new subdivision,
until less than ten (10) percent of the lots remain for initial sale;
otherwise, signs shall identify or advertise only that activity
conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located, except the
following which shall be permitted with approval of City Council
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007):
(a) Collective identification or directory signs for churches and
service clubs;
(b) Official City-owned and maintained directional signs for
public facilities (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007);
(c) Signs for placement upon baseball outfield fences which meet
the following criteria:
(i) such signs shall be erected only for the length of the
baseball season;
(ii) such signs shall be uniform in size and material, and in
all cases shall not extend above the height of the fence;
(iii) such signs shall be securely fastened, constructed and
maintained in a manner to prevent damage from
the natural elements;
(iv) such signs shall be located only upon fences
circumjacent to playing fields, facing infield, and in
such a manner so as to minimize visual impact outside
of the baseball park facilities; and
(v) such signs shall be permitted for the sole purpose of
generating funds for non-profit youth sports groups,
but in all cases the overall aesthetics of the baseball
park and the surrounding area will be a significant
consideration.
(3) No sign shall be located so that the safety of a moving vehicle or
pedestrian will be impaired by obscuring their vision or obstructing
their travel.
(4) The color or format shall not resemble or conflict with traffic signs
or signals, as shown or described by the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD), as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(5) All signs must be maintained in good repair.
(6) Illumination of signs shall be arranged to reflect away from
residential properties and shall otherwise comply with Chapter 4-13.
(Ord. 1924, 12-05-2002)
(7) This Section is not intended to control or limit appropriate seasonal
decorations which do not constitute a public nuisance or hazard.
(8) Dispenser type displays such as soft drink machines, gasoline
pumps, tire displays and ice machines, with information printed by
the manufacturer on the dispenser shall be permitted, provided the
City determines they are not detrimental to the general appearance
and character of the area.
(9) (Reserved for future use - Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(10) (Reserved for future use - Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(11) Existing signs on nonconforming uses may be permitted to continue
for as long as the nonconforming use exists, but may not be extended
or altered in any way.
(D) Special Requirements:
(1) No rotating, flashing, roof, or animated signs shall be permitted.
(2) Time and temperature signs shall be permitted in all commercial and
industrial zoning districts. Electronic reader boards and electronic
signs, and any portion of the sign face thereof may be changed no
more frequently than once every five (5) minutes. Non-electronic
changeable signs shall not be changed more often than once every
five (5) minutes. Use of electronic reader boards and electronic
signs shall be limited to the “B2” and “B3” zoning districts, and said
signs shall be no larger than forty-eight (48) square feet. The City
may inspect the settings for electronic reader boards and electronic
signs at any time during business hours for the business operating
the sign, to determine compliance with these provisions.
(a) The burden shall be upon the applicant for a sign permit to
prove compliance with applicable provisions of the City’s
outdoor lighting ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 2265, 02/15/2011)
(3) (Reserved for future use - Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(4) A window sign shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
window surface.
(5) Window and electric signs shall only be permitted in commercial
and industrial zones, except that a sign may be permitted in the
window to temporarily advertise property for sale or rent.
(6) Temporary signs and banners, shall be permitted in all nonresidential
zoning districts for a maximum of fourteen (14) days at a
time, but for no more than a total of one hundred and eighty (180)
days per calendar year; each time a temporary sign is displayed, the
display time shall be calculated as fourteen (14) days, regardless of
the actual duration of said sign’s display. The area of a temporary
sign shall not be included in the maximum permitted sign area.
Temporary signs shall be no larger than sixty-four (64) square feet in
size. Temporary signs shall be subject to the same height limitations
as permanent signs. (Ord. 2219, 04-02-2009)
(a) Temporary signs and signs subject to a Special Event sign
permit may be allowed in locations which will not cause
unreasonable annoyance or inconvenience to adjoining
property owners or other persons in the area, and on such
conditions as deemed necessary to protect adjoining premises
and the public. The permittee shall remove any temporary or
Special Event signs erected, on or before the expiration date
of the permit. (Ord. 2219, 04-02-2009)
(b) All temporary signs shall require a permit on forms
acceptable to the City, issued subject to the provisions of
Section 4-4-21 (C)(1), herein. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(c) Festivals, fairs, markets, commercial or non-commercial
sales, and public events shall obtain a Special Event sign
permit for all signage, and shall be exempt from the
temporary sign limitations, provided said festival, fair,
market, commercial or non-commercial sale or event is open
for public use no more than ninety-six (96) consecutive hours,
or four (4) calendar days (including those times when the
festival, fair, market, commercial or non-commercial sale or
event is not in actual operation). The sign face area of
Special Event signs shall not be included in the maximum
permitted sign area. All signage related to the festival, fair,
market commercial or non-commercial sale or event shall be
promptly removed at the conclusion thereof.
(Ord. 2219, 04-02-2009)
(i) Festivals, fairs, markets, commercial or noncommercial
sales, and public events may obtain
Special Event sign permits up to twelve (12) times per
calendar year; said permits may run consecutively.
Balloons, streamers, flags and pennants may be
allowed up to the maximum height of a freestanding
sign allowed in the zone in which the event is located.
All balloons of any shape must fit within a three-foot
cube (3’ high x 3’ deep x 3’ wide). Human-held and
human-powered signs, and live costumed advertisers
or performers shall also be allowed; all other animated
signs not listed specifically in this paragraph shall be
prohibited. All signage subject to a Special Event sign
permit shall be on-premise. (Ord. 2219, 04-02-2009)
(d) Temporary signs not maintained in good condition, including
but not limited to those that have faded, torn, become tattered,
droopy, or un-tethered, shall be removed by the permittee.
Temporary signs not maintained in good condition shall be
considered a nuisance, and may be abated by the City in
accordance with the City’s nuisance abatement procedures.
The City’s sight triangle requirements shall apply to
temporary signs, and all signs used pursuant to a Special
Event sign permit. (Ord. 2219, 04-02-2009)
(7) One (1) portable sign per business or use may be erected without a
City sign permit in all commercial zones, not to exceed sixteen (16)
square feet in sign area and four (4) feet in height, in addition to the
maximum sign area permitted as indicated in the tabulated
provisions of this Section. The permittee shall be required to obtain
additional permits from other agencies, if required by law. Such
signage shall not create a nuisance; nuisances created by such signs
may be abated in accordance with the City’s nuisance laws.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(a) In the “B-1” zone only, said portable signs may be placed
upon the City sidewalk abutting a business, so long as the
sign does not create a traffic or other safety hazard, or
unreasonably impede pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk, and
conforms substantially to guidelines developed by the
applicable retail merchants’ association or downtown
merchants’ association for such signs, if any; responsibility
for enforcement of said retail merchants’ guidelines shall not
be upon the City. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(8) Development Identification Signs: developments, including
subdivisions, planned developments, multi-family dwelling
complexes, mobile home parks, and industrial parks, may have a
total of two (2) signs. The sign message shall be limited to
identifying the development. The total sign area of the two (2) signs
taken together shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet. No part of
either sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in height. Such signs are not
allowed upon any City property, including public rights-of-way.
The signs shall be kept in good repair by the sign owner or owner of
the appurtenant property. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(9) The permanent sign base of a freestanding sign shall have an
aggregate width of at least forty percent (40%) of the width of the
sign cabinet or face. All supporting structures of a freestanding sign
shall match the primary finish and colors of the associated
building(s). (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(a) One freestanding sign shall be permitted per multi-tenant lot
or parcel. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(b) One hundred and fifty (150) square feet of landscaping shall
be required around the base of any freestanding sign located
within fifty (50) feet of a public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(c) Permanent freestanding signs twelve (12) feet or lower in
total height shall be exempt from the forty percent (40%) base
width requirements set forth in this Section, provided that the
sign shall have a sign face area not to exceed forty (40)
square feet per sign face. (Ord. 2219, 04-02-2009)
(10) (Reserved for future use.) (Rep. by Ord. 1238, 5-3-84)
(11) If a business has more than one frontage on streets and alleys, it
may have one additional wall sign not to exceed twelve (12) square
feet on each of the secondary frontages.
(12) The maximum sign area and number of signs allowed by the table
contained in the tabulated provisions of this Section shall apply to a
lot or parcel which has more than one (1) separately owned or
operated business or function thereon. The allowable sign area shall
be computed based upon the linear feet of principal street frontage.
The total allowable sign area may be apportioned by the owner or
landlord of said lot or parcel to each of the businesses or functions
on the lot or parcel, which may each then have one (1) separate
primary sign. The total area of such signs with respect to such lot or
parcel shall be limited to the maximum set forth in the tabulated
provisions of this Section. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(a) One freestanding sign shall be allowed per lot or parcel, as set
forth in subsection (D)(9) herein; the area of any freestanding
signage shall be counted toward the maximum allowed
signage area. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(13) Sight triangle provisions: for traffic safety reasons, whenever
practicable, a fifteen foot (15’) minimum setback shall apply to all
freestanding signs in all zoning districts, except “B-1”.
(Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(14) A construction sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area, and shall be removed after substantial completion of the
project. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(15) A real estate sign may be erected without a permit on the lot or
parcel which is for sale or rent. Such sign must be removed within
ten (10) days after the closing of the sale or completion of the
transaction which it concerned. Such sign shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in area. Real estate signs exceeding six (6) square feet in
area shall require a sign permit, and shall be issued in accordance
with any applicable provisions of the Official Municipal Code of the
City of Montrose, or any applicable Federal, State or local laws or
regulations. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(16) A projecting sign shall be a minimum height of nine feet (9') above
ground level. A projecting sign shall not extend more than five feet
(5') over the public right-of-way, and it shall not be higher than the
roofline of the building at the point where it is attached. An
encroachment permit on forms acceptable to the City, as set forth in
Chapter 9-8 herein, shall be required for signs projecting over Cityowned
rights-of-way. Other agencies may have requirements in
addition to those set forth herein. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(17) For an applicant to obtain primary signage beyond two (2) primary
signs, a Coordinated Sign Plan shall be submitted as set forth in
Section 4-4-22(F)(2), et seq. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(18) (Reserved for future use - Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(19) The maximum sign area permitted per business or function present
upon a single lot or parcel shall be as specified in the table contained
in the tabulated provisions of this Section. Where the maximum
sign area is based upon a computation determined by the linear feet
of principal street frontage, the allowed maximum shall be applied to
the entire lot or parcel, regardless of the number of businesses or
functions thereon, in accordance with the provisions of subsection
12 of this Section. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(20) All vehicle-mounted signs shall be permanently affixed, painted,
magnetically applied or otherwise mounted upon a vehicle and shall
not project more than eighteen (18) inches above the surface to
which they are attached; and any sign which is mounted upon the
roof, hood or trunk of a vehicle and which projects above such
surface upon which it is mounted shall not exceed two (2) square
feet in area per face. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
(a) No sign shall be placed or erected in the bed of a truck or on
the deck of a trailer or a truck, except for traffic control, as
approved by the City.
(b) The primary purpose of any vehicle upon which a vehiclemounted
sign is affixed must be to serve a useful function in
the transportation or conveyance of persons, services or
commodities from one (1) place to another, including
transportation to and from work, and such intermittent delays
and stops as are customary in the routine conduct of the
business or activity for which the transportation or
conveyance occurs. (Ord. 2219, 04-02-2009)
(c) No vehicle upon which a vehicle-mounted sign is affixed may
be parked on any lot for the primary purpose of directing or
attracting the attention of the public to a building, institution,
product, organization, event or location offered or existing
elsewhere than upon the same lot where such vehicle is
parked.
(d) Banners displayed on vehicles shall be subject to the
provisions contained in Section 4-4-22 (D)(6).
(e) Vehicle-mounted signs used in connection with a special
event are exempted from the requirements of this Section
during the term of the special event only. Upon the
conclusion of the special event, such signs must either be
dismantled, moved to a location where the sign is not visible
from public rights-of-way or made to comply with the
provisions of this Section. For the purposes of this subsection,
the term special event shall mean a parade, circus, fair,
carnival, festival or other similar event that is intended to or
likely to attract substantial numbers of persons and is
different in character from the customary or usual activities
generally associated with the property upon which the special
event is to occur.
(f) This Section shall not apply to signs that are being transported
for installation.
(E) Non-conforming Signs:
(1) The following non-conforming signs may continue to be used and
maintained only in accordance with and subject to the limitations,
criteria and requirements of this subsection:
(a) Signs which were lawfully erected and maintained prior to
January 17, 1974, in accordance with prior existing City
Ordinances and have since been maintained as legally nonconforming
signs in accordance with City regulations;
(b) Signs which were or are lawfully erected and maintained
under applicable existing Federal, State and County
regulations prior to and at the time of annexation to the City
and which have been or are maintained as legally nonconforming
signs in accordance with City regulations
thereafter; and
(c) Signs which were or are lawfully erected and maintained in
accordance with City sign regulations in effect at the time of
their erection, but which became or become non-conforming
on account of subsequent amendment to the City sign
regulations.
(2) Signs which are non-conforming in the following respects shall not
be permitted and shall be brought into conformity immediately, or
upon annexation, notwithstanding any other provision of this
subsection.
(a) Any rotating, flashing or animated sign.
(b) Any sign which was erected in violation of the requirements
of applicable Federal, State, County or City regulations in
effect at the time of erection.
(c) Any sign which creates a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular
traffic by creating sight barriers, by having a color or format
which resembles or conflicts with traffic control devices, or
otherwise.
(d) Any sign which is not maintained in reasonably good repair
or which creates a safety hazard to persons or property.
(e) Any sign which creates a public or private nuisance.
(3) Signs which where lawfully non-conforming on February 1, 1984 or
upon annexation subsequent thereto may be used and maintained
only substantially as such sign existed on February 1, 1984 or the
date of annexation. No material change or alteration may be made
which increases the nonconformity, or which alters the size or the
message of the sign; provided, however, ordinary maintenance of the
sign is permitted.
(4) The right provided herein to maintain a nonconforming sign shall be
terminated and the sign removed or brought into compliance with
these regulations along with any other signs related to the same
business under the following conditions:
(a) Abandonment of the sign, abandonment or termination of the
related business, or an interruption in continuance of the
related business for a period of ninety (90) days.
(b) A change in the name of the business or change in the sign
message.
(c) A violation of any provision of this Section by the owner or
party in lawful possession of the sign. The destruction of the
sign, or damage to the sign such that the cost of repair is
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the
sign.
(d) The creation of any condition specified in subsection 4-4-
22(E)2. (Ord. 1229, 2-3-84)
(F) Coordinated Sign Plan Regulations (Ord. 2155, 3-15-2007)
(1) General Provisions:
(a) The intent of this Section is to encourage the placement of
signs on tracts of land in accordance with an overall plan for
signage by providing flexibility with respect to placement and
location requirements, and to provide uniform procedures and
requirements for multibuilding developments.
(b) Property owners who wish to avail themselves of the special
provisions contained in this Section may elect to do so in their
discretion, and in accord with the provisions set forth herein.
This Section shall be supplementary to the Montrose
Municipal Code and the Sign Regulations therein contained;
when applicable, and more specific than the foregoing, the
following regulations shall control.
(i) Approval of a Coordinated Sign Plan by the City is
purely discretionary. If the City and the applicant do
not agree on all required conditions and the plan, the
City may deny approval, or the City may unilaterally
impose conditions. If the applicant does not accept all
conditions, that development must adhere to standard
signage requirements.
(c) Approved Coordinated Sign Plan documentation shall be
retained on the same record retention schedule as approved
site plans.
(d) As a condition precedent for a Coordinated Sign Plan to
become effective, a declaration of covenants running with the
land shall be executed by all landowners taking part in the
Coordinated Sign Plan. Said declaration of covenants shall
be similar in form and substance to those declarations used by
the City for approved site plans, and shall be on forms
acceptable to the City.
(2) Coordinated Sign Plan Procedures:
(a) A Coordinated Sign Plan is required prior to the issuance of a
Sign Permit for signs specified in this Section 4-4-22 (F) or as
otherwise required herein to determine overall sign locations
on a property, the relationship of the signs to surrounding
existing, and proposed future improvements, and to determine
consistency and uniformity among buildings and signs within
a Coordinated Sign Plan. The Coordinated Sign Plan shall be
submitted to the City for review and approval.
(b) Coordinated Sign Plan Area – Prior to City consideration of a
Coordinated Sign Plan, all property owners located within the
physical limits of a Coordinated Sign Plan shall submit to the
City notarized letters on forms acceptable to the City
authorizing the creation of the Coordinated Sign Plan.
Different areas subject to Coordinated Sign Plans shall not
overlap one another nor be adjacent to one another other than
at the legal boundary of a lot.
(i) A Coordinated Sign Plan shall consist of multiple legal
divisions of real property which were depicted on the
same final plat or site plan, and be united through:
1. common building architecture, building color,
building materials and landscaping; or
2. existing shared parking; or
3. existing shared infrastructure exclusively
serving the entire proposed area subject to the
Coordinated Sign Plan.
(c) A Coordinated Sign Plan shall contain the following
information:
(i) Elevations of the signs illustrating the materials of
construction, colors, lighting, fonts of letters, and
dimensions of the signs. If the sign is to be attached to
a building, the elevation shall be a composite of the
sign and the building; and
(ii) Elevations depicting the size of the signs in relation to
the size of the buildings within the development; and
(iii) A site plan showing dimensions, parking lot details
and traffic movement within said parking lot,
landscaping, and details of all permanent structures in
the site. Said site plan shall illustrate the location of
existing and proposed signs on the property and, if
required by City staff, on adjacent properties; and
(iv) Other information to illustrate the consistency and
uniformity of the signs; and
(d) A Coordinated Sign Plan required to erect signs specified in
this Section 4-4-22 (F) or as otherwise required herein shall
be submitted to the City. The Coordinated Sign Plan will be
reviewed in accordance with applicable provisions of the
Montrose Municipal Code, the Montrose Regulations
Manual, and Codes adopted by the City by reference, and
considered for approval by City staff.
(i) An administrative denial of a Coordinated Sign Plan
may be reviewed as set forth in Section 4-4-29 of the
Montrose Municipal Code; in the case of a request for
a deviation from quantity, design, size, or setback
regulations, the Review Board’s analysis shall be in
accord with the Sign Variance criteria set forth in
Section 4-4-26 of the Montrose Municipal Code.
(e) No variance shall be granted from a previously approved
Coordinated Sign Plan; changes may only be made by the
submission of a new or amended Coordinated Sign Plan to
the City.
(f) In the case of any submission of a new or amended
Coordinated Sign Plan, the fees shall be as set forth in Section
3-1-1 of the Montrose Regulations Manual.
(g) Staff shall have discretion to require any applicant to submit
all new plans and materials as required by these regulations
for all amendments to previously approved Coordinated Sign
Plans.
(3) Allowed Signs: The following signs are allowed within the
Coordinated Sign Plan:
(a) Individual Monument Sign (“IM”) – A sign supported from
the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to
have a solid and opaque base and used to identify tenants or
name of a business or businesses located within a
Coordinated Sign Plan, or on a separately platted lot within a
Coordinated Sign Plan on non-residential zoned property,
subject to the following conditions:
(i) Time – A Sign Permit is required. A Sign Permit shall
not be issued to erect, install or place an IM on a
property until a site plan and/or final plat has been
approved by the City for development of the property,
and after the issuance of a building permit for a
building on the property. A Coordinated Sign Plan
must be approved prior to approval of any IM.
(ii) Place – IMs are permitted in non-residential zoning
districts and on a lot containing an apartment complex,
daycare facility, school, community center, amenity
center, or religious facility. An IM is permitted on the
same lot as a Group Monument Sign (“GM”). The
minimum front yard setback for an IM is fifteen (15)
feet from the property line. The minimum side and rear
setback from the property line shall be equal to the
height of the IM. Placement is limited to one (1) IM
per approved public access point into the parcel,
provided said access point is adjacent to an
intersecting roadway on the outside perimeter of a
parcel; placement is also limited to within fifty (50)
feet of the centerline of the access point.
(iii) Manner–
1. The design, materials, and finish of an IM shall
match those of the buildings on the same lot.
All IMs shall comply with the dimensional
requirements as set forth in Section 4-4-22 (F)
of the Montrose Municipal Code.
2. IMs constructed in conjunction with GMs and
Directional, Directory and Menu Signs
(“DDM”s) shall be consistent with the building
elements and materials of GMs within the
Coordinated Sign Plan, and DDMs on the same
lot and within the Coordinated Sign Plan.
Architectural embellishments are also
encouraged and may be considered through the
review of a Coordinated Sign Plan.
3. A lot is allowed a maximum of one (1) IM per
street frontage.
4. The maximum area of an IM is sixty (60)
square feet.
5. The maximum height of an IM is eight (8) feet.
6. Exceptions in maximum height and area may be
considered through the review of a staff denial
of a Coordinated Sign Plan.
(b) Directional, Directory, And Menu Signs (“DDM”) – A DDM
is a sign that is supported from the grade to the bottom of the
sign having, or appearing to have, a solid base and generally
used for one of the following purposes: a directory sign is
intended to identify multiple businesses within a defined area
or building; a directional sign is intended to assist in vehicular
navigation through a Coordinated Sign Plan; a menu board is
a sign commonly used at drive-through restaurants. A DDM
is permissible on non-residential zoned property subject to the
following conditions:
(i) Time- A Sign Permit is required. A Sign Permit shall
not be issued to erect, install or place a DDM on a
property until a site plan and/or final plat has been
approved by the City for development of the property
and after the issuance of a building permit for a
building on the property. A Coordinated Sign Plan
must be approved prior to approval of any DDM.
(ii) Place – A DDM is permitted only in conjunction with
a non-residential use or in a nonresidential zoning
district. Minimum front and side yard setback is
twenty-five (25) feet from the property line.
(iii) Manner–
1. The design, materials, and finish of DDMs shall
match those of the buildings on the same lot.
DDMs constructed in conjunction with GMs
and/or IMs shall be consistent with the building
elements and materials of the GMs and IMs
within the Coordinated Sign Plan.
2. The maximum dimensions of a DDM shall be
as follows:
a. Menu Boards: seven (7) feet high; thirtyfive
(35) square feet total sign area.
Menu boards are exempt from the DDM
setback requirements, so long as they are
not designed to be readable from any
street frontage.
b. Directory Signs: four (4) feet high;
twelve square feet total sign area.
c. Directional Signs: thirty (30) inches high
or less; six (6) square feet total sign area.
3. Exceptions in maximum height and area may be
considered through the review of a staff denial
of a Coordinated Sign Plan.
(c) Group Monument Sign (“GM”) – A GM is a sign that is
supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having, or
appearing to have, a solid base and is used to identify
multiple tenants within a Coordinated Sign Plan. A GM is
permissible on non-residential zoned property subject to the
following conditions:
(i) Time – A Sign Permit is required. A Sign Permit shall
not be issued to erect, install or place a GM on a
property until a site plan and/or final plat has been
approved by the City for development of the property,
and after the issuance of a building permit for a
building on the property. A Coordinated Sign Plan
must be approved prior to approval of any GM.
(ii) Place –
1. A GM shall be located within a Coordinated
Sign Plan.
2. A GM is permitted on the same lot as an IM,
but the total number of GMs and IMs located
within a Coordinated Sign Plan shall generally
not exceed the number of lots located within the
Coordinated Sign Plan.
3. The minimum front setback for a GM is fifteen
(15) feet from the perimeter of the Coordinated
Sign Plan area.
4. No minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks
are required for a GM, but a GM shall not be
located closer than seventy-five (75) feet to
another GM or an IM.
5. For GM signs, only those properties and
businesses included within the Coordinated
Sign Plan shall be included or identified on the
GMs.
(iii) Manner–
1. A GM shall be constructed of materials and
with a design consistent with the buildings
located on the Coordinated Sign Plan.
2. The maximum area of a GM shall be based on
the size of the Coordinated Sign Plan. The
maximum area of a GM for a Coordinated Sign
Plan of five (5) acres or less is sixty (60) square
feet. For every whole acre over five (5) acres,
the area of the GM may be increased by twelve
(12) square feet with the maximum area of a
GM being one hundred forty-four (144) square
feet.
3. The maximum height of a GM is sixteen (16)
feet.
4. Architectural embellishments for GMs are
encouraged. Exceptions in maximum height and
area may be considered through the review of a
Staff denial of a Coordinated Sign Plan.
5. One (1) GM is permitted per street frontage of
the Coordinated Sign Plan. One (1) additional
GM is permitted along a street for each
additional seven hundred-fifty (750) linear feet,
or portion thereof, of street frontage that
exceeds seven hundred-fifty (750) linear feet of
street frontage.
(d) Wall Signs – A Wall Sign is any sign attached to or erected
with the exposed face of the sign parallel to the wall of a
building or structure, for which the sign allowance shall be
calculated on the basis of the area of the one (1) building
façade that is most nearly parallel to the street that it faces.
Each building façade, which faces a dedicated public street,
shall have its own separate and distinct sign allowance. The
total sign allowance, or any percentage thereof, may be
transferred to a façade that has no frontage on a dedicated
public street. Projecting signs shall also be permitted. Wall
Signs shall be permitted within a Coordinated Sign Plan on
non-residential zoned property subject to the following
conditions:
(i) Time – A Sign Permit is required. A Sign Permit shall
not be issued to erect, install or place a Wall Sign on a
property until a site plan and/or final plat has been
approved by the City for development of the property
and after the issuance of a building permit for a
building on the property. A Coordinated Sign Plan
must be approved prior to approval of a Wall Sign
under these regulations.
(ii) Place – A Wall Sign shall be located within a
Coordinated Sign Plan.
1. A Wall Sign is permitted on the same lot as an
IM, DDM, or GM.
(iii) Manner –
1. Characteristics: Intended to identify individual
businesses, offices, office buildings, industrial,
technical and employment establishments.
Signs may be either placed flat against the
building or projecting from the building.
2. Maximum Area: one and a half (1.5) square
feet of sign area for each linear foot of building
or tenant frontage, not to exceed two hundred
(200) square feet in area for all types of wall
signs.
3. Maximum Height: May not project above the
roofline of the building to which sign is
attached.
4. Limitation in Number: One (1) sign per
business, per street frontage not to exceed two
(2) frontages, or three (3) frontages with an area
not to exceed the total sign area permitted for
two (2) frontages.
5. Restrictions, Additions, Clarifications and
Exceptions:
a. Projecting signs may not exceed thirty
(30) square feet in area. Projecting signs
may not project over public right of way
or more than five feet (5') from the
building wall.
b. The total length of any individual sign
may not exceed seventy five percent
(75%) of the length of the frontage of the
establishment, storefront or tenant space
on which the sign is placed.
c. Illuminated signs are permitted.
d. Buildings that are primarily office
buildings may have no tenant or user
signs above the first floor with the
exception that building identification
signs may be located above the first
floor.
6. Office Wall Sign. For multi-tenant office
buildings, an office wall sign shall be a
maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet per
sign; the cumulative total of all tenant wall
signs shall not exceed one hundred and twenty
(120) square feet per frontage, and shall
conform to 5.b. and 5.e., above.
7. A building identification wall sign shall be in
conformance with 5.b., above, and shall be no
more than a maximum of thirty-two (32) square
feet.
8. Wall signs may not be located on the rear of
buildings which abut a residential zone district
or use.
(G) Tabulated Provisions: The following tabulated provisions apply with
respect to the zones and uses indicated. (Ord. 2179, 12-20-2007)
Zoning District
Maximum
Number of
Signs
Maximum Square Footage
of Signs Per Lot – All
Signs Combined
Maximum Height of
a Freestanding Sign
Maximum Size of a
Freestanding Sign*
B-1 2 Primary
1 Secondary**
1 ½ ft2 per linear foot of
principal street frontage or
200 ft2, whichever is smaller
20’ Single tenant: 96 ft2
Multi-tenant: 144 ft2
B-1A, B-4 2 Primary
1 Secondary**
1 ½ ft2 per linear foot of
principal street frontage or
200 ft2, whichever is smaller
10’ Single tenant: 96 ft2
Multi-tenant: 144 ft2
B-2, B-2A, B-3 2 Primary
1 Secondary**
1 ½ ft2 per linear foot of
principal street frontage or
300 ft2, whichever is smaller
25’ Single tenant: 96 ft2
Multi-tenant: 144 ft2
I-1, I-2 1 Primary
1 ½ ft2 per linear foot of
principal street frontage or
200 ft2, whichever is smaller
10’ Single tenant: 96 ft2
Multi-tenant: 144 ft2
MR, OR 1 Primary
1 Secondary
Buildings up to and including
5000 ft2: 6 ft2
Buildings over 5000 ft2: 32 ft2
Secondary sign area limited
to 6 ft2
6’
4 ft2 for buildings up
to 5000 ft2
24 ft2 for buildings
over 5000 ft2
RL, R-1, R-1A, R-
1B, R-2, R-3, R-
3A, R-4, R-5, R-6
1 Primary
1 Secondary***
Buildings up to and including
5000 ft2: 4 ft2
Buildings over 5000 ft2: 32 ft2
4’ for buildings up to
5000 ft2
6’ for buildings over
5000 ft2
4 ft2 for buildings up
to 5000 ft2
24 ft2 for buildings
over 5000 ft2
MHR 1 Primary
1 Secondary*** Each sign is limited to 6 ft2 4’ 6 ft2
* Freestanding sign square footage is counted as part of the maximum square footage of signs per lot
** Secondary signs in Commercial zones limited to 12 ft2
*** Secondary signs in Residential zones are only allowed for buildings over 5,000 ft2 and are limited to 6 ft2
4-4-23: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
(A) Home Occupations: Home occupations may be conducted within a
dwelling unit in any district as an accessory use only if the following
criteria are complied with:
(1) An application must be submitted with a fee as set by Resolution and
referred to in the City Regulations Manual. Additionally, a City and
State sales tax licenses must be obtained if sales taxable by the City
or State sales taxes are to be made. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(2) The occupational activity and storage of any items used or sold in
the occupation must be entirely within the dwelling unit. Neither the
occupational activity nor any storage may be conducted within or
utilize any garage, detached buildings, or other place upon the
premises other than the residence itself.
(3) Only the residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home
occupation.
(4) No unreasonable noise, glare, smoke, dust, vibration or odor shall be
observable off of the premises.
(5) The home occupation activity shall not utilize or occupy more than
twenty percent (20%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit.
(Ord. 1077, 5-16-80)
(6) No exterior sign shall be allowed in the RL, R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2,
R-5, R-6 or MHR Districts. Signs in other districts shall comply
with applicable sign regulations. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(7) Off-street parking shall be required for both the residential and the
commercial activity in accordance with the requirements of Section
4-4-20. (Ord. 1077, 5-16-80)
(B) Fence, Hedge, and Wall Regulations:
(1) For all uses in residential districts, fences and free-standing walls
shall not exceed four (4) feet in height when located within the
required front yard setback and six (6) feet elsewhere. (Ord.
1936,02-20-03)
(2) For all uses in commercial and industrial districts, fences and
freestanding walls shall not exceed four (4) feet in height when
located within the required front yard setback and eight (8) feet
elsewhere. An additional two (2) feet shall be allowed for barbed
wire where it meets the requirements of Subsection (5) below.
(Ord. 1936, 2-20-03)
(3) No fence, free-standing wall, hedge or other plantings shall be
located, constructed, or maintained in such a way as to obstruct the
view of abutting streets or intersections by motorists and pedestrians.
(Ord. 1936, 2-20-03)
(4) Electrically charged fences are allowed within the City only if in a
location made inaccessible to persons, who would not know the
fence is electrified, by virtue of another fence or structure.
(5) Barbed wire fences are allowed in industrial and commercial
districts only if the barbed wire is a minimum of eight (8) feet above
the ground. No barbed wire fence may be maintained in other
districts unless necessary to confine livestock lawfully kept within
the City. (Ord. 1236, 5-3-84)
(6) Temporary fences installed to provide security and protection around
a construction site are permitted and need not be in conformance
with the standard height requirements set forth in (1) and (2) above.
(Ord. 1936, 2-20-03)
(7) Chain-link and similar type fencing of open wire material which
does not obstruct views around sports facilities and which is
installed for security and safety, sports play, including, but not
limited to, tennis courts, baseball outfields, backstops, batting cages,
and golf courses are not subject to the height requirements set forth
in (1) and (2) above. (Ord. 1936, 2-20-03)
(C) Screens:
(1) Screening or berming shall be required between a non-residential,
commercial or industrial use located in any zone and an adjacent
residence located in the "MR", "OR" or other residential zoning
Districts, if the residence was in use as a residence prior to the
commencement of the commercial use, and the commercial use will
create or is creating unreasonable noise, dust, odor, emanation of
light or other conditions which are incompatible with the reasonable
enjoyment of the abutting premises as a residence and such
conditions can be ameliorated by the erection of screening. (Ord.
1693, 3-4-99)
(2) The screening or berming shall be of a type and design meeting the
requirements of the City standards, which will provide significant
relief to the affected residence without undue hardship to the
commercial activity. Tall thick hedges may be used in lieu of
artificial screening. (Ord. #1693, 3-4-99)
(D) Canopies and Awnings
(1) No canopy or other permanent structure, other than an awning
unsupported by the ground, or a sign allowed under the provisions of
Section 4-4-22, may project over any public right-of-way, except
one within a "B-1" District which meets the criteria of this
subsection.
(2) A permit shall be obtained for any awning in the B-1 District from
the City.
(3) All awnings shall be a minimum of seven and a half feet (7.5’ )
above the grade of the right-of-way. No awning shall extend to a
point closer than 5 feet from the face of curb of the City right-ofway.
(4) No awning may be installed, permitted or maintained which
interferes with City landscaping, streetscape, lights, signs or other
use of the right-of-way, or extends over an alley right-of-way.
(5) No vested right to maintain an awning extending over or upon the
public right-of-way shall ever be acquired, and the City may require
it to be removed or remove it at any time for any reason in its sole
discretion. (Ord. #1693, 3-4-99)
(E) A building within a subdivision may be utilized as a temporary construction
or sales office for a period up to one year by the developer of that
subdivision during the period of the construction and initial sales
respectively of the building and improvements within the area encompassed
by the preliminary plat for each subdivision. The City may authorize
additional one year periods for use as a construction office if construction is
continuing in the area after the preceding year, or as a sales office if not all
of the houses in the area have been sold during the year preceding. (Ord.
1080, 6-5-80)
(F) It shall be unlawful to maintain, own or operate any offensive or unwhole
some business or establishment within the City, including but not limited to
rendering plants, tanneries, pig sties, feed lots, dairy farms, manufacture
and storage of explosives, sugar beet pulp storage facilities, foundries, or
petroleum product refineries, unless such business was lawfully in
existence at the effective date of this Section, or at the effective date of
annexation subsequent to the effective date of this Section. In either event,
such business or establishment shall be subject to the non-conforming use
regulations of Section 4-4-24 of these regulations, and all other applicable
regulations of the City. (Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
(G) Temporary Use Permits:
(1) The Planning Commission may issue a permit authorizing a
temporary use of premises in a district for a use which is otherwise
not allowed in such a district for a period of up to three (3) months in
accordance with this subsection (G).
(2) The temporary use permit may be issued by the Planning
Commission only after it determines that unusual circumstances
exist, not created by the applicant, such as damage, destruction or
delay in construction of applicants permanent premises, which
results in significant hardship, and that the temporary use will not
unreasonably interfere with the use of other property, or result in any
permanent adverse effects to other property, or create a safety or
health hazard.
(3) The Planning Commission shall hold such hearings concerning the
application and provide such notice thereof as the circumstances
merit in its opinion. The permit may be granted subject to
conditions appropriate to insure compliance with the criteria of this
Section. (Ord. 1095, 8-21-80)
(H) Industrial uses located within the Industrial Zoning Districts may provide
residential dwelling units for certain residential use accessory to the
industrial use providing that the following criteria are met:
(1) The dwelling units must be entirely within a permanent structure on
the premises, which structure is devoted primarily to industrial uses.
(2) The dwelling units may not exceed 10% of the area of the building.
(3) The dwelling units may not only be used by out-of-town business
visitors on a temporary and occasional basis, or by up to three local
employees of the industry who are needed for the purpose of
providing around-the-clock security.
(4) No temporary use permits for a residential use may be in effect,
pursuant to Subsection (G) above for the premises. No temporary
permit for a mobile home or a travel home may be in effect pursuant
to Section 4-12-4 for the premises.
(5) Unit charges for water and sewer taps must be paid pursuant to City
Code Section 3-5-12 for each residential unit.
(I) Manufactured Housing for single family homes is allowed only in the
“MHR”, “R-5”, and “R-6” zoning districts, and manufactured housing for
duplexes is allowed only in the “R-6” zoning district. Manufactured
housing for multiple family residences is allowed only in the “R-6” zoning
district as a conditional use. All of these uses are subject to specified
performance criteria. Manufactured Housing is prohibited elsewhere in the
City except for the following subdivisions which were under development
on July 1, 1998 (Ord. 2047, 03-17-2005):
Rainbow Meadows Subdivision
(Ord. 1670, 9-3-98)
(J) Antenna and Tower Citing (Ordinance 1782, 6-22-2000)
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to protect
residential areas and lands by minimizing adverse impacts of
antennas and towers; to encourage the location of antennas and
towers in nonresidential zone districts; and to minimize the total
number of antennas and towers in the community. In addition, these
provisions are established to encourage the joint use of new and
existing tower locations; to ensure that towers are located in areas
that minimize adverse impacts; to ensure towers and antennas are
configured in a way that minimizes adverse visual impacts by
careful design, appropriate siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques. Further, these provisions are
established to enhance the ability to provide telecommunications
services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; to
protect public health and safety; to avoid damage to adjacent
properties from tower failure through careful engineering and
locating of tower structures; to encourage the attachment of antennas
to existing structures; and to facilitate the provision of
telecommunications services throughout the City.
(2) Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all towers,
antennas, and telecommunication facilities as defined, except any
tower or antenna not more than thirty-five (35) feet in height, and
owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or used exclusively as a receive-only facility. Further, high
tension electric transmission or distribution line support towers used
as mounts for antennas not more than twelve (12) feet in height
above the highest point of the said tower shall be permitted in all
zoned districts and are exempt from the separation requirements
contained in this Section, but shall meet the specific requirements for
telecommunications facilities/telecommunications support facilities
for towers contained in this Section 4-4-23 and in Chapter 3-7 of the
City regulations. Towers, antennas, and telecommunication facilities
shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to the provisions of this
Section and the provisions contained in Chapter 3-7 of the City
regulations and shall not be considered utilities.
(3) Definitions. For the purposes of this Title, the following definitions
shall apply:
(a) “Antenna(s)" shall mean any exterior transmitting or
receiving devices mounted on a tower, building, or structure
and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless
telecommunications signals, or other communication signals,
including, but not limited to antenna used for personal
wireless services as defined in 47 U.S.C. 332 (c)(7).
(b) "Telecommunications facilities" shall mean the plant,
equipment and property, including but not limited to, cables,
wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, towers, alternative
tower structures, electronics and other appurtenances used to
transmit, receive, distribute, promote, or offer
telecommunications services.
(c) "Tower(s)" shall mean any structure designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more
antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers,
or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, and other similar structures.
This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached
to the tower structure.
(d) "Tower height" shall mean, when referring to a tower or
alternative tower structure, the distance measured from the
lowest point within ten (10) feet of the structure to the highest
point on the tower or other alternative tower structure,
including the base pad and any antenna.
(4) Location. Antennas are allowed only as conditional uses in the
"B-2", "B-2A", "B-3" and Industrial Districts subject to the
provisions of Section 4-4-24 herein below and the other applicable
requirements of City ordinances and regulations. Towers are allowed
only as conditional uses in Industrial Districts and the other
applicable requirements of City ordinances and regulations. A
request to locate a tower, antenna, or telecommunication facility is
subject to the provisions of Section 4-4-24 herein below and may be
granted only when the goals contained in Section 4-4-23 (J) (1) are
met and the following conditions as will advance those goals:
(a) Moving the location of the tower or antenna to a more
appropriate available site;
(b) Using a different technology that will lessen the impact of the
tower or antenna;
(c) Requiring an appropriate alternative tower structure;
(d) Other actions designed to disguise or otherwise lessen the
impact of the tower.
(5) Application and Review Procedures.
(a) Application. Each and every application for a tower shall be
submitted to the City Planning Department and shall include
all of the following:
(i) The first application for a permit by a provider shall
include a complete inventory of the provider's existing
towers, antennas, or site approved for towers or
antennas, that are either within the City or within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the City's urban growth
boundary and the provider shall also comply with the
inventory and tracking requirement of this Section.
(ii) The identification of its backhaul providers, updated
on at least an annual basis, and the method of
providing backhaul, wired or wireless.
(iii) A vicinity map drawn to scale showing adjacent land
uses that require separation and zoning within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the City's urban growth
boundary.
(iv) Upon the request of the Planning Department, the City
Council or their designees, the telecommunications
provider shall meet with and provide the requesting
official information concerning the proposed system
design, which information shall not be reduced to
writing and shall be treated as a confidential trade
secret.
(v) A scaled set of plans containing the following
information:
(1) Location and legal description of the proposed
site;
(2) Type and height of the proposed tower;
(3) On-site land uses and zoning;
(4) Adjacent roadways;
(5) Proposed means of access;
(6) Setbacks from property lines;
(7) Architectural elevation drawings of the
proposed tower and any other
telecommunications support facilities;
(8) Site topography;
(9) Parking;
(10) A landscape plan showing specific landscape
materials;
(11) The method of fencing, finished color, and, if
applicable, the method of camouflage and
illumination.
(vi) An affidavit from the owner of the property
acknowledging that the owner of the property is
responsible for the removal of a tower that is
abandoned or is unused for a period of twelve (12)
months.
(vii) A filing fee of $150 shall be submitted upon filing of
the application pursuant to Subsection 4-4-23(J).
(b) Review Procedure. The review procedure for any and all
applications for locating or relocating towers and/or antennas
shall be as provided in Sections 4-4-24 and 4-4-29 of this
Code provided, however, that the application must be
reviewed by the City Land Use Review Committee prior to
submission to the Planning Commission.
(6) Public Records. The City may share information, except for the
confidential proposed system design, with other applicants applying
for approval or use exceptions or other organizations seeking to
locate towers or antennas in the City, except that the City is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that
such sites are available or suitable.
4-4-24 : CONDITIONAL USES
(A) Uses listed as conditional uses for the various zoning districts provided in
this Chapter shall be allowed only if the Review Board determines,
following review pursuant to Section 4-4-29, that the following criteria are
substantially met with respect to the type of use and its dimensions:
(1) The use will not be contrary to the public health, safety, or welfare.
(2) The use is not materially adverse to the City's master plan.
(3) Streets, pedestrian facilities, and bikeways in the area are adequate
to handle traffic generated by the use with safety and convenience.
(4) The use is compatible with existing uses in the area and other
allowed uses in the district.
(5) The use will not have an adverse effect upon other property values.
(6) Adequate off-street parking will be provided for the use.
(7) The location of curb cuts and access to the premises will not create
traffic hazards.
(8) The use will not generate light, noise, odor, vibration, or other
effects which would unreasonably interfere with the reasonable
enjoyment of adjacent property.
(9) Landscaping of the grounds and the architecture of any buildings
will be reasonably compatible with that existing in the
neighborhood.
(B) The burden shall be upon the applicant to prove that these requirements are
met.
4-4-25: NONCONFORMING USES
(A) Any use, building or structure which at the effective date of this Chapter or
at the time of annexation, if annexed subsequent to the effective date of this
Chapter, was lawfully existing and maintained in accordance with the
previously applicable County or City regulations and ordinances but which
does not conform or comply with all of the regulations provided in these
zoning regulations, may continue to be maintained and used as a lawful
non-conforming use only in compliance with the provisions and limitations
imposed by this Section. Uses, structures or buildings which were unlawful
or illegal and not in compliance with previously applicable regulations shall
remain unlawful, illegal, and subject to abatement or other enforcement
action.
(B) If a use, building or structure is lawfully non-conforming in that it is not a
"use by right", or a "conditional use" which has been approved pursuant to
the review provisions of Section 4-4-29 and 4-4-24, the following shall
apply:
(1) If the building or structure involved in the use is destroyed or
damaged so that repair or reconstruction will cost more than fifty
percent (50%) of the fair market value of the building or structure
after repair, it shall no longer be lawful to use the building or
premises except in compliance with the use regulations for the
district within which it is located.
(2) If the non-conforming use is abandoned or discontinued for a period
of six (6) months, then the premises may only be used in compliance
with the use regulations for the district within which it is located.
(3) The use may be continued only substantially as it existed at the
effective date of this Chapter or of annexation, and no material
change in the type of use shall be allowed, unless the Review Board
determines, following the hearing procedure provided in Section 4-
4-29, that the criteria set out in Section 4-4-24 will be met, and that
the new use is a more restrictive use than the existing nonconforming
use. Any change in use allowed pursuant to this
provision shall not effect the future status of the use as a non--
conforming use for all purposes of this Section.
(4) The extent or area of the premises utilized for or by the
nonconforming use, building or structure, may not be materially
extended or enlarged, or substantially structurally altered, unless the
Review Board determines, following the review procedure of
Section 4-4-29, that the criteria set out in Section 4-4-24 will be met.
(C) If the use, building or structure is in compliance with the use regulations for
the district within which it is located and is non-conforming only with
respect to dimensional requirements, off-street parking requirements, or the
regulations governing fences, hedges, walls, or canopies, the following
provisions shall apply:
(1) If the nonconformity of the building, use, or structure is abandoned,
removed, or corrected for any length of time, such nonconformity
may not be re-established.
(2) If the building or structure is damaged so that the cost of replacing or
restoring it is greater than fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value
after replacement, the building or structure may be repaired or
replaced only in compliance with these zoning regulations.
(3) If the building or structure is damaged in such a way as to remove
the nonconformity, the non-conforming feature may not be reestablished
by any repair or reconstruction, unless it is unfeasible to
repair the building without re-establishing the non-conforming
feature.
(4) No alteration may be made to the use, building, or structure which
would increase the amount or degree of the non-conforming feature.
Changes in the use, building, or structure may be made which will
decrease the degree or amount of deviation from the requirements of
this Chapter.
(D) This Section shall not apply to signs. Non-conforming signs shall be
governed by the provisions of subsection 4-4-22(E). (Ord. 1077, 5-16-80)
4-4-26: VARIANCES
(A) The Review Board may grant a variance from the requirements set out in
this Chapter, if it determines, following the review procedure of Section 4-
4-29, that the criteria of this Section will be met. Provided, however, no
variance shall be granted from provisions restricting "uses by right" and
"conditional uses" within any zoning district. (Ord. 1236, 4-5-84)
(B) Variances shall be granted only if all the following criteria are met:
(1) The variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(2) Unusual physical circumstances shall exist, such as unusual lot size
or shape, topography, or other physical conditions peculiar to the
affected property which make it unfeasible to develop or use the
property in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter in
question.
(3) The unusual circumstances have not been created as a result of the
action or inaction of the applicants, other parties in interest with the
applicant, or their or his predecessors in interest.
(4) The variance requested is the minimum variance that will afford
relief and allow for reasonable use of the property.
(5) The variance will not result in development incompatible with other
property or buildings in the area, and will not affect or impair the
value or use or development of other property.
(C) The burden shall be on the applicant to show that these criteria have been
met.
(D) Variances shall be granted for sign regulations only if all of the following
criteria are met, in lieu of the criteria of Subsection (B).
(1) The variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(2) The variance requested is the minimum variance that will afford
relief.
(3) The variance will not result in signage incompatible with other
properties in the area and will not affect or impair the value, use of
development of such properties.
(4) Strict compliance with the regulation presents practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardships, and the variance sought falls within the
spirit of the sign code as a whole.
4-4-27: AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE OFFICIAL ZONING
MAP
(A) Rezoning:
(1) Amendments to the Official Zoning Map involving any change in
the boundaries of an existing zoning district, or changing the
designation of a district, shall be allowed only upon findings as
follows:
(a) The amendment is not adverse to the public health, safety and
welfare; and
(b) The amendment is in substantial conformity with the master
plan, or
(i) The existing zoning is erroneous, or
(ii) Conditions in the area affected or adjacent areas have
changed materially since the area was last zoned.
(2) Rezoning may be requested or initiated by the City Manager, the
Planning Commission, or the owner of any legal or equitable interest
in the property or his representative. The rezoning shall be reviewed
for compliance with the criteria of this subsection in accordance with
the review procedure of Section 4-4-29. The City Council may
initiate rezoning on its own motion, in which case the Council shall
hold a hearing either in conjunction with second reading of a
rezoning ordinance, or separately, in substantial compliance with the
review procedure of Section 4-4-29. The area considered for
rezoning may be enlarged by the Planning Commission on its own
motion over the area requested in the application.
(3) The City may impose conditions as necessary to insure that the
above criteria are met. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(B) Zoning of Additions:
(1) The Planning Commission shall recommend to the Council a zoning
district designation for all property annexed to the City not
previously subject to City zoning, and shall follow the review
procedure set out in Section 4-4-29 in arriving at its
recommendation. Proceedings concerning the zoning of property to
be annexed may be commenced at any time prior to the effective
date of the annexation ordinance or thereafter. The zoning
designation for newly annexed property shall not adversely affect the
public health, safety and welfare.
(2) The City may impose conditions on the zoning necessary to insure
that the above criteria are met and as appropriate to insure
comparability with the City’ s master plans. (Ord. #1693, 3-4-99)
(C) Legislative Zoning: Comprehensive review and re-enactment of all or a
significant portion of the Official Zoning Map shall be a legislative action,
and shall not be subject to the review procedure of Section 4-4-29 or any
criteria set out in this Section.
(D) No amendment, addition to or re-enactment of the Official Zoning Map
shall become effective until enacted by an ordinance, approved by at least
three (3) Councilors. (Ord. #1693, 3-4-99)
4-4-28: AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER
Amendments to this Chapter may be made only by an ordinance approved by at least
three (3) Councilors. (Ord. #1693, 3-4-99)
4-4-29 : REVIEW PROCEDURE
(A) All requests for approval of a variance, a planned development, a
conditional use, a change in a nonconforming use, or amendments or
changes to the Official Zoning Map, or review of an administrative denial
of a Coordinated Sign Plan, or other action which is required to be
reviewed pursuant to this Section by these zoning regulations or other City
ordinances, shall be reviewed by a Review Board consisting of the entire
Planning Commission or such Planning Commission members as may be
provided for by the bylaws of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2155, 3-15-
2007)
(B) The applicant requesting approval of a variance, conditional use, change in
a nonconforming use, or review of an administrative denial of a
Coordinated Sign Plan, or rezoning shall submit an application upon forms
supplied by the City accompanied by any other required information. A
single application may contain a request for more than one action. The
application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount as set
by City Council. No formal application need be submitted or fee paid for an
amendment or addition to the Official Zoning Map initiated by the City
Manager, City Council or Planning Commission. An adequate legal
description shall be provided by the applicant for proposed zoning
boundaries or when otherwise deemed necessary by the City. (Ord. 2155, 3-
15-2007)
(C) A hearing shall be set before the Review Board not sooner than twenty (20)
days, nor more than forty (40) days after receipt by the City of a properly
completed application form and all other required information.
(D) Notice of the hearing shall be given as follows:
(1) The applicant shall be advised of the date set for the hearing. The
applicant shall be responsible to post a sign upon the property
affected, easily legible from an abutting street which briefly
describes the requested action and time and location of the hearing.
Such sign shall be maintained continuously for at least fifteen (15)
days before the hearing and until final action is taken by the Review
Board or City Council. (Ord. #1693, 3-4-99)
(2) The applicant shall also cause a notice to be published in a legal
newspaper which describes the action or actions requested and the
property affected. The property shall be described by street address,
or relationship to a street, other property with an address or other
known landmarks and not by a legal description. It shall not be
necessary to publish such a notice if the only action requested is for
a variance.
(3) The applicant shall either hand deliver, or deposit in the U.S. mail a
copy of the above notice addressed to the owner of record of any
property located within one hundred feet (100') of the property
affected.
(E) At the hearing, the applicant and other interested parties may appear and
present such evidence and testimony as they may desire. Anyone
presenting evidence or testimony shall be subject to cross-examination by
other interested parties, although the Review Board may limit testimony,
evidence, and cross-examination, which are merely cumulative. The
Review Board shall not be required to follow any set procedure during the
hearing, nor to strictly follow the rules of evidence as applied by the courts.
The chairman of the Review Board shall make all rulings on admissibility
of testimony or evidence. The hearing shall be tape recorded or otherwise
electronically recorded. The applicant, or other interested party may, if
desired, may have the hearing recorded by a court reporter, at their expense.
The hearing may be continued from time to time as necessary. The City
Manager, or authorized representative, may appear as a party at the hearing.
The burden is upon the applicant in all cases to establish that all applicable
criteria for any action are met, including proper notice. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(F) The Review Board shall announce its decision within thirty (30) days of the
completion of the hearing. It shall not be necessary for the Review Board
to provide written findings or conclusions, except upon the request of the
applicant, or other party appearing or participating in the hearing.
(Ord. 1898, 2-07-2002)
(G) The Review Board may approve the requested action only upon finding that
all applicable criteria and requirements of these zoning regulations or other
City ordinances have been met. If it determines that such criteria have not
been met, the application shall be denied. The application may be granted
upon conditions or limitations which the Review Board determines are
necessary in order to insure that the applicable criteria are met. Such
conditions or limitations shall be provided to the applicant and interested
parties in writing as part of the decision. The decision of the Review Board
with respect to requests for approval of a variance or conditional use, or
review of an administrative denial of a Coordinated Sign Plan, shall be
final. However, upon receipt of a written request filed within five (5) days
of the date of the Review Board’s decision by the applicant, the City
Manager, the City Council or a taxpayer or elector of the City who
appeared or participated at the hearing before the Review Board, the City
Council shall hold a hearing de novo in substantial conformity with the
procedure of this Section. (Ord. 2155, 3-15-2007)
(H) The Review Board’ s decisions with respect to amendments to the Official
Zoning Map shall be submitted to the city Council as a recommendation.
The Council may, without further hearing, ratify the recommendation, take
no action if no action is recommended or upon its own motion schedule the
matter for a de novo hearing. However, it shall, upon receipt of a written
request filed within five (5) days of the date of the Review Board’s decision
by the applicant, the City Manager or a taxpayer or elector of the City who
appeared or participated at the hearing before the Review Board, hold a
hearing de novo in substantial conformity with the procedure of this
Section. Such hearing may be held in conjunction with the public hearing
on a rezoning ordinance on second reading or separately.
(Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(I) The Mayor and City Council shall set all application fees related to land use
action under this Chapter per resolution as set forth in Section 3-1 of the
City of Montrose Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1999, 04-15-2004)
4-4-30: ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
(A) The City Manager shall be responsible for the interpretation, administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter, as amended, the Official
Zoning Map, as amended, and of any decisions entered by the Review
Board or the City Council pursuant to this Chapter.
(B) No building permit, occupancy permit, or other permit or license shall be
issued, nor shall any action be taken or allowed by the City which is not in
compliance with the provisions of these zoning regulations, and any
decision issued by the Review Board or City Council pursuant to this
Chapter.
(C) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions
of these zoning regulations, or any provision of a decision entered by the
Review Board or the City Council, pursuant to this Chapter, or whenever
there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation of any provision of
these zoning regulations, or any decision issued by the Review Board or
City Council, pursuant to this Chapter exists, the City Manager or his
authorized representative, shall have the right to enter upon such building
or premises at all reasonable times for purposes of inspection or to perform
any other duty imposed by this Chapter. Prior to entry they shall identify
themselves and request permission to enter from the occupant or person in
charge of the premises if they can be found by reasonable efforts. If entry
is refused, the City Manager or an authorized representative, shall have
recourse to any remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(D) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin any violation of these zoning regulations or of any decision entered
by the Review Board or City Council pursuant to this Chapter. Continuing
violations of this Chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(E) It shall be unlawful to violate any of the provisions of these zoning
regulations, or the terms of any decision entered by the City Council or
Review Board pursuant to this Chapter. Any person convicted of such a
violation may be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or a jail sentence of up to one (1) year, or by both such fine
and imprisonment; provided, however, that no person under the age of
eighteen (18) years shall be subject to any term of imprisonment in excess
of 10 days. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
(F) The Code Enforcement Officer of the City shall be deemed a peace officer,
as defined in Rule 203 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of
Procedure, for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter under the direction of the City Manager. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall exercise the authority of a peace officer in the enforcement of
these provisions, including the power to issue summons and complaints and
initiate prosecution of violations thereof. (Ord. 1908, 6-13-2002)
Chapter 4-6
RADIO INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED
Sections:
4-6-1 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED
4-6-2 EXCEPTIONS
4-6-3 DUTY OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
4-6-4 FAILURE TO COMPLY
Chapter 4-6
RADIO INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED
Sections:
4-6-1 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED
4-6-2 EXCEPTIONS
4-6-3 DUTY OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
4-6-4 FAILURE TO COMPLY
4-6-1: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain, use or operate any apparatus or
device, whether electrical, mechanical or of any other kind whatsoever, so as to cause
electrostatic or electromagnetic waves to radiate so as to interfere with radio reception in
the City. The above prohibition shall be construed to apply to radio receiving equipment,
either of the regenerative or of any other type, vibrating battery charges, sign changers,
electric regenerative or of any other type, electric refrigeration machines, electrically
driven oil pumps, furnace equipment, electric welding outfits, high tension ignition
systems, electric transmission lines, gas or electric power plant; defective insulators,
defective transformers, badly sparking motors and badly sparking generators, and other
similar apparatus, which interfere with radio reception, whether on account of the manner
of construction or the manner of operation of the apparatus.
4-6-2: EXCEPTIONS
Section 4-6-1 of this Chapter should not apply to the following situations:
(A) It shall not be unlawful to operate violet ray machines, diathermal
machines, or any other electromedical devices causing radio interference,
providing such interference is reduced as much as is reasonably possible in
every available way, and particularly by not using the devices except when
reasonably necessary and by equipping the devices as far as is reasonably
possible with filters, condensers, shields and grounds, and with any other
apparatus tending to reduce interference.
(B) It shall not be unlawful to operate X-ray machines causing radio
interference, whenever necessary, providing such interference is reduced as
much as is reasonably possible as explained in paragraph (A) preceding.
4-6-3: DUTY OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to inspect any electrical or other devices,
appliances, equipment, machines or installations of any kind which may be causing interference
with radio reception, and whenever, upon such inspection, he shall find that any
electrical or other device, appliance, equipment, machine or installation of any kind is
unnecessarily or avoidably causing interference with radio reception, he shall give written
notice to the owner or operator of the same to abate such interference within a period of
not less than two (2) nor more than ten (10) days from the receipt of such notice.
4-6-4: FAILURE TO COMPLY
Whenever the Electrical Inspector shall have served the notice provided for in the
preceding Section, and the owner or operator maintaining the device causing the
interference described in the notice served upon him shall have failed to abate such
interference within the time prescribed by such notice, the Electrical Inspector shall have
the power to cause the electrical service to the premises whereon such interference is to
be maintained to be disconnected and discontinued until such interference has been
abated; or such owner or operator may be proceeded against as the author of a nuisance,
and such apparatus may be abated as a nuisance under the Laws of the City. (Ord. No.
215 8-21-1934)
Chapter 4-7
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Sections:
4-7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-7-2 INTERPRETATION
4-7-3 DEFINITIONS
4-7-4 ENFORCEMENT
4-7-5 SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
4-7-6 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
4-7-7 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
4-7-8 SECURITY FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
4-7-9 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
4-7-10 AMENDED PLATS
4-7-11 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW HEARING
4-7-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) This Chapter as amended from time to time may be cited and referred to as
the City's Subdivision Regulations.
The purposes of these subdivision regulations are to promote and protect
public health, safety and welfare; to encourage the harmonious, orderly and
progressive development of land; to ensure the development of
economically sound and compatible neighborhoods; to require the
construction of necessary improvements and utilities; to ensure safe and
convenient circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; to ensure that
parks, open spaces, school sites and land needed for other public purposes
are either reserved or dedicated; to ensure development is in accordance
with the requirements of the City's Master Plan as such may be amended
from time to time; and to insure that new development bears its fair share of
the costs of providing improvements and services necessitated by, or
resulting from, the development of subdivisions.
(B) The Mayor and City Council shall set all application fees related to land use
action under this Chapter per resolution. (Ord. 1940, 03-06-2003)
4-7-2: INTERPRETATION
(A) The interpretation and application of the provisions of the Subdivision
Regulations shall be regarded as the minimum required for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare and shall be liberally construed to
further the purposes as specified in Section 4-7-1 above.
(B) Whenever a provision of these Subdivision Regulations and any other
provision found in another City ordinance contain any restrictions or
regulations covering the same subject matter, whichever restriction or
regulation is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement
shall govern.
(C) The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
(D) Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the
singular include the plural; and words of one gender include all other
genders, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
(E) Reference to "City" shall be interpreted to generally apply to City Land Use
Staff, City Planning Commission and City Council collectively.
(F) Reference to “Master Plan” shall be reference to the City Comprehensive
Plan, as may be amended from time to time.
4-7-3: DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AMENDED PLAT: An amended subdivision plat, or "replat", which changes the
number of separately described contiguous parcels of
property or lots previously approved by the City, and meeting
the requirements of Section 4-7-10.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the property line beyond which no exposed
portion of a building extends, other than the roof overhang.
ESTATE SUBDIVISION
(LARGE): A subdivision, or part thereof, with a minimum lot size of at
least one half (0.5) of an acre, a gross area of at least ten (10)
acres or a minimum total area inclusive of adjoining approved
large or small “estate subdivision” with a minimum of onesixth
(1/6) contiguity of at least twenty (20) acres, and which
is designated as a "single family residence" district.
ESTATE SUBDIVISION
(SMALL): A subdivision, or part thereof, with a minimum lot size of
fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500) square feet, a gross
area of at least ten (10) acres or a minimum total area
inclusive of adjoining approved large or small “estate
subdivision” with a minimum of one-sixth (1/6) contiguity of
at least twenty (20) acres, and which is designated as a "single
family residence" district.
LAND USE STAFF: City Staff members appointed by the City Manager for
purposes of review of land use matters, inclusive of the City
Planner, the City Engineer, the City Manager and the City
Attorney.
LETTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE
COMPLETION
AND ACCEPTANCE: A letter issued by the City Engineer pursuant to Chapter 4-7
of the Municipal Code accepting all public and necessary on
and off-site improvements. The issuance of this letter shall
end the Construction Warranty period.
(Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
LETTER OF SUBSTANTIAL
COMPLETION: A letter issued by the City Engineer pursuant to Chapter 4-7
of the Municipal Code accepting all public and necessary on
and off-site improvements, except for landscaping and
irrigation facilities. The landscaping and irrigation facilities
may be secured with as set forth in Section 4-7-8 of the
Municipal Code. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot measured at the building line.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision which meets the requirements of subsection 4-
7-9(A) of this Chapter.
OUTLOT: A lot or lots representing the remaining aggregate of
unsubdivided land in those instances where large parcels of
land are subject to existing uses or development, and may be
subject to future subdivision as part of a phased development.
.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
corporation, trust or any other entity.
PRELIMINARY LETTER
OF INFRASTRUCTURE
COMPLETION: A letter issued by the City Engineer pursuant to Chapter 4-7
of the Municipal Code when all public and necessary on and
off-site improvements have been inspected and determined to
be complete. This letter initiates the Construction Warranty.
(Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
SIDEWALK: Improvements intended for pedestrian, bicycle and nonmotorized
traffic including sidewalks, trails, recreation paths,
bike paths and similar facilities.
STORMWATER
DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A system designed to carry off and minimize the effects of
run-off water. It may consist of surface grading or subsurface
piping or other components as required.
SUBDIVIDE: Any act which is intended to or does result in the creation of a
subdivision of land.
SUBDIVIDER: A person who subdivides.
SUBDIVISION or
SUBDIVIDED LAND: A parcel of land which is divided into two or more parcels,
lots, tracts or other interests including condominiums;
townhouses, other common interest ownership properties; and
any act creating such results. Provided, however, the
following shall not be considered to be a subdivision for the
purpose or application of these regulations:
• A division of land which creates cemetery lots;
• The creation of separate but undivided interests in a
tract of land such as joint tenancy, tenancy in common,
tenancy in entirety, trust, lien, mortgage, deed of trust
or other security interest, unless such separate interests
apply to less than all of the tract;
• An interest severing the oil, gas, minerals or water
from the surface estate;
• Creation of a utility easement or an easement unrelated
to the use of the surface;
• Any division of property created by official acts of the
City, including but not limited to partial acquisitions
and conveyances of land, partial annexations of land,
easements, and public rights-of-way;
• Boundary adjustments which resolve a disputed
boundary or boundary survey problem such as
overlaps or gaps, so long as the boundary adjustment
or transaction does not result in the transfer from one
parcel to another of an area in excess of 10,000 square
feet and does not result in any violation of applicable
City Zoning Regulations.
TRANSPORTATION
PLAN: That portion of the City's Comprehensive Plan which
establishes the location, character and size of streets or other
public ways. "Transportation Plan" may also be referred to as
"Street Plan" or "Thoroughfare Plan".
WARRANTY “Warrant” or “Warranty” as used herein means the subdivider
shall take such steps and incur such costs as may be needed
so that all public and necessary on and off-site improvements
or any portion or phase thereof as repaired and/or replaced,
shall comply with the subdivider’s construction plans and/or
site plan and City standards and specifications until the end of
the warranty period. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(Ord. 1884, Amended, 12/20/2001)
4-7-4: ENFORCEMENT
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide any land within the City of
Montrose whether by sale, conveyance, gift, delivery or recording of a plat,
deed or other legal instrument or by any other means except in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
(B) Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter may
be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(C) The City may withhold building or occupancy permits with respect to any
lot or tract of land which has been subdivided in violation of the provisions
of this Chapter.
(D) In addition to any other remedy that the City may have, the City may
maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for an order to
enjoin any violation of this Chapter.
(E) It shall be unlawful to sell any tract of land, including an entire platted lot
or separately described tract, if a violation of the applicable dimensional
requirements of the City’ s Zoning Regulations will result from such sale
by virtue of a change in dimensions of any building site.
(F) A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a
violation of this Chapter continues. Continuing violations of this Chapter
are declared to be a nuisance.
4-7-5 SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
(A) The subdivision of land shall be accomplished in accordance with the
procedures provided in this Section, except for those instances where
different governing procedures are set forth pursuant to Sections 4-7-9, 4-7-
10 and 4-7-11 Informal Review and Sketch Plan. The City Council shall
set all application fees related to land use action per Resolution.
(1) Prior to submittal of the subdivision application, the subdivider shall
make a reasonable effort to consult informally with property owners
of record adjoining or within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision,
and the City. No fee shall be required for such review or discussions
of any plans or data concerning the proposed subdivision, prior to
Sketch Plan review. The City shall not be bound by virtue of any
discussions during the Informal Review stage.
(2) The proposal shall be consistent with the Master Plan, City
subdivision and zoning regulations, standards and other applicable
ordinances and regulations and will be reviewed considering the
following at a minimum:
(a) Conformance with the master plan and zoning regulations;
(b) Relationship of development to topography, soils, drainage,
flooding, potential natural hazard areas and other physical
characteristics;
(c) Availability of water, means of sewage collection and
treatment, storm water drainage, access and other utilities and
services;
(d) Compatibility with the natural environment, wildlife,
vegetation and unique natural features;
(e) Adjacent streets and traffic flow, including pedestrian access;
(f) Availability of fire, police and other emergency services
protection;
(g) Impacts on area schools.
(3) A subdivider who intends to immediately develop only a portion of a
full tract shall nevertheless submit an informal Sketch Plan for the
entire tract showing his present plans for its eventual development.
(4) Following Informal Review when applicable, and in all cases except
when not required by other provisions of this Chapter, the applicant
shall file copies of the Sketch Plan application and sketch map,
along with all required supporting plans, with the City. The
submittal of such application, map and supporting plans shall
comply with City's application and fee requirements.
(a) Filing of a Sketch Plan shall not be required in cases where a
subdivision, which does not qualify as a minor or amended
subdivision, primarily due to a lack of installed on or off-site
public improvements. In no case shall the Sketch Plan
requirement be waived under this provision for subdivision
proposals containing more than three (3) divisions of real
property, or where any part of the subdivision has been
subdivided without a Sketch Plan under any part of this
Official Code of the City of Montrose, Colorado, within the
three (3) years prior to the date of submission. (Ord 2229, 11-
05-2009)
(5) The Sketch Plan review shall commenced only upon submittal of a
completed sketch map, a completed Sketch Plan Application form,
which form shall be provided by the City, and all required
supplemental information as set forth below, as well as any
additional materials determined by City Staff to be necessary for
processing of the application:
(a) Sketch Map: The sketch map shall include the following:
(i) A location map, of approximately 4” by 4”, showing
the project location in relation to the City of Montrose,
with appropriate reference to major and minor arterial
and collector roads or highways.
(ii) A detailed map showing property boundaries of the
subdivision, north arrow and date. The scale of the
map shall not be less than one inch equals two hundred
feet. The map shall include the name of the
subdivision, name of the county, township, range,
section and quarter section. The map shall further
indicate zoning and land use of all lands within three
hundred feet of any property boundary owned by or
under option to the subdivider. A title box shall be
located in the lower right corner of the map. In the
case of large subdivisions requiring more than one
sheet at such a scale, an index map showing the total
area on a single sheet shall also be submitted.
(iii) A conceptual drawing of the lot and street layout
indicating the approximate area and number of
individual lots and access to the property.
(iv) Significant natural and manmade features on the site,
such as streams, lakes, natural drainage ways and
wetlands; vegetation types including locations of wood
areas; wildlife habitats; scenic corridors; visual
impacts; solar access; existing buildings; utility lines
and easements; irrigation ditches; bridges and similar
physical features; existing development on adjacent
property; and footprints of existing buildings.
(v) Total acreage of the tract.
(vi) Existing and proposed zoning district boundary lines.
General land use divisions including residential types,
commercial, industrial, parks, open space and
community facilities, including the proposal’s
relevance to underlying zoning.
(vii) Type and layout of all proposed infrastructure
including streets, utilities, water and sewer systems,
and impact on existing systems.
(viii) Public use areas proposed to be dedicated to the
public, the purpose of the dedication, and their
relationship to existing public use areas.
(ix) Existing and proposed land use patterns, including
street system, of both the tract proposed for
development and immediately adjacent land.
(x) Existing site problems or peculiarities, such as areas of
poor drainage, existing flood plain, geological hazards
and seepage water.
(xi) Existing and proposed storm water discharge facilities
pertaining to the property.
(b) Sketch Plan Application: The Sketch Plan Application shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information
pertaining to the proposed subdivision (this information may
be provided in a narrative format):
(i) Estimated total number of gallons per day of water
system requirements, source of waters to supply
subdivision requirements, and proposed dedication of
water rights in accordance with existing City
ordinances.
(ii) Estimated total number of gallons per day of sewage to
be treated and means for sewage disposal.
(iii) Availability of electrical power, natural gas, CATV,
telephone and other utilities necessary or proposed to
serve the subdivision.
(iv) Access to the property, off-street parking, school bus
stop area(s), and mail box location(s).
(v) Total number of proposed dwelling units.
(vi) Demonstrated compatibility with natural features.
(vii) Identification of all activities of the subdivision which
shall require approval by permitting agencies at the
local, state and federal level, and a description of the
approval so required.
(viii) Names and addresses of all property owners of record
adjoining or within 100 feet of the proposed
subdivision.
(ix) Summary of issues or concerns resulting from informal
review with neighboring property owners, if
applicable.
(c) Sketch Plan Supplemental Documents: The Sketch Plan
Application shall also include the following supplemental
documentation:
(i) Disclosure of ownership, with supporting
documentation from a title insurance company or, if
acceptable to the City, an attorney licensed in the state
of Colorado, which shall set forth a legal description of
the property and title ownership of the property.
(6) Upon complete submittal of all required information, City Staff shall
provide initial review of the Sketch Plan within 45 days. Upon
completion of initial review of the plan and submission by the
applicant of any supplemental materials or necessary revisions as
requested by City Staff, the Sketch Plan Application shall be placed
on an upcoming Planning Commission agenda for which space is
available and for which all notice requirements can be met.
(7) Advance notice of the Sketch Plan review by the City Planning
Commission shall be provided by publication, with a location map of
the property to be subdivided. Fifteen (15) day advance written
notice shall also be provided, by hand delivery or deposit into the
U.S. mail, to all property owners of record adjoining or within 100
feet of the proposed subdivision. The City shall provide such notice.
The review and discussion of the Sketch Plan by the Planning
Commission shall be informal and non-binding in nature, and shall
serve as a means to provide guidance to the subdivider.
(B) Preliminary Plat:
(1) An application for Preliminary Plat shall be submitted to the City
and shall comply with applicable City submittal requirements.
(2) The City may distribute copies of the Preliminary Plat and
supporting plans or data as appropriate to the County Land Use
Department, the School District, the natural gas, CATV, electrical
power and telephone companies, the Fire Protection District, the
Colorado Department of Transportation, the Federal Aviation
Administration, the Uncompahgre Valley Water User’s Association,
applicable City departments and employees, and other entities as
appropriate.
(3) The Preliminary Plat and proposed improvements shall comply with
all requirements of these subdivision regulations and other
applicable City design and construction specifications and standards.
The plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
one hundred feet (1” = 100’). (See Chapter 4 of this Title, Zoning
Regulations).
(4) The Preliminary Plat shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(a) The name of the subdivision and the name, address and phone
number of the subdivider, and his representatives, if
applicable. Such information shall be contained in a title box
located on the lower right corner of the plat.
(b) A certificate by the engineer or surveyor preparing the plat
attesting to the accuracy of the plat. Such information shall
be contained in a title box located on the lower right corner of
the plat and shall be signed and stamped by the licensed
professional engineer or registered surveyor, and shall
indicate the scale used and direction of true north.
(c) A certificate by a licensed professional engineer that the
water, storm water, sewer systems, and all other
improvements are properly engineered and designed in
compliance with applicable requirements of the City and
State.
(d) A certificate of ownership of the subject property.
(e) A location map, of approximately 4” by 4”, showing the
project location in relation to the City of Montrose, with
appropriate reference to significant roads or highways. The
location map shall be provided both on the Preliminary Plat
and separately on letter size paper.
(f) Certification on forms approved by the City to document
approval of the plat; and the form of the certificates proposed
to be used to comply with the requirements imposed for the
Final Plat as found in subsection (D) of this Section.
(g) Two-foot (2') elevation contours and the boundaries of the
"base flood" (100-year flood) and "floodway" and base flood
elevation data, as defined and specified in the City's flood
plain management regulations.
(h) The then current zoning designations of the subdivision and
of adjacent properties.
(i) The names of the owners of record of adjacent properties, and
the property lines of adjacent properties as space will allow.
(j) The location and ownership interest of existing and proposed
watercourses including lakes, swamps, ditches and flood
prone areas (the inclusion of such watercourses within the
jurisdictional authority of local, State or Federal regulatory
agencies shall also be noted); the location of existing and
proposed streets, easements, utility lines, poles and towers,
sewer lines, water lines, drains, culverts and other
underground utilities and storm water drainage facilities both
on the proposed subdivision and adjacent properties as
practical.
(k) The layout of all lots showing the building lines, dimensions
and lot areas and footprints of existing buildings, if any. The
plat shall include at least two references to City GPS
Coordinates.
(l) The layout and location of all parks and open space.
(m) The location of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public
use.
(5) The following shall be submitted accompanying the Preliminary Plat
together with plans and specifications prepared by a licensed
professional engineer consistent with City standards and
specifications, for all required or proposed improvements. All plans
and specifications shall be signed and stamped by a licensed
professional engineer.
(a) Plans for the proposed sanitary sewer system showing
location, grade, pipe sizes and invert elevations, and the
connection points to the existing system.
(b) Plans for the water system and fire protection system showing
locations, pipe size, valves, fire hydrants and connection
points to the existing system.
(c) Plans for the storm drainage system showing location, pipe
sizes, grades and discharge points, including off-site
improvements. Such plans shall comply with any applicable
City storm water drainage requirements.
(d) Plans for any improvements specifically affecting
watercourses within the jurisdictional authority of local, State
or Federal regulatory agencies, noting the required permits
therefore.
(e) Plans for proposed streets, sidewalks, recreation paths,
showing grade and cross-section, trails and walkways and
streetlight and street names.
(f) A soil or geological report prepared and certified by a
professional geologist or soil scientist.
(g) Plans for piping ditches, or improvements to waterways.
(h) Plans for parks and recreation facilities.
(i) A traffic impact study for all developments when estimated
vehicle trips per day will exceed 250 and plans for
recommended traffic mitigation measures. The study shall
provide, but not be limited to, traffic capacity for existing
road infrastructure, proper analyses of transportation linkages
in conformance with Transportation Plan, cumulative traffic
impact of development at build-out, and proposed
infrastructure design to account for such considerations. The
scope of the impact study may be broadened to include other
nearby subdivisions and developments, allowing for
cooperative participation and cost sharing.
(6) If the applicant intends to develop the project in phases, a Phasing
Plan will be required to be submitted to and approved by the City.
The Phasing Plan must include the numbers of lots in each phase, the
infrastructure planned for completion with each phase that is
necessary to allow the phase to properly integrated into City services
as determined by the City Engineer, the amenities to be constructed
with each phase, and all other information pertinent to the
completion of the development.
(7) Upon submittal of all required information, the City Staff shall
provide initial review of the Preliminary Plat within 45 days. Upon
completion of initial review of the Preliminary Plat and submission
by the applicant of any supplemental materials and revisions
necessary to comply with City regulations, the Preliminary Plat
Application shall be placed on an upcoming Planning Commission
agenda for which space is available and for which all notice
requirements can be met. City Staff shall make a recommendation
to the City Planning Commission to approve the Preliminary Plat,
provided that all supporting documentation has been properly
submitted and the plat meets all requirements, disapprove the plat if
it does not appear to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, or
approve the plat with conditions or modifications.
(8) Advance notice of the Preliminary Plat review by the City Planning
Commission shall be provided by publication, with location map of
the property to be subdivided. The City shall provide such notice at
least fifteen (15) days in advance of the scheduled meeting.
(9) Following receipt of a completed Preliminary Plat Application, the
applicant shall be required to diligently pursue the application by
providing revised plans, plat maps, and other necessary information
in a timely fashion. Where the applicant fails to meet this
requirement, the City shall, in writing, request the applicant to
withdraw the application. If the applicant fails to take any further
action on the Preliminary Plat Application for a period of six (6)
consecutive months following such request to withdraw, the
Preliminary Plat Application shall automatically expire and all
applicable fees shall be non-refundable. When a Preliminary Plat
Application has expired under this subsection, in the event the
applicant wishes to pursue development of the property the applicant
must re-apply and pay any applicable fees.
(10) Upon review by the City Planning Commission, the Commission
shall make a recommendation to the City Council to approve the
Preliminary Plat provided that all supporting documentation has
been properly submitted and the plat meets all requirements,
disapprove the plat if it does not appear to comply with the
provisions of this Chapter, or approve the plat with modifications or
conditions. The reasons for such recommendation shall be included
in the minutes of the Planning Commission meeting and provided in
writing to the applicant upon request.
(11) Unless the subdivider withdraws the Preliminary Plat from review,
or it expires as set forth herein, the plat shall be submitted to the City
Council for final review and action. Advance notice of the
Preliminary Plat review by the City Council shall be provided by
posted notice.
(12) Council may approve the Preliminary Plat, approve the plat subject
to conditions necessary to implement the provisions of this Chapter,
or disapprove the plat if the Council finds that the requirements of
these regulations have not been met. (Ord. 2092, 11-17-2005)
(13) No construction of the required subdivision improvements shall
commence until approval of the Preliminary Plat by the City Council
and submittal of both a Mylar of the Preliminary Plat, as finally
approved with signed certificates as required by the City, and a copy
of the Preliminary Plat in a digital format acceptable to the City and
compatible with City computer systems. Upon approval and
submittal of the Mylar, and supporting documentation as required,
the City shall then issue a written notice to proceed.
(C) Final Plat:
(1) No land shall be subdivided, or any parcel thereof sold or conveyed,
until a Final Plat has been approved and either a Letter of Substantial
Completion or a Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure Completion has
been issued in accordance with this subsection (C).
(Ord. 2173, 11-17-2007)
(a) Final Plat submittals shall comply with all application and fee
requirements. The submittal of Final Plats for approval must
occur within five (5) years of approval of a related
Preliminary Plat, unless an extension of time is granted by the
City Council, or the timing of the submittal is consistent with
a Phasing Plan that has been submitted by the applicant and
approved by the City. The applicant may request and the City
Council may approve an extension of time for filing the Final
Plat where development of the project in accordance with the
Preliminary Plat has been pursued with due diligence.
(b) (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(i) Until the public improvements are accepted by the
City, the City shall not be obliged to issue any building
permits within a subdivision, except as provided
herein. Provided that all other applicable City codes
and regulations have been satisfied, building permits
may be issued only to the subdivider for any property
with an approved Preliminary Plat. The subdivision
must have sufficient access and water to allow for
adequate fire protection as determined by the fire
protection district. No certificates of occupancy,
temporary or otherwise, shall be issued unless and
until:
(a) all public and necessary on and
off-site improvements have been
completed;
(b) a Letter of Substantial Completion or a
Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure
Completion has been issued by the City;
and
(c) a Final Plat has been approved and
recorded.
(ii) A Letter of Substantial Completion or a Preliminary
Letter of Infrastructure Completion shall evidence City
inspection and approval.
(iii) The two (2) calendar year Construction Warranty shall
begin to run from the date of said Preliminary Letter of
Infrastructure Completion.
(c) The Final Plat shall contain all plat elements required as a
condition of Preliminary Plat approval and the following, all
in forms acceptable to the City:
(i) The total number of lots and lot numbers or letters.
(ii) Sufficient data to determine easily and reproduce on
the ground the location of all monuments, and the
bearing and length of every street line, boundary line,
block line, lot line and building line whether curved or
straight, including the radius, central angle and tangent
distance for the center line of curved streets. Other
curved lines shall show arc or chord distance and
radius. All dimensions shall be to the nearest onehundredth
of a foot (.01') and all angles to the nearest
second. The plat shall include at least two references to
City GPS Coordinates.
(iii) A certificate by a registered surveyor, attesting to the
accuracy of the survey plat and placement of
monuments, and compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter and State law.
(iv) A certificate of dedication for streets, easements and
other property dedicated for public use, properly
executed and notarized.
(v) A certificate by a licensed professional engineer that
the sanitary sewer, water distribution and storm
drainage systems, streets and other improvements are
properly engineered, designed and constructed in
compliance with all applicable requirements of the
City and the State.
(vi) Separate certificate of approval of the plat by the City
Attorney.
(vii) A certificate of an attorney that title to the property is
in the name of those parties executing the dedication,
and that property dedicated to the City will be free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances affecting
marketability.
(viii) A certificate by the City Engineer specifying which
improvements have been completed and listing those
that require security prior to Final Plat approval.
(ix) A certificate by the City Clerk as to receipt of any
security for the completion of improvements.
(x) The name of the subdivision and the name, address
and phone number of the subdivider, and his
representative if applicable, said information to be
included within a title box located on the lower right
corner of the plat.
(xi) The name of the registered surveyor preparing the plat,
the date of the plat, said information to be included
within a title box located on the lower right corner of
the plat.
(xii) A certificate of recording to be executed by the County
Clerk and Recorder.
(xiii) The scale used, direction of true north, and basis of
bearing.
(xiv) A location map, of approximately 4” by 4”, showing
the project location in relation to the City of Montrose,
with appropriate reference to significant roads or
highways. The location map shall be provided both on
the Final Plat and separately on letter size paper.
(xv) The location and ownership interest of all watercourses
including lakes, swamps, ditches and flood prone
areas; the location and names of streets, sidewalks,
easements, utility lines, poles and towers, sewer lines,
water lines, drains, culverts and other underground
utilities and storm water drainage facilities.
(xvi) The layout of all lots showing the building lines,
dimensions and lot areas.
(xvii) The layout and location of all parks, trails, recreation
paths and open space.
(xviii)The location of all land to be reserved or dedicated for
public or other uses and the boundaries of the "base
flood" (100-year flood) and "floodway" and base flood
elevation data, as defined and specified in the City's
Flood Plain Management Regulations.
(xix) Plat notes and restrictions as appropriate to implement
compliance with this Chapter, conditions of approval
as necessary or desirable to implement the City’ s
Master Plan.
(xx) Plat notes, easements and restrictions as appropriate to
implement required FAA aviation regulations.
(2) The Final Plat shall be accompanied by a computation showing
closure of the tract boundary to one foot (1’) in five thousand feet
(5,000’) or better. The Final Plat and accompanying plans shall be
drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet
(1” = 100’). If discrepancies are believed to exist, the City may have
the plat checked by an independent registered surveyor at the
subdivider’s expense.
(3) Any conditions or improvements imposed on the applicant by the
City Council under the Preliminary Plat approval must be shown on
the Final Plat and either completed, or the appropriate security under
§ 4-7-5(C)(5) provided, prior to approval by the City Council.
(4) The Final Plat may be submitted for a portion of the Preliminary
Plat, or “phased”, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The applicant has submitted a Phasing Plan that has been
approved by the City.
(b) All required improvements, utilities and road infrastructure
must be accessible to the remaining aggregate of
unsubdivided land, or “outlot”.
(c) In instances where completion of required improvements,
utilities or road infrastructure within the outlot is determined
by the City to be necessary as a condition of approval of that
Final Plat, the developer shall be required to complete said
improvements, utilities or road infrastructure upon approval
of that Final Plat. This may include, but not be limited to,
completion of necessary road infrastructure, storm water
drainage system, trails and park development.
(d) In instances where the dedication of land for public purposes
within the outlot is determined by the City to be necessary as
a condition of approval of that Final Plat, the developer shall
be required to dedicate said lands upon approval of that Final
Plat. This may include, but not be limited to, the dedication
and development of land for parks, trails, open space, rightsof-
way and easements.
(5) The Final Plat shall be accompanied by security for the completion
of any uncompleted improvements in accordance with Section 4-7-8
of these regulations.
(6) Accompanying the Final Plat shall be two (2) copies of the "as-built"
plans or record drawings for sanitary sewers, storm sewers or
drainage systems and the water and fire systems showing grades,
pipe sizes, pipe types, outlets, connection points and other
information which the City Engineer may require along with as-built
plans for all other utility systems. As-built plans and data shall also
be provided in a digital format compatible with City computer
systems, and in accordance with City specifications. As-built plans
for any improvements not completed at the time the Final Plat is
submitted shall be submitted prior to inspection or approval of the
improvements and release of any security. All as-built plans and
data shall be signed and stamped by a licensed professional engineer.
(7) Upon complete submittal of all required information, City Staff
shall, within 30 days, provide initial review of the Final Plat. Upon
completion of an initial review of the Final Plat and submission by
the applicant of any supplemental materials or necessary revisions as
requested by City Staff, the application shall be placed on an
upcoming City Council agenda for which space is available. No
Final Plat shall be placed on a City Council agenda unless and until
all necessary materials have been submitted, reviewed and
determined by City Staff to meet all applicable City codes and
regulations.
(8) City Council may approve the Final Plat, approve it subject to
conditions necessary to implement the provisions of this Chapter, or
disapprove the plat if it finds that the requirements of these
regulations have not been met. (Ord. 2092, 11-17-2005)
(9) No Final Plat shall be approved by the City Council until:
(a) All of the improvements required by these subdivision
regulations have been installed, inspected and approved by
the City Engineer, or properly secured in accordance with the
provisions of Section 4-7-8 of these regulations on forms
approved by the City.
(b) Two (2) hard copies of as-built plans and data for completed
utility improvements have been provided, reviewed and
accepted by the City Engineer, and also provided in a digital
format acceptable to the City and compatible with City
computer systems. As-built plans for any improvements not
completed at the time the Final Plat is submitted, and secured
in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-7-8, shall be
submitted prior to inspection or approval of the improvements
and release of any security. All as-built plans and data for
completed utility improvements shall be signed and stamped
by a licensed professional engineer.
(c) The Final Plat has been submitted in final form on two (2)
reproducible Mylars, with all requisite signatures, and also in
a digital format acceptable to the City, and compatible with
City computer systems.
(d) Payment to the City of any costs incurred by the City within
the subdivision review process, which costs are specifically
subject to reimbursement.
(e) The security for the two (2) calendar year Construction
Warranty has been provided by the subdivider in a form
acceptable to the City. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(10) Following City Council approval of the Final Plat and verification
that the documentation has met all applicable codes and regulations,
the Final Plat shall be executed by the appropriate City Staff and
recorded with due diligence.
(Ord. 2062, Amended, 06/02/2005)
4-7-6: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
(A) All subdivisions and improvements shall be in substantial compliance with
the City Comprehensive Plan.
(B) All subdivisions shall be provided, at the expense of the subdivider, and
subject to applicable zoning criteria, with the following public
improvements as required to serve the subdivision and to mitigate its
impacts.
(1) Street improvements:
(a) Paved Streets;
(b) Paved alleys, if required by the City;
(c) Street signs;
(d) Street lights;
(e) On and off-site traffic mitigation improvements.
(2) Curbs, gutters, sidewalks and accessibility ramps.
(3) Blocks and Lots.
(4) Parks, open space and recreation trails.
(5) Public utilities:
(a) A water system including fire hydrants and fire mains;
(b) A sanitary sewer system;
(c) A stormwater system;
(d) Other public utilities, including if available, gas, electricity,
telephone, and CATV;
(6) Piped drainage facilities and waterways.
(7) School land dedication.
(8) Survey monuments.
(9) Berms, screening and buffers, if applicable.
(10) Off-street parking, mailbox location areas and school bus stops, if
applicable.
(C) Other improvements required as a condition of approval and found to be
roughly proportional to the impacts being mitigated. All public
improvements shall be subject to applicable City Minimum Design
Standards, Regulations and Specifications.
(D) Following the completion of any required improvements and submission of
the as-built plans, the City Engineer shall conduct an inspection and if the
improvements are in accordance with the requirements of these and other
applicable regulations and good engineering and construction standards,
shall issue a Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure Completion as provided
herein. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(1) A Letter of Substantial Completion may be issued when only
landscaping and irrigation facilities are incomplete and secured as
provided under Section 4-7-8 of the Municipal Code.
(a) In the case of subdivisions that have been issued a Letter of
Substantial Completion, upon completion of the outstanding
improvements and submission of the as-built plans therefore;
the City Engineer shall conduct an inspection and shall issue
a Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure Completion, if all public
and necessary on and off-site improvements are in accordance
with the requirements of these and other applicable codes and
regulations and good engineering and construction standards.
(2) The subdivider shall warrant the improvements against defects or
failures in workmanship or materials for a period of two (2) calendar
years from the date of the Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure
Completion. During this two (2) calendar year Construction
Warranty period, the City will, as applicable, assume the
responsibility for snow removal in regard thereto, but the subdivider
shall remain responsible for all other maintenance and to correct all
defects or failures that appear in any such public improvements
during the Construction Warranty period.
(a) The City shall determine what constitutes a defect or failure
in its sole discretion, provided, that such are not the result of
public abuse, misuse or normal wear from use. The City
Engineer shall notify the subdivider in writing of such defect
or failure, setting forth a list of specific deficiencies. If within
thirty (30) days after the City has notified the subdivider of a
defect or failure, the subdivider has not started or completed
the required repairs, provided construction drawings and a
proposed repair schedule for City review and approval, or
submitted a written objection to the to the City’s request for
repair work, the City is hereby authorized to make the repairs
or replacements or to order the work be done by a third party.
The City may authorize a temporary repair if necessary due to
weather conditions or materials availability. The subdivider
shall pay the cost of any repair work. Any appeal of the City
Engineer’s repair or replacement requirements shall follow
the appeal process pursuant to Chapter 4-1-6 of the Municipal
Code.
(b) At the end of two (2) calendar years from the date of issuance
of the Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure Completion, the
subdivider shall request, in writing, that the City Engineer
perform a final inspection of the improvements to facilitate
the completion of the Construction Warranty.
(i) The City Engineer shall conduct an inspection of all
public and necessary on and off-site improvements,
and upon final approval, as evidenced by the City’s
issuance of a Letter of Infrastructure Completion and
Acceptance, the City shall accept the improvements,
and the security held by the City shall be returned to
the subdivider.
(ii) All public and necessary on and off-site improvements,
including all physical facilities constructed by the
subdivider necessary for the extension, maintenance
and repair of municipal utility services and other public
facilities constructed by the subdivider in public rights
of way, easements, streets or alleys shall become the
property of the City immediately upon the issuance of
the Letter of Infrastructure Completion and Acceptance
by the City Engineer.
(iii) Following such conveyance, the City shall be solely
responsible for the maintenance of such public
improvements, unless otherwise provided for by
agreement, except for any correction work required
during the warranty period.
(c) Any repairs or replacements noted in the final inspection shall
be completed prior to the issuance of the Letter of
Infrastructure Completion and Acceptance.
(i) Upon notification, the subdivider shall promptly make
all repairs or replacements in accordance with a repair
plan prepared by the subdivider and approved by the
City, which repair or replacement, in the opinion of the
City, arose out of defects or failures and became
necessary during the Construction Warranty period.
(ii) The subdivider shall warrant each repaired and/or
replaced improvement or any portion or phase thereof
for one (1) calendar year following acceptance of such
repair and/or replacement.
(iii) Inspection of any improvement(s) does not constitute a
waiver by the City of any right(s) or remedies that it
may have on account of any defect in or failure of the
improvements that are detected. The Construction
Warranty shall continue until the Letter of
Infrastructure Completion and Acceptance is provided
in writing to the subdivider.
(3) The City shall require a Construction Warranty backed by financial
security prior to issuance of a Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure
Completion.
(4) The subdivider may, at the subdivider’s option, provide the City
financial security for the two (2) calendar year Construction
Warranty in one or a combination of the following forms only:
(a) A cash escrow in the amount of fifteen percent (15%) of the
total construction cost of all public and necessary on and offsite
improvements required by the Final Plat.
(b) A letter or letters of credit on forms acceptable to the City, in
the amount of fifteen percent (15%) of the total construction
cost of all public and necessary on and off-site improvements
required by the Final Plat.
(c) Marketable securities acceptable to the City, with a value no
less than fifteen percent (15%) of the total construction cost
of all public and necessary on and off-site improvements
required by the Final Plat. In the situation where the value of
the securities is later determined to be below the amount of
security required, without notice from the City, subdivider
shall be required to provide additional securities or other
security as provided in this Section to address any shortfall.
(d) It is the responsibility of the subdivider to maintain the
necessary amount of security at all times until all public and
necessary on and off-site improvements are completed and
accepted by the City.
(e) The City shall not be obligated to administer burdensome
security arrangements.
(5) The security shall be available for the City to use to correct any
defects or failures in accordance with City specifications during or
after the two (2) year Construction Warranty period in the event the
subdivider is unable or unwilling to perform any repair or
replacement of the improvements in a timely fashion. The use of the
proceeds from the security is a remedy that is cumulative in nature
and is in addition to any other remedies that the City has at law or in
equity. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(E) All property and easements dedicated to the City on any plat shall become
property of the City upon execution of the plat, free and clear of all
mortgages, liens and encumbrances. The subdivider shall provide written
evidence to the City Attorney that the title to lands underlying the
improvements are free and clear from all liens and encumbrances, except
those items or encumbrances that may be approved in writing by the City
Attorney. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(1) All dedicated improvements shall be subject to the two (2) calendar
year Construction Warranty as provided above.
(F) The subdivider may provide, at his or her expense, certain private
improvements as specifically referenced below, to serve the subdivision
and to mitigate its impacts, and in accordance with duly adopted City
standards, if applicable.
(1) Recreational facilities, parks, open space and trails;
(2) Piped drainage facilities and waterways;
(3) Mail box location areas;
(4) Berms, screening and buffers;
(5) Other private improvements required as a condition of approval.
(G) Such improvements shall be privately owned and/or maintained, and the
plat shall contain appropriate restrictions on the use and covenants for
ownership and maintenance in perpetuity enforceable by the City,
providing for recovery of the City’ s costs by liens or assessment against
the property in the subdivision. Such improvements shall be completed or
secured similar to public improvements prior to final plat approval.
4-7-7: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
(A) All public improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the
minimum standards set forth below or other applicable City design and
construction specifications and standards, and other applicable City
ordinances or regulations. All public and private improvements shall be in
substantial conformity with the preliminary plat as approved, the City
Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto, and in accordance with good
engineering and construction practices. All plans must be approved in
advance by the City Engineer.
(B) The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council a deviation
from these standards during preliminary or final plat review, if and only if
all of the below criteria are met. The Council may accept or deny the
recommendation accordingly.
(1) Unusual topography or a hardship exists;
(2) Alternative standards will more effectively protect the quality of the
subdivision and the public welfare and more effectively achieve the
purposes of these regulations;
(3) Alternative standards will more effectively implement provisions of
the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Alternative standards will more effectively conform to existing
improvements within the subdivision, which existing improvements
have been previously approved by either the City of Montrose or the
County of Montrose in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations.
(C) Minimum Standards.
(1) Streets
(a) Subdivider shall be required to make and install
improvements to existing streets within and abutting the
subdivision and / or other areas outside the subdivision or any
filing thereof being considered, including but not limited to
curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street paving improvements,
when the subdivision and developments thereof will directly
create a need for said improvements outside the subdivision
itself, or a need to expand or improve existing public
improvements to current standards in order to properly serve
future residents of the subdivision, or if the subdivider or their
predecessors of interest by virtue of their actions and the
timing and scope of developing the subdivision or other
property have created a situation where the needed
improvements were not previously improved or installed. It
shall be presumed that existing streets and sidewalks directly
abutting the subdivision must be improved to current City
standards in order to properly serve the subdivision.
(b) In those cases where the City determines that the immediate
improvement of the abutting street, or other on-site or off-site
improvements, is not currently practical, or should be
delayed, or the costs of such improvements should be shared
with additional property likely to use and be benefited by the
improvements, the developer may be allowed to execute
recordable covenants on the plat or separately in a form
provided by the City, binding the lots in the subdivision to
future assessments or participation in an improvement district
for the construction of such improvements.
(c) Wherever topography will permit, the arrangement of the
streets shall provide for the dedication and construction of
street stubs to align with existing or future streets to adjoining
developing or developable areas. (Ord. 2229, 11-05-2009)
(d) Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turn-around having a
minimum right-of-way of at least one hundred feet (100’) in
diameter, and a paved turn-around with a minimum outside
diameter of eighty feet (80’). Cul-de-sacs shall be not less
than one hundred feet (100’) long, and not more than five
hundred feet (500’) long, as measured from the center of the
cul-de-sac bulb to the center of the intersecting street; use of
cul-de-sacs is limited to places where street connections
would be impractical.
(i) Cul-de-sacs longer than three hundred feet (300’) shall
require a recreation trail connection at the end that
provides connectivity to the nearest City street.
(Ord. 2229, 11-05-2009)
(e) Temporary dead-end streets which extend for a distance
greater than the depth of one abutting lot shall be provided
with a temporary turn-around having a diameter of at least
eighty feet (80’).
(f) Whenever a new street is proposed along the edge of the
subdivision, the entire street shall be dedicated and improved
within the subdivision.
(g) No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any point.
Intersections shall be as near as practicable to ninety degrees
(90). A street shall have a minimum straight distance of
one hundred feet (100’) from the intersection before it may be
curved.
(h) A straight section of one hundred feet (100’) shall be
provided between reverse curves on all streets.
(i) All lots in the subdivision will have direct access to a
dedicated street, subject to the following exceptions:
(i) private access drives, subject to City specifications,
may be approved for subdivisions with a total of six
(6) or less units in residential zoning districts.
(ii) reciprocal access easements may be approved to
accommodate subdivisions with multiple commercial
units with contiguous parking area in commercial
zoning districts.
(j) Any two (2) local streets which intersect a common third
local or collector street shall have centerlines no closer than
one hundred seventy-five feet (175’) from one another. Any
two (2) local streets which intersect a common third minor
arterial or major arterial street, shall have centerlines no
closer than three hundred fifty feet (350’) from one another.
(i) The City may limit access to major arterial or minor
arterial streets to facilitate traffic flows, or to promote
public safety.
(Ord. 2229, 11-05-2009)
(k) The maximum block length, as measured from the centerline
of the nearest intersecting streets, shall be a maximum of
seven hundred feet (700’). (Ord. 2229, 11-05-2009)
(l) Street names must be approved by the City.
(m) All streets, alleys, sidewalks, recreation paths, parks of two
acres or larger, and other public ways or places must be
dedicated to the City by the owners of any interest therein
except the owners of severed mineral or water interests.
(n) Streets shall be developed in accordance with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan Roadway Cross-Sections, the City’s
Engineering Specifications, as applicable, and the table
below. The minimum dedicated rights-of-way and street
widths shall be as follows:
Street Classification Minimum
Right-of-
Way
Minimum Street Width
Urban = Width between Curb Flowlines
Rural = Paved Width (Asphalt or
Concrete)
Major Arterial - Urban 124 feet * 92 feet ***
Major Arterial - Rural 124 feet * 76 feet ***
Minor Arterial - Urban 112 feet ** Varies with traffic volume and whether
parking is allowed, see Engineering
Specifications for road widths ***
Minor Arterial - Rural 112 feet ** Varies with traffic volume and whether
parking is allowed, see Engineering
Specifications for road widths ***
Collector 70 feet 46 feet
Local - Boulevard Style
Alternative 2
50 feet
50 feet
28 feet with detached 5-foot sidewalk
36 feet with attached 6-foot sidewalk
Planned Developments 40 feet 24 feet with attached 6-foot sidewalks in
addition to curb and gutter
Supplemental off-street parking may be
required.
* R-O-W width shall be increased by 10 feet within 500’ of an arterial cross street intersection to allow a double left turn lane.
** R-O-W width shall be increased by 12 feet within 500’ of an arterial cross street intersection to allow a double left turn lane.
***The decision whether to require urban or rural street widths shall be made at sketch plan review.
(Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(o) Subdivisions which include any part of an existing platted
street which does not conform to the minimum right-of-way
requirements of these regulations may be required to provide
additional width necessary to meet the minimum right-of-way
requirements of these regulations.
(p) No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent
(0.5%) or exceed the following maximum grade:
Street Classification
Maximum %
Grade
Minimum
Radius of Curve
Minimum Sight
Distance*
Major Arterial 5% 400 feet 500 feet
Minor Arterial 5% 400 feet 500 feet
Collector 8% 300 feet 300 feet
Local 8% 100 feet 200 feet
* as measured between points four feet (4’ ) above the centerline of the street.
(q) Alleys shall be provided at the rear of lots within the
commercial zoning districts, or as otherwise approved by the
City. Alleys shall be twenty feet (20’) in width and shall be
paved in accordance with City specifications.
(2) Curb, gutter and sidewalks
Curb, gutter, and sidewalks or recreation trails shall be
provided along all roadways consistent with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan.
(i) A minimum ten-foot (10’) wide concrete recreation
trail with the addition of two-foot (2’) obstacle-free
recovery zones, constructed of Class 6 gravel
aggregate, or a City-approved alternative, on each side
of said trail shall be located along one (1) side of the
roadway, as determined by the City. Recreation trails
shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO
“Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities”.
(ii) A minimum six-foot (6’) wide sidewalk shall be
provided on the side of the roadway not occupied by
the recreation trail described above. Greater sidewalk
widths may be required in commercial areas.
(iii) Recreation trail lighting may be required in more
heavily populated or urbanized areas, travel corridors,
and commuter routes, as determined by the City.
Recreation trail lighting shall provide a minimum .4 to
.5 foot-candles of illumination at all points along the
length of the trail. The City’s provisions, standards,
and specifications regarding outdoor lighting shall also
apply.
(iv) Recreation trails with alternative non-hard surfaces
and narrower widths may be approved in those
instances where such trails are secondary to existing or
proposed concrete recreation trails, and do not serve as
connectors to the City’s recreation trail system, as
denoted within the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
(v) Curb, gutter, and sidewalks shall be provided along
collector and local streets. Six-foot (6’) detached
sidewalks are required on collector streets. Five-foot
(5’) detached or six-foot (6’) attached sidewalks are
required for local streets.
(Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(b) Sidewalks shall be located and constructed as necessary to
interconnect the subdivision and lots therein with the network
of City sidewalks and recreation trails. (Ord 2229, 11-05-
2009)
(c) Accessibility ramps shall be provided in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act. (Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(d) The City may elect to require over-sizing of any sidewalk and
participate in cost sharing thereof. (Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(e) The City may require any sidewalk to be wider than those
standards set forth herein, upon a finding that such greater
widths are necessary to serve the subdivision, due to:
(i) high density of the subdivision;
(ii) special needs of the residents of the subdivision; or
(iii) connection to existing wider sidewalks or recreation
trails.
(Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(3) Blocks and Lots.
(a) In residentially zoned districts, blocks shall be wide enough
to permit two (2) lots between lengthwise streets.
(b) The building line for residential lots on collector streets shall
be set back twenty-five feet (25') from the front property line.
(c) The building line on corner lots shall be set back twenty-five
feet (25’) from both street front property lines.
(d) Lots which abut a street in the front and the rear shall be
avoided except where a railroad right-of-way, a major arterial
or minor arterial street is located to the rear of the lot, in
which case such a lot shall have a minimum depth of one
hundred twenty five feet (125'). Lots abutting cul-de-sacs
shall have a minimum frontage of twenty-five feet (25’).
(e) Every lot shall front on a designated collector or local street,
subject however to the following exceptions:
(i) Private shared access drives accessing more than one
dwelling unit may be allowable, subject to City
approval, in subdivisions containing a total of six (6)
or less dwelling units in residential zoning districts;
(ii) Private access easements may be provided, subject to
City approval, in subdivisions within commercial
zoning districts across parking lot areas;
(iii) In such instances, the shared access improvements
shall be subject to City specifications and the
restrictions set forth in Section 4-7-6(G) above.
(f) No residential lot shall front on a major arterial or minor
arterial street. No access shall be permitted directly from a
residential lot to a major arterial or minor arterial street.
(g) The lot depth shall not be more than three (3) times the lot
width at the front building line.
(h) Access drives and intersections shall comply with City access
standards and the Transportation Plan. In addition, accesses
onto County roads shall comply with applicable County
regulations.
(i) Lots shall be at least fifty feet (50’) in width at the front
building line. Lots abutting cul-de-sacs shall have at least
twenty five feet (25’) of linear frontage to the cul-de-sac.
(j) Sight triangles shall be shown on the plat as per the
Engineering Specifications. (Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(4) Parks, open space and trails.
(a) For all new residential development requiring subdivision or
P.D. approval, or a combination of both, the owner shall pay
money in lieu of park land dedication as determined by the
City to be necessary or required, to defray the cost of and
provide parks and open space as calculated below.
(i) Those developments that dedicate adequate quantities
and qualities of park land acceptable to the City, in the
City’s sole discretion, shall not be required to pay the
money in lieu of park land dedication. Only park land
dedicated to the City of Montrose, and approved by the
City, in the City’s sole discretion, that meets the City’s
Parks, Trails, and Open Space Plan, or the City’s
Comprehensive Plan, the minimum design standards as
set forth herein, and that is improved to meet the City’s
park standards and specifications, shall qualify to
relieve the subdivider of payment of money in lieu of
park land dedication.
(ii) Lot or Unit x 0.0175 (acres park land per lot or unit) x
$90,000 (value per developed park land acre, based
upon $25,000 per acre undeveloped land value plus
$65,000 park land development cost) = $1,575 per lot
or unit.
(iii) Monies collected in lieu of park land dedication shall
be collected at time of issuance of building permit, and
placed into a City park development fund to be
earmarked for future acquisition or development of
parks, opens space, or trails. No security as set forth in
Section 4-7-8 shall be required.
(Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(b) Monies paid in lieu of park land dedication, pursuant to this
§ 4-7-7 (C)(4), are to enable the City to provide parks in the
proper locations, and of the proper sizes to serve the citizens
of the City.
(i) Private open space(s) or recreation areas shall not be a
substitute for the dedication of park land, or money in
lieu of park land dedication.
(Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(c) All non-public common areas, parks and open spaces shall be
held in private ownership and maintained in perpetuity, with
appropriate platted restrictions on use and covenants for
ownership and maintenance in accordance to the provisions
of §4-7-6(G) above. All non-public common areas shall be
located, constructed and installed in compliance with plans as
reviewed and approved.
(d) For purposes of these provisions, developed park land shall
require prior submittal and approval of a park plan by the
City, which plan shall address the City’s park standards and
specifications. (Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(e) When authorized by the City, the required dedication of
developed park land may be partially or wholly substituted by
alternative dedication and/or preservation of open space areas
such as riparian habitat, wetlands habitat, wildlife habitat and
view corridors as approved by the City. (Ord 2229, 11-05-
2009)
(f) Parks that are sized, developed, and located to meet the needs
of the City and constructed in accordance with City standards
and specifications may be dedicated to the City, and if so
dedicated, shall be available for use by the public. (Ord 2229,
11-05-2009)
(g) Consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan, subdividers
shall dedicate to the City developed park land based upon a
formula of seven (7) acres of developed and usable park land
per density of one thousand (1,000) residents, calculated at
build-out of the proposed subdivision. For purpose of this
calculation, it shall be assumed that each residential unit shall
house two and one-half (2.5) residents. (Ord 2229, 11-05-
2009)
(h) Sidewalks and recreation trails shall be integrated with
existing and planned sidewalks and recreation trails in
accordance with the City’s Parks, Trails and Open Space Plan
or Comprehensive Plan. The owner of each project shall
dedicate the appropriate easements consistent with said Plans.
(Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(i) Unless otherwise authorized, all sidewalk and recreation trails
shall be available for use by the public and shall be dedicated
to the City. (Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(j) Natural watercourses may be developed and preserved
consistent with City Floodplain Management Regulations,
Storm Drainage Requirements and Federal Clean Water Act
Section 404 Permit requirements, to minimize safety,
environmental, and other hazards, and shall be integrated with
the City's Comprehensive Plan for such watercourses
whenever feasible. Parks, open space and trails shall be sited
in flood plains instead of developed lots when reasonable to
do so. (Ord 2229, 11-05-2009)
(k) (Rep. by Ord. 2229, 11-05-2009)
(l) (Rep. by Ord. 2229, 11-05-2009)
(5) Public utilities:
(a) All utilities shall be installed underground unless the City
Engineer determines that soil or topographic conditions make
that impracticable.
(b) Utilities shall be installed prior to the paving of any street
under which they are to be located and the individual service
lines shall be connected and stubbed out prior to paving, in
order to avoid the necessity of cutting into the pavement to
connect any abutting lots.
(c) Utilities will be sized and placed as necessary to facilitate
connection with future subdivisions and developments. At a
minimum, six-inch (6”) water main lines shall be provided in
residential zoning districts, and eight-inch (8”) water main
lines shall be provided in commercial and industrial zoning
districts. At a minimum, eight-inch (8”) sewer main lines
shall be provided in all zoning districts. Multiple buildings
within a single lot shall each require a singular water and
sewer lateral connection to a main line.
(d) The City may elect to require over-sizing of the extended
utility and pay for the cost of such materials accordingly.
(e) City water and sewer systems shall be provided except where
the City has required an alternative supplier by service area
agreement with such alternative provider. In cases where
alternative utilities are provided on a temporary basis,
connection to City services shall be required at such time they
are made available to the subject property.
(f) In the event that City sewer service will not be available
within a reasonable time period following final plat approval,
engineered individual sewage disposal systems may be
authorized by the City for those subdivisions occurring within
the residential “rural living” zoning districts with lot sizes of
five (5) acres or greater. Advance City approval shall be
required in each case.
(g) All extension of City utilities shall require City approval and
proper execution of City utility extension agreements. The
extension of utilities shall be at the sole expense of the
subdivider.
(h) Prior to any installation or construction of utility extensions,
the subdivider shall first submit proposed alignment location
maps and engineered drawings for City approval. The
subdivider shall acquire all necessary easements for the
proposed utility location from all affected properties. The
easements shall be conveyed to the City and executed on
applicable City forms.
(i) All utility extensions shall be subject to City inspection and
approval. The City may elect to contract inspection services
at the subdivider’s expense.
(j) All utility main line extensions, once approved by the City,
shall be dedicated to the City with applicable utility
easements. As-built plans and data shall be provided on hard
copy in accordance with these provisions and on diskette in a
digital format compatible with City computer systems.
(k) Following the completion of any utility extension and
submission of the as-built plans, the City Engineer shall
conduct an inspection, and if the improvements are in
accordance with the requirements of these and other
applicable regulations and good engineering and construction
standards, shall issue a Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure
Completion. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(i) For a period of two (2) calendar years thereafter, the
subdivider shall be responsible for correcting all
defects or failures that appear in such improvements.
(ii) At the completion of this two (2) calendar year
Construction Warranty period, upon written request
from the subdivider, all public and necessary on and
off-site improvements shall again be inspected by the
City Engineer, and upon final approval, may be
accepted by the City, as evidenced by issuance of a
Letter of Infrastructure Completion and Acceptance.
The provisions set forth in Section 4-7-6 (D) of the
Municipal Code shall apply to improvements and
construction covered by this Section.
(6) Piped drainage facilities and waterways.
(a) Stormwater discharge improvements shall be engineered and
approved in accordance with City specifications. Stormwater
retention on site shall be discouraged. When feasible to do so,
all ditches shall be piped and subject to platted easements to
be dedicated either to the City or to the applicable owner of
the ditch facilities. The City may elect to allow the location
of piped ditch facilities within its rights-of-way at its
discretion. Perpetual maintenance shall be provided pursuant
to plat notes and/or City approved covenants.
(b) Permission shall be acquired, in writing, from all applicable
owners of ditch facilities prior to improvements thereto.
(c) No discharges of urban stormwater into any irrigation ditch
facilities shall be allowed. No discharges of urban
stormwater into agricultural drainage ditch facilities shall be
allowed, unless otherwise approved by the owning interest in
said drainage facilities.
(7) School Land Dedication
(a) The subdivider shall dedicate to the City land for
development of school based upon the below formula of
17.83 acres of vacant land per density of one thousand units
or lots, calculated at build-out of the proposed subdivision.
This is based upon an average of 0.64 students per residential
unit.
(b) All of the dedicated shall be of a singular parcel, shall meet
the minimum size requirements for the intended use, and shall
be suitable for construction of school facilities. The RE-1J
School District shall review the subdivider’s request to
dedicate land or pay cash-in-lieu of land dedication, and shall
provide its recommendation to the City Land Use Staff
accordingly.
Elementary school = 15 acres
Middle school = 30 acres
High school = 55 acres
(c) For those subdivisions where the dedication of school land is
not practicable, such as subdivisions involving small land
area, or where the area of the land is not suitable or sufficient
for purposed construction of school facilities, the City shall
require a money-in-lieu-of payment equal to the value of the
property otherwise developed and dedicated in accordance
with these provisions. The value of the property shall be
based upon Montrose County Land Values, as adjusted from
time to time, and calculated as follows:
School Student
per Lot
Acres per
Student
Dollars per
Acre
In-Lieu
Fees
Elementary .294 .033 $25,000 $243
Middle .154 .067 $25,000 $258
High .192 .037 $25,000 $178
TOTAL $679
(Ord. 2188, 04-03-2008)
(d) Moneys collected in lieu of school land dedication shall be
collected at time of issuance of building permit (or certificate
of occupancy for those buildings commenced prior to final
plat approval) and placed into a school land fund to be
disbursed to the RE-1J School District on a quarterly basis.
No security as set forth in Section 4-7-8 shall be required.
(e) When possible, the requirement for money in lieu of
dedication shall be noted as a plat note on the final plat of the
subdivision, or within the recorded declaration of covenants
for residential development not requiring subdivision, such as
mobile home parks.
(f) The following shall be exempted from school land dedication
requirements or payment-in-lieu-of fees:
(i) Nursing homes as defined in the City Code;
(ii) City approved subdivisions that are subject to recorded
covenants restricting the age of the residents of said
dwelling units such that the dwelling may be classified
as “housing for older persons” pursuant to the Federal
Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.
(iii) Residential zoning uses that do not accommodate
permanent residential housing. Said developments
shall be required to record a covenant running with the
land, prohibiting permanent residential housing
therein, in a form acceptable to the City, if a waiver of
the fee in lieu of school land dedication is requested.
(Ord. 2188, 04-03-2008)
(8) Monuments: Monuments shall be set in concrete and placed at all
corners of all street intersections, at the intersections of the boundary
of the subdivision with street right-of-way lines, at angle points and
points of curve in each street and at points of change in direction of
the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. The top of the monument
shall have a metal cap set flush to identify the location. All lot
corners shall be monumented with a minimum of a #5 rebar 18” in
length and metal cap.
(9) Berms, screening and buffers: Buffers and/or screening shall be
provided between incompatible uses both within the subdivision and
adjoining the subdivision in accordance with City design standards
and specifications.
(10) Street Lights
(a) In all subdivisions, except for residential zoned “rural living”
and "estate” subdivisions, streetlights shall be provided at all
intersections and at intervals between intersections in
accordance with City specifications.
(b) In residential “rural living” zoning districts and "estate”
subdivisions, street lights shall only be required at street
intersections, with no interval requirements.
(c) All streetlights shall conform to City standards and
specifications, and with Chapter 4-13. (Ord. 1924, 12-05-
2002)
(11) Outdoor Lighting: All outdoor and exterior lighting shall conform
with Chapter 4-13. (Ord. 1924, 12-05-2002)
4-7-8: SECURITY FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
(A) If the subdivider wishes to have the Final Plat approved prior to the
installation, inspection and approval of all required improvements, the
subdivider must provide security incorporated into a Subdivision
Improvement Agreement to guarantee the completion of all improvements
within two (2) calendar years after approval of the Final Plat in accordance
with this Section. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(1) Said security shall be in the form of:
(a) a subdivision lien agreement placing an adequate lien upon
the lots of the subdivision, with an escrow account with the
City into which the subdivider shall pay, prior to the sale of
any lot within the subdivision, an amount to be verified by the
City Engineer equal to one hundred and fifty percent (150%)
of the pro rata cost to complete the subdivision improvements
necessary to serve that lot; or;
(b) a cash escrow deposited with the City or a clear irrevocable
letter of credit in an amount to be verified by the City
Engineer equal to one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of
the pro rata cost to complete the subdivision improvements
necessary to serve that lot.
(2) Funds in any escrow account shall be returned to the subdivider
upon the issuance of either a Letter of Substantial Completion or a
Preliminary Letter of Infrastructure Completion, depending on the
circumstances. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-2007)
(3) Security shall not be required for money in lieu of payments relative
to park land and school land dedications provided in Section 4-7-7,
as such money payments shall be collected upon issuance of
building permits relative to subdivided lots or units.
(4) Even though a Final Plat will have been recorded, when a subdivider
chooses to secure public and necessary on and off-site improvements
with a Subdivision Improvement Agreement, the subdivider shall
agree not to sell, transfer, offer for sale or otherwise convey any
portion of the property, including lot(s), unit(s) or outlot(s), prior to
the issuance of a Letter of Substantial Completion or a Preliminary
Letter of Infrastructure Completion, depending on the circumstances.
A sale or other transfer of the entire subdivision will be possible
once the purchaser has provided the necessary security. (Ord. 2173,
11-15-2007)
(B) The subdivider shall complete all necessary on and off-site improvements
within two (2) calendar years of the approval of the Final Plat by the
Council. In the event that all necessary on and off-site improvements are
not completed, inspected and approved within two (2) calendar years of the
date of the approval of the Final plat by the Council, no further building
permits, occupancy permits, water taps or sewer taps shall be allowed by
the City in such subdivision until such improvements are completed. It
shall then be unlawful to sell any further lots in the subdivision until all
necessary on and off-site improvements are completed. (Ord. 2173, 11-15-
2007)
(C) The City Council may authorize extensions of time to complete all
improvements beyond the two (2) year limitation as set forth herein.
4-7-9: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
(A) Subdivisions which meet all of the following criteria do not require a sketch
plan or preliminary plat to be submitted, and may be approved
administratively without notice and hearing.
(1) The subdivision results in no more than three (3) tracts or lots or
interests.
(2) All lots or tracts are adjacent to a dedicated and accepted public
street.
(3) The lots are part of a subdivision plat that has been previously
approved and/or accepted by the City and recorded in the Montrose
County Records.
(4) The improvements required by these regulations are already in
existence and available to serve each lot, or secured.
(5) Each lot will meet requirements of the applicable City zoning
regulations without the necessity for any variance and no variance
has been granted within the three (3) previous years.
(6) No part of the subdivision has been approved as part of a minor
subdivision within three (3) years prior to the date of submission of
the minor subdivision plat.
(7) No material changes to prior plat notes, restrictions or easements are
proposed.
(B) Submittals of sketch plans and preliminary plats are not required. Five (5)
copies of the minor subdivision plat shall be filed with the City. All fees
related to this Section shall be as set forth in Chapter 3-1 of the City of
Montrose Regulations Manual, which fees shall cover all administrative
costs. (Ord. 2005, 05-20-2004)
(C) The plat shall contain Certification on forms approved by the City to
document approval of the plat, including but not limited to the following:
(1) The name of the subdivision and the name, address and phone
number of the subdivider, and his representative if applicable, said
information to be included within a title box located on the lower
right corner of the plat.
(2) A certificate by a registered surveyor, attesting to the accuracy of the
survey plat and placement of monuments, and compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter and State law.
(3) The name of the surveyor preparing the plat, the date of the plat,
said information to be included within a title box located on the
lower right corner of the plat.
(4) A certificate of an attorney that title to the property is in the name of
those parties.
(5) A certificate of recording to be executed by the County Clerk and
Recorder.
(D) The City Land Use Staff may either approve, disapprove or conditionally
approve the plat subject to compliance with any minimum design standards;
to dedication of additional right-of-way, easements, open space or park
land; or to installation of additional improvements.
(E) Upon approval by the City Land Use Staff, the plat of the minor
subdivision shall be submitted in final form on two (2) reproducible mylars,
with all requisite signatures, and also on diskette in a digital format
acceptable to the City, and compatible with City computer systems.
4-7-10: AMENDED PLATS
(A) Amended Plats may be submitted without a sketch plan or preliminary plat
if they meet the below requirements. Five (5) copies of the amended plat
shall be filed with the City. All fees related to this Section shall be as set
forth in Chapter 3-1 of the City of Montrose Regulations Manual, which
fees shall cover all administrative costs. (Ord. 2005, 05-20-2004)
(1) The plat, as amended, reduces the number of lots within the
subdivision; or the nature of the amendment is de minimus.
(2) All lots or tracts are adjacent to a dedicated public street.
(3) The lots are part of a subdivision plat which has been approved
and/or accepted by the City and recorded in the Montrose County
Records.
(4) The improvements required by these regulations are already in
existence and available to serve each lot.
(5) Each lot will meet requirements of the applicable City Zoning
regulations without the necessity for any variance and no variance
has been granted within the three (3) previous years. No material
changes to prior plat notes, restrictions or easements are proposed.
(B) Submittals of sketch plans and preliminary plats are not required. The City
Land Use Staff may either approve, disapprove or conditionally approve
the plat subject to compliance with any minimum design standards; to
dedication of additional right-of-way, easements, open space or park land;
or to installation of additional improvements.
(C) The plat shall contain Certification on forms approved by the City to
document approval of the plat, including but not limited to the following:
(1) The name of the subdivision and the name, address and phone
number of the subdivider, and his representative if applicable, said
information to be included within a title box located on the lower
right corner of the plat.
(2) A certificate by a registered surveyor, attesting to the accuracy of the
survey plat and placement of monuments, and compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter and State law.
(3) The name of the surveyor preparing the plat, the date of the plat, said
information to be included within a title box located on the lower
right corner of the plat.
(4) A certificate of an attorney that title to the property is in the name of
those parties.
(5) A certificate of recording to be executed by the County Clerk and
Recorder.
(D) The City Land Use Staff may either approve, disapprove or conditionally
approve the plat subject to compliance with any minimum design standards;
to dedication of additional right-of-way, easements, open space or park
land; or to installation of additional improvements.
(E) Upon approval by the City Land Use Staff, the amended plat shall be
submitted in final form on two (2) reproducible mylars, with all requisite
signatures, and also on diskette in a digital format acceptable to the City,
and compatible with City computer systems.
4-7-11: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW HEARING
(A) Upon City Council final action concerning either preliminary plat or final
plat, the subdivider may request, in writing and submitted to the City within
30 days of said final action, with appropriate fees paid as set forth in
Section 3-1 of the City of Montrose Regulations Manual, an administrative
review hearing before the City Council. (Ord. 1999, 04-15-2004)
(B) The administrative review hearing shall be limited to review of:
(1) denial of the plat;
(2) minimum standards and/or conditions imposed as a requirement of
approval of the plat.
(C) The hearing shall be conducted on record, and the Council shall prepare and
submit to the subdivider a written summary of its findings and decision in
the matter.
Chapter 4-9
HOUSING CODE
Sections:
4-9-1 DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-9-2 INSPECTIONS
4-9-3 ENFORCEMENT OF HOUSING CODE
4-9-4 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
4-9-5 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND
FACILITIES
4-9-6 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
4-9-7 ROOMING HOUSES AND HOTELS
4-9-8 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS; ORDER
REQUIRING VACATION
4-9-9 EMERGENCY PROCEEDINGS IN COURT OF RECORD
4-9-10 OFFENSES
4-9-11 SEVERABILITY
Chapter 4-9
HOUSING CODE
Sections:
4-9-1 DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-9-2 INSPECTIONS
4-9-3 ENFORCEMENT OF HOUSING CODE
4-9-4 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
4-9-5 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND
FACILITIES
4-9-6 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
4-9-7 ROOMING HOUSES AND HOTELS
4-9-8 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS; ORDER REQUIRING
VACATION
4-9-9 EMERGENCY PROCEEDINGS IN COURT OF RECORD
4-9-10 OFFENSES
4-9-11 SEVERABILITY
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
The following definitions and general provisions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this Chapter.
(A) Declaration of Policy: The Council declares the purpose of this article is to
protect, preserve, and promote the physical and mental health of the people,
control communicable diseases, regulate privately and publicly owned
dwellings for the purpose of sanitation and public health, and protect the
safety of the people and promote the general welfare by legislation which
shall be applicable to all dwellings now in existence or hereafter
constructed.
(B) Legislative Finding: The Council finds that there exists in the City
numerous dwellings which are substandard in one (1) or more important
features of structure, equipment, sanitation, or maintenance. Such
conditions adversely affect the physical and mental health of the people, the
control of communicable diseases, the safety of the people and the general
welfare and therefore require the establishment and enforcement of
minimum housing standards.
(C) Title: This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Montrose
Housing Code. "Approved" shall mean constructed, installed, and
maintained in accordance with this Chapter or other pertinent ordinances of
the City and rules and regulations adopted and promulgated in pursuance
thereof.
(D) Terms not defined herein shall be as defined in the Building Code.
(E) "Garbage" shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
(F) "Habitable Room" shall mean a room designed to be used for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking, excluding bathrooms, toilet compartments,
closets, halls and storage places.
(G) "Infestation" shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests of such kind or in such numbers to
cause a hazard to health.
(H) "Manager" shall mean the City Manager of Montrose.
(I) "Multiple Dwelling" shall mean any dwelling containing more than two (2)
dwelling units.
(J) "Occupant" shall mean any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or
having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
(K) "Operator" shall mean any person, whether the owner or not, who manages
or controls any dwelling, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or
rooming units are let.
(L) "Owner" shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others:
(1) Has record legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying possession thereof;
(2) Acts as the agent of the person holding the record legal title of any
dwelling or dwelling unit;
(3) Is the personal representative or fiduciary of an estate through which
the record legal title to the real property in which) any dwelling or
dwelling unit is administered.
(M) "Rooming Unit" shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but no
part of which is exclusively or occasionally appropriated to cookery.
(N) "Rooming House" shall mean any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling,
containing one (1) or more rooming units in which space is let to three (3)
or more persons who are permanent guests.
(O) "Rubbish” shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials
household and yard debris and ashes.
(P) "Supplied" shall mean paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control
of the owner or operator.
4-9-2: INSPECTIONS
For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the
Manager or his authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition, use, and occupancy of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units, and the premises upon which the same are located. For the purpose of
making such inspections the Manager or his authorized representative is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises upon which the same are located, at all reasonable times. The owner, operator
and occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall give the Manager,
or his authorized representative, free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit and its premises, for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Every
occupant of a dwelling shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to
any part of such dwelling, or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter or with any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated, or any
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
4-9-3: ENFORCEMENT OF HOUSING CODE
(A) Notice of Violations: Except in those instances to which Section 4-9-11
hereof is applicable, whenever the Manager or his authorized representative
determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this Chapter
or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of
such alleged violation to the person who may be responsible therefor, as
enumerated below. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Particularize the violations alleged to exist to have been committed;
(3) Provide a reasonable time, but not less than thirty (30) days in any
event, for the correction of the violations particularized;
(4) Be addressed to and served upon the owner of the property, the
operator of the dwelling, and the occupant of the dwelling unit or the
rooming unit concerned, if the occupant is or may be responsible for
the violation. Service shall be as provided for personal service by
the rules of civil procedure for courts of record in Colorado or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, delivered to
addressee only. If service is made by registered or certified mail, the
Manager or his authorized representative shall include in the record
a statement giving details regarding the mailing. If one (1) or more
persons to whom the notice is addressed cannot be found or served
after diligent effort so to do, service may be made upon such person
by posting notice in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
affected by the notice, in which event the Manager or his authorized
representative shall include in the record a statement as to why such
posting was necessary.
(B) Appeal to the Council: Any person affected by a notice issued hereunder,
who is aggrieved thereby, and who believes the same to be factually or
legally contrary to the provisions of the City Code, may appeal the same to
the Council.
(C) Variance on Appeal: The Council may authorize, upon appeal in specific
cases, such variance from the terms of the Housing Code or regulation pursuant
thereto, subject to terms and conditions fixed by the Council, as will
not adversely affect the public health where, owing to exceptional and
extraordinary circumstances, literal enforcement of applicable provisions
will result in unnecessary hardship. The burden of proof is upon the applicant
to show by clear and convincing evidence that:
(1) The variance shall not substantially or permanently injure the
appropriate use of the other portions of the dwelling involved, or
other property;
(2) The variance shall be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of the
Housing Code;
(3) The variance shall protect, preserve, and promote the physical and
mental health of the people of the City in the same manner and to the
same effect as would literal enforcement of the provisions applicable
to each particular case.
(D) Time to Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Manager
may appeal said decision within ten (10) days from the time of the receipt
of the notice or the time of posting, as the case may be. The appeal shall be
directed to the Council and shall be filed with the Clerk within said ten (10)
day period.
(E) Effect of Failure to Appeal: If no appeal is taken, the notice shall become a
final order when the time for appeal to the Council has elapsed.
4-9-4: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Council is hereby authorized to adopt and the department shall promulgate rules and
regulations deemed necessary for the proper and effective enforcement of the provisions
of this Chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this
Chapter and the standards established herein.
4-9-5: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit which does not
comply with the following requirements:
(A) Every habitable room shall have artificial light.
(B) A habitable room must have an openable window unless mechanical
ventilation is provided.
(C) Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with rubbish and garbage storage
facilities whose type and location are approved.
(D) Every dwelling shall have adequate facilities and utilities for heating in at
least one-half (½) of the habitable rooms.
(E) There shall be a supply of running water for drinking within all dwelling
units from City service.
(F) In each dwelling unit there shall be at least one (1) sink with running water
of approved quality connected in accordance with the Plumbing Code,
except as provided in the Trailer Court Chapter.
(G) Every dwelling unit shall have approved, safe, unobstructed means of
egress leading to safe and open space at ground level.
(H) All dwelling structures shall be weathertight, dry and in good repair. There
shall be no leaking gas pipes or fixtures; no leakage of coal gas from coal
stoves, furnaces, pipes or chimneys; no dampness from faulty drainage.
(I) Each dwelling unit shall be adequately wired for electricity for proper
lighting in each room and passageway in accordance with the Building
Code.
(J) There shall be insect screening on every window and exterior door or other
opening through which air may be admitted from the outdoors, and absence
of infestation of any insects, rodents or other pests.
(K) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred square feet (100 sq.
ft.) of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least fifty (50)
additional square feet of floor space for each additional occupant to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
(L) The occupants of not more than two (2) dwelling units may share a single
bathtub or shower, and a single flush water closet if: the facility is
accessible to the occupants of each dwelling unit without their having to go
outside to reach the facility.
4-9-6: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
(A) Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared
or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(B) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition
that part of the dwelling which he occupies and controls.
4-9-7: ROOMING HOUSES AND HOTELS
No person shall operate a rooming house, or hotel except in compliance with all the
applicable provisions of this Chapter. There shall be supplied at least one (1) flush water
closet or urinal, or shower, for each ten (10) persons, or fraction thereof.
(A) The operator of any rooming house, hotel or other transient facility, shall
supply and change bed linen and towels therein at least once each week,
and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding, walls, floors, and
ceilings, in a clean and sanitary manner.
4-9-8: DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS; ORDER REQUIRING
VACATION
(A) Designation: Whenever the Manager finds any dwelling which does not
conform to the standards established by this Chapter, he may without prior
notice or hearing designate such dwelling unit as unfit for human
habitation.
(B) Placarding; Order to Vacate: Any dwelling unit designated as unfit for
human habitation by the Manager shall be appropriately placarded as such
and shall be vacated by the occupants within the time specified. Such
placard shall be deemed an order directing vacation, and shall permit not
less than ten (10) days from the date of such placarding for the vacating of
the dwelling.
(C) Correction of Defects: No dwelling which has been placarded as such shall
again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from
the Manager.
(D) Unlawful to Deface Placard: It shall be unlawful for any person to deface,
remove or obscure any placard affixed under the provisions of this Chapter.
4-9-9: EMERGENCY PROCEEDINGS IN COURT OF RECORD
If any owner refuses or neglects to comply with an order of the Manager, or if an
emergency to public health exists, the Manager may cause to be done whatever is
necessary to obviate an imminent hazard to public health by way of causing the
demolition of any dwelling or part thereof concerned. Such demolition shall be by
instituting appropriate proceedings in the District Court in and for the County of
Montrose and State of Colorado under these provisions. The costs of demolition shall be
collected in the action. The costs enumerated above, if not otherwise paid by the
defendants or collected upon execution in the manner provided by law, shall constitute a
lien against the premises.
4-9-10: OFFENSES
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this Chapter or any order issued
hereunder shall be guilty of an offense.
4-9-11: SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Chapter is held invalid, unconstitutional, void, or inoperative,
such holding shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Chapter.
The Council finds this Chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
health and safety and determines that it shall take effect immediately upon its final
passage and publication. (Ord. 456; 1962)
Chapter 4-11
STREET, LOT AND BUILDING DESIGNATIONS
Sections:
4-11-1 NUMBERS REQUIRED
4-11-2 NUMBER SPECIFICATIONS
4-11-3 MOBILE HOME PARK NUMBERING
4-11-4 STREETS
4-11-5 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 4-11
STREET, LOT AND BUILDING DESIGNATIONS
Sections:
4-11-1 NUMBERS REQUIRED
4-11-2 NUMBER SPECIFICATIONS
4-11-3 MOBILE HOME PARK NUMBERING
4-11-4 STREETS
4-11-5 ENFORCEMENT
4-11-1: NUMBERS REQUIRED
(A) All property, lots, buildings, residences, mobile homes and other structures
shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and
other applicable City ordinances and regulations.
(B) Property numbers shall be assigned by the City in accordance with the
scheme set out in this Chapter and on the Official City Numbering Map, or
on the basis of specific numbering schemes for the following subdivisions:
Vista View, Monell Heights, Montrose Estates, Akard, Monterey Park,
Mountain View, Edmar, McWhiter and Foster.
(C) Property located on the northerly side of streets running generally east/west
and on the westerly side of streets running generally north/south shall be
designated with odd numbers. Property located on the southerly side of
streets running generally east/west and on the easterly side of streets
running generally north/south shall be designated with even numbers;
provided, however, that in an area generally south of Main Street as
delineated on the Official Numbering Map of the City, property located on
the westerly side of streets running generally north/south shall have an even
number and property located on the easterly side of streets running
generally north/south shall have an odd number.
(D) The owner, occupant or lessee of any structure including mobile homes
shall be jointly and severally responsible to affix and maintain the property
number assigned in accordance with this Chapter.
4-11-2: NUMBER SPECIFICATIONS
(A) All property numbers shall be affixed upon a structure at a location clearly
visible and legible from the street upon which the main structure fronts.
Unless impractical, such numbers shall be affixed to the main building or
structure.
(B) The numbers shall be Arabic numerals with a minimum height of two and
one-half inches (2 1/2"), and shall be affixed with a contrasting colored
background.
4-11-3: MOBILE HOME PARK NUMBERING
(A) Numbers shall be assigned to each lot or space in every mobile home park
by the City based upon a suitable frontage footage increment. Each mobile
home shall have affixed to it the same number assigned to the lot upon
which it is located.
(B) The numbers will be assigned with even numbers being assigned to those
mobile homes on the easterly and southerly sides of streets and odd
numbers being assigned to mobile homes on the northerly and westerly
sides of streets. Numbering will begin at the main entrance into the mobile
home park.
(C) The number assigned to each lot shall be affixed to a utility connection
post, or the like, wherever such a structure exists on a mobile home lot with
a minimum of one inch (1") Arabic numerals. Any mobile home located on
that lot shall have affixed to it the same number with arabic numerals at
least two and one-half inches (2 1/2") in height at a point clearly visible and
legible from the street upon which it fronts.
(D) It shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the owner, occupant and
lessee of each mobile home and the owner and lessee of the lot upon which
any mobile home is located to affix and maintain numbers in accordance
with this Section and to change such numbers whenever any mobile home
is moved.
(E) Mobile homes located in mobile home subdivisions shall be numbered in
the same manner as other structures in the City are numbered.
4-11-4: STREETS
(A) Streets in mobile home parks shall be lettered with those streets running in
a northerly/southerly direction lettered from the beginning of the alphabet.
Streets in mobile home parks running an easterly/westerly direction shall be
lettered commencing with the letter "Z" in reverse alphabetical order.
Street letters shall be assigned by the City for new and existing mobile
home parks at the same time that numbers for individual mobile home
spaces are assigned. Double letters may be assigned if necessary.
(B) All other streets in the City shall be assigned designations either in the
subdivision process for new subdivisions, or otherwise at the direction of
the City.
4-11-5: ENFORCEMENT
(A) All new structures shall have affixed the proper number prior to the
issuance of any occupancy permit.
(B) If the City determines that a violation of this Chapter exists the City shall
send a notice of such violation addressed to the owner, occupant or lessee
of the property involved, and if such owner, occupant or lessee fails to affix
and maintain the number assigned in accordance with this Chapter within
fifteen (15) days of the date on which notice was mailed, the City may
cause the required numbers to be affixed and may collect the expense of
doing so from the owner, occupant or lessee of the property in accordance
with law.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this Chapter.
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter may
be sentenced to a term of not to exceed one (1) year in jail, or a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or to both such fine and
imprisonment; provided, however, that no person under the age of eighteen
(18) years shall be subject to any sentence of imprisonment. (Ord. 1614,
12-19-96)
(D) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin any violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 1024, 5-3-79)
Chapter 4-12
MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL HOME REGULATIONS
Sections:
4-12-1 DEFINITIONS
4-12-2 USE AND LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES
4-12-3 USE AND LOCATION OF TRAVEL HOMES
4-12-4 PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY LOCATION OR OCCUPANCY OF
TRAVEL HOMES
4-12-5 MOBILE HOME PARK PERMITS
4-12-6 MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
4-12-7 TRAVEL HOME PARK PERMITS
4-12-8 TRAVEL HOME PARK DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
4-12-9 MAINTENANCE OF MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL HOME
PARKS
4-12-10 VIOLATIONS
4-12-11 CONSTRUCTION AND SET UP REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 4-12
MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL HOME REGULATIONS
Sections:
4-12-1 DEFINITIONS
4-12-2 USE AND LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES
4-12-3 USE AND LOCATION OF TRAVEL HOMES
4-12-4 PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY LOCATION OR OCCUPANCY OF
TRAVEL HOMES
4-12-5 MOBILE HOME PARK PERMITS
4-12-6 MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
4-12-7 TRAVEL HOME PARK PERMITS
4-12-8 TRAVEL HOME PARK DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
4-12-9 MAINTENANCE OF MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL HOME
PARKS
4-12-10 VIOLATIONS
4-12-11 CONSTRUCTION AND SET UP REQUIREMENTS
4-12-1: DEFINITIONS
MOBILE HOME: A single family home substantially or entirely
manufactured in a factory which is moved on site in
substantial component parts, including homes commonly
known as mobile homes, modular homes, factory built
homes, manufactured homes, and those manufactured and
certified pursuant to 42 USC 540 et seq. or manufactured
pursuant to other construction standards. Travel homes as
defined below shall not be considered a mobile home, as
defined herein. (Ord. 1670, 9-3-98)
DEPENDENT
MOBILE HOME:
A mobile home without toilet, lavatory or bathing facilities.
(Ord. 1670, 9-3-98)
MOBILE HOME
PARK:
Any single or contiguous lots, tracts, or premises upon
which is located two or more mobile homes intended for
use or used as residences typically, but not necessarily, held
and operated under undivided ownership with rental of
spaces or units. (Ord. 1670, 9-3-98)
TRAVEL HOME: Vehicles and structures commonly used for temporary
dwelling during travel or recreation activities including, but
not limited to, those registered or required to be registered
and licensed as a vehicle, such as campers, motor homes,
RV’s, pick-up truck campers, trailers and trailer coaches.
(Ord. 1670, 9-3-98)
4-12-2: USE AND LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES
Mobile homes maybe used, occupied or located only in the following places:
(A) Upon property lawfully used for a mobile home sales business, provided
that such use or occupation thereof shall be restricted to the office usage
associated with the mobile home sales business, and no residential
occupation shall be allowed. (Ord 1766, 04-06-2000)
(B) Occupied as a dwelling within a mobile home park for which an occupancy
permit has been issued or which park lawfully existed at the date this
Chapter became effective.
(C) Occupied as a dwelling within a mobile home subdivision, or a zoning
district, which allows mobile homes on individually owned lots.
(D) Upon property for which a permit has been issued by the City for
temporary use pursuant to Subsection 4-1-3(N) of the Official Code of the
City of Montrose, Colorado.
(E) At a location where a mobile home is lawfully located, occupied or used at
the effective date of this Chapter, or date of annexation to the City, and
continuously located, occupied or used thereafter; subject to the Non-
Conforming Use Regulations of the City's Zoning Regulations. (Ord. 1029,
7-5-79)
(F) Repealed by Ordinance 1475.
4-12-3: USE AND LOCATION OF TRAVEL HOMES
(A) Travel homes may be occupied as temporary dwellings only in the
following circumstances:
(1) Within a travel home park for which an occupancy permit has been
issued or within a travel home park which lawfully existed at the
effective date of this Chapter.
(2) Upon private property for temporary occupancy by out-of-town
guests, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any year for any
tract of property.
(3) Upon property for which a permit has been issued by the City
pursuant to Section 4-12-4.
(B) Travel homes may be parked, if unoccupied, upon private property, or
temporarily upon public streets, if registered under State law and lawfully
parked, as set forth in Chapter 10-1 herein, and in the Model Traffic Code
as adopted by Chapter 10-1 herein; provided, however, travel homes may
not be parked to create a traffic hazard. (Ord 2223, 07-02-2009)
4-12-4: PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY LOCATION OR OCCUPANCY OF
TRAVEL HOMES
(A) An application for a permit for the temporary location or use of a travel
home upon private property shall be made upon forms supplied by the City
and appropriate fees paid as set forth in Section 3-1 of the City of Montrose
Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1999, 04-15-2004)
(B) A permit (for a period of up to one year) may be issued under the following
circumstances by the City Manager:
(1) For fire protection or security purposes in Industrial Districts.
(2) At a construction site during the construction period for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Travel homes may be used as a temporary residence, on property
owned by the occupants, for which a building permit for a single
family residence has been issued, and water and sewer taps
purchased which meet the following criteria:
(a) The permit shall be in effect only as long as actual
construction of the permanent residence is being pursued with
due diligence.
(b) The owners of all abutting property must approve the use in
writing.
(c) The lot size of the premises upon which the travel home is
located must have an area of at least twice the minimum lot
size specified in City Zoning Regulations.
(d) The travel home must be properly connected to the water and
sewer system and be subject to monthly water, sewer and
trash collection charges.
(C) The Planning Commission may issue a permit for the temporary location of
Travel Homes, irrespective of the proposed use, on private property only,
under the following circumstances:
(1) Permits shall be issued only upon the Planning Commission’s
determination that the criteria set forth in § 4-4-24 of the Official
Code of the City of Montrose applicable to Conditional Uses have
been met.
(a) The permit may be granted upon conditions or limitations
which the Planning Commission determines are necessary in
order to ensure that the applicable criteria are met.
(b) Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements set forth in § 4-4-29 of the Official Code of the
City of Montrose for Conditional Use permit applications.
(c) An appeal de novo from the Planning Commission’s decision
may be had in accordance with § 4-4-29 (G) of the Official
Code of the City of Montrose for Conditional Use permit
applications.
(2) The Planning Commission shall determine the maximum permit
period, but in no case shall the permit period exceed twelve (12)
months.
(a) No more than one (1) permit for the same property may be
issued in any twelve (12) month period.
(b) Six (6) months must elapse between successive permits
applicable to the same property.
(3) These provisions are not intended to allow temporary commercial
Travel Home parks. No payments shall be collected from the Travel
Home occupants by the owner or operator of the permitted site.
(4) All Travel Home units shall be connected to a potable water and
sanitary sewer system.
(a) The City shall determine the appropriate utility rate structure,
when City utilities are utilized by the Travel Home units. Tap
and system investment fees shall apply, when new taps are
purchased. Unit Charges may apply, at the City’s sole
discretion.
(b) Monthly water, sewer, and trash collection charges shall
apply, when City utilities or services are utilized by the
Travel Home units.
(c) Water, sewer, and other utility connections shall meet all
applicable requirements of the utility providers.
(d) Backflow prevention device(s) shall be required in
accordance with Chapter 3-8 of the Official Code of the City
of Montrose.
(5) Access points and access drives shall feature all-weather surfaces,
and meet all applicable City and Fire District requirements.
(6) Travel Homes shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet
from the nearest property line, regardless of the underlying zoning
district.
(7) Fire hydrant(s) may be required as set forth in the International Fire
Code, as adopted by the City.
(8) All Travel Homes and utility facilities shall be promptly removed
from the permitted site at the end of the permit period.
(9) All applicable Federal, State and local storm water regulations shall
be met.
(a) The permitted site shall comply with any other applicable
Federal, State, or local regulations.
(Ord. 2272, 04-19-2011)
(D) The City shall not issue any temporary Travel Home location permit,
except for a use or location which complies with the criteria of this Section.
Such permit may be revoked by the City Council after a hearing upon
reasonable notice to the applicant for a violation of any of the provisions of
this Section, or any other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations of the
City, State or Federal governments.
(Ord. 2272, 04-19-2011)
4-12-5: MOBILE HOME PARK PERMITS
(A) It shall be unlawful to commence the construction of any mobile home park
or the enlargement of an existing mobile home park until a mobile home
park construction permit has been approved by the City Planning
Commission and City Council as meeting the criteria and requirements of
this Chapter and other applicable City and State regulations.
(B) Application for a mobile home park construction permit shall be made by
submitting a site plan of the proposed mobile home park, accompanied by
any supporting documents, plans or drawings as necessary to show that the
design requirements of Section 4-12-6 will be complied with.
(C) The site plan and all supporting plans must be submitted to the City no later
than thirty (30) days before the date at which the Planning Commission is
to review the application. Following review of the application, the
Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the application. If
disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall be included in the Planning
Commission minutes and provided to the applicant upon request. If the
application is approved, it shall be submitted to the City Council for review
and action. The Council may approve the application, or disapprove the
application if it finds that the requirements of these regulations have not
been met.
(D) It shall be unlawful to locate any mobile home within any mobile home
park prior to the time that an occupancy permit for the mobile home park,
or applicable portion thereof, has been issued by the City Manager
following an inspection to determine if the mobile home park, or the
applicable portion thereof, has been developed in substantial conformity
with the site plan as approved by the City Council.
(E) An application fee as set forth in Section 3-1 of the City of Montrose
Regulations Manual shall accompany the application for a mobile home
park construction permit. (Ord. 1999, 04-15-2004)
4-12-6: MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
(A) Size and Location: Mobile Home Parks must meet the following criteria:
(1) They may be located only where allowed by City zoning regulations.
(2) The park must have a minimum size of 5 acres.
(3) The maximum size of the mobile home park shall be 20 acres except
for mobile home parks in existence, or parks developed on property
held in single undivided ownership and zoned “MHR”, as of July 1,
1998.
(4) No part of any mobile home park may be located within 1,320 feet
of any part of any other mobile home park located either within or
without the City limits. (Ord. 1670, 9-3-98)
(B) All mobile home parks shall, as a minimum, comply with the Regulations
for Mobile Home Parks issued by the State of Colorado, and the
requirements of this Chapter. In the event of any conflict between the State
regulations and the requirements of this Chapter, or other ordinances and
regulations of the City, those regulations which are more stringent shall
apply. (Ord. 1029, 7-5-79)
(C) Dimensional Requirements:
(1) Each mobile home space shall be shown on the site plan and may
have only one mobile home located on it.
(2) Each space shall be a minimum area of 6,250 square feet. (Ord.
1670, 9-3-98)
(3) Front set-backs shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12'); the rear setbacks
a minimum of ten feet (1O'); set-backs for the front and street
side of a corner space shall be twelve feet (12'); the side set-backs
shall be a minimum of five feet (5'); and either the front set-back or
one of the side set-backs shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20').
(4) A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per space shall be
provided.
(5) Accessory structures which are not attached to the mobile home are
not subject to rear and side yard set-backs.
The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all mobile home parks
constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance. (Ord. 1136, 12-3-81)
See Chapter 4 of this Title.
(D) The mobile home park developer shall provide the following
improvements:
(1) City water systems, including fire hydrants and fire mains.
(2) City sanitary sewer system.
(3) Paved streets with a minimum paved width of forty feet (40'),
including the width of valley pans or sidewalks.
(4) Storm drainage system.
(5) Street signs, street lights. (Ord. 1029, 7-5-79)
(6) Concrete valley pans, three feet (3') in width or curbs, gutters, or
sidewalks, shall be installed on each side of each street. (Ord.1040,
7-19-79)
(7) Landscaping of each space to include a minimum of 40% of the
space in irrigated lawn, and the remainder of the area not occupied
by improvements shall be landscaped in a reasonable fashion; (Ord.
1670, 9-3-98)
(8) A minimum of 8% of the mobile home park must be developed as
park and open space and located to provide a buffer to adjoining
streets or property. (Ord. 1670, 9-3-98)
(E) Arrangements to provide public utilities including, if available, gas,
electricity, telephone and cable television shall be made with the utility
companies.
(F) Plans for all improvements shall be submitted with the site plan and shall
be approved by the City Manager and City Engineer. prior to the approval
of any permit by the City Council. All required improvements shall
comply with standard City design and construction standards and
specifications.
(G) Easements: The City may require reasonable utility easements to be
dedicated to the public for the purpose of public and City utilities. The City
may require the over sizing of any water and sewer lines, in which event the
City shall pay for the cost of over sizing.
(H) No dependent mobile home shall be allowed in any mobile home park
unless the park provides sanitary facilities and a service building meeting
the requirements contained in the State Mobile Home Park Regulations.
4-12-7: TRAVEL HOME PARK PERMITS
(A) It shall be unlawful to commence construction of any travel home park until
a travel home park construction permit has been approved by the City
Planning Commission and City Council as meeting the criteria and
requirements of this Chapter and other applicable City and State
regulations.
(B) Application for a travel home park construction permit shall be made by
submitting a site plan of the travel home park, accompanied by any
supporting documents, plans or drawings as necessary to show that the
design requirements of Section 4-12-8 have been complied with.
(C) The site plan and all supporting plans must be submitted to the City no later
than thirty (30) days before the date at which the Planning Commission is
to review the application. Following review of the application, the
Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the application. If
disapproved the reasons for disapproval shall be included in the Planning
Commission minutes and provided to the applicant upon request. If the
application is approved it shall be submitted to the City Council for review
and action. The Council may approve the application, or disapprove the
application, if it finds that the requirements of these regulations have not
been met.
(D) It shall be unlawful to occupy any travel home within any travel home park
prior to the time that an occupancy permit for the travel home park, or
applicable portion thereof, has been issued by the City Manager following
an inspection to determine if the travel home park, or the applicable portion
thereof, has been developed in substantial conformity with the site plan as
approved by the City Council.
(E) An application fee as set forth in Section 3-1 of the City of Montrose
Regulations Manual shall accompany the application for a travel home park
construction permit. (Ord. 1999, 04-15-2004)
4-12-8: TRAVEL HOME PARK DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
(A) Size and Location: Travel home parks may be located only where allowed
by City Zoning Regulations and shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in
area.
(B) All travel home parks shall, as a minimum, comply with applicable State of
Colorado regulations for campgrounds and recreation areas, and the
requirements of this Chapter. In the event of any conflict between State
regulations and the requirements of this Chapter, or other City ordinances
or regulations, those regulations which are more stringent shall apply.
(C) Dimensional Requirements:
(1) All travel homes and any accessory structures shall be at least ten
feet (10') from any other travel home and accessory structure.
(2) The number of travel homes in the park shall not exceed twenty five
(25) travel homes per acre.
(D) Eight percent (8%) of the gross area of the travel home park, or two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be
developed and maintained as a park or playground.
(E) The travel home park developer shall provide the following improvements:
(1) A water system, including fire hydrants and fire mains.
(2) A sanitary sewer system.
(3) Paved streets with a minimum width as follows:
(a) One-way/no parking - 11 feet;
(b) One-way/parking on one side - 18 feet;
(c) Two-way/no parking - 24 feet;
(d) Two-way/parking on one side - 27 feet; and
(e) Two-way/parking on both sides - 34 feet.
(4) A storm drainage system.
(5) Street signs and security lights.
(6) A service building meeting the requirements of applicable State and
City regulations.
(F) Plans for all improvements shall be submitted with the site plan and shall
be approved by the City Manager and the City Engineer prior to the
approval of any permit by the City Council. All required improvements
shall comply with standard City design and construction standards and
specifications.
(G) Easements: The City may require reasonable utility easements to be
dedicated to the public for the purpose of public and City utilities. The City
may require the over sizing of water and sewer lines in which event the
City shall pay the cost for over sizing.
4-12-9: MAINTENANCE OF MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL HOME PARKS
(A) All mobile home parks and travel home parks shall be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of this Chapter, applicable State of
Colorado Department of Health regulations, and other applicable
regulations of the City of Montrose, Colorado.
(B) The City Building Official, or his designated representative, shall have the
right to enter upon any mobile home park or travel home park at any
reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting the premises to determine
compliance with this Chapter or other applicable ordinances and City and
State regulations.
(C) The mobile home park owner and operator shall insure that al landscaping
and irrigated lawn is maintained in good and healthy condition. (Ord.
1670, 9-3-98)
4-12-10 VIOLATIONS
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter.
Any person convicted of such a violation may be sentenced to a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by a term of imprisonment not
to exceed one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided,
however, no person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be sentenced
to any term of imprisonment. (Ord. 1614, 12-19-96)
(B) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin any violation of any provision of this Chapter.
(C) Continuing violations of this Chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance
which may be abated in any lawful manner. (Ord. 1670, 9-3-98)
4-12-11: CONSTRUCTION AND SET UP REQUIREMENTS
(A) It shall be unlawful to set up any mobile home on any space, lot or site until
a siting permit has been obtained from the City. The fee for such permit
shall be as set forth in Section 3-1 of the City of Montrose Regulations
Manual. (Ord. 1999, 04-15-2004)
(B) Unless located within a mobile home park, a mobile home shall be either
placed on a permanent foundation meeting City Building Code
requirements or shall be set up as follows:
(1) The mobile home shall be set up so that there is a minimum eighteen
inches (18") high area for access to the water and sewer connections
measured from the bottom of the wood frame to the ground or pad.
(2) The support areas shall consist of a poured concrete or leveled gravel
base.
(3) The mobile home shall be set upon supports along both sides no
more than eight feet (8’) apart, center to center, or as per
manufacturer's specifications. Each support shall consist of two four
inch by eight inch by sixteen inch (4" x 8" x 16") concrete pad
blocks, topped by additional concrete blocks placed with their long
dimensions running perpendicular to the long dimensions of the pad
blocks. Pad blocks are not required if the supports rest upon a
concrete slab. The top of each support shall be capped by a two inch
by eight inch by sixteen inch (2" x 8" x 16") wood block, and
wedges shall be used to insure a tight set up. Alternate supports may
be approved pursuant to Section 106 of the Uniform Building Code.
(4) The sewer connection shall be grouted and sealed. All plumbing,
electrical or gas connections and work shall meet applicable Code
requirements.
(5) The site shall be graded to direct drainage away from the mobile
home.
(6) That portion of the water supply line subject to flexing shall be
copper or polybutylene. That portion subject to freezing shall be
wrapped with heat tape or otherwise frost proofed.
(7) All applicable requirements of this Chapter, City zoning regulations,
Flood Plain Management regulations and other City ordinances and
regulations shall be met.
(8) Fire resistant skirting meeting City standards shall be installed
within 90 days of set up around the lower perimeter of the mobile
home, between the ground and the mobile home.
(9) The mobile home must have over 500 square feet of floor space.
(C) No siting permit for use of a mobile home or other factory built structure as
a residence shall be issued unless the following criteria are met:
(1)
(a) It bears a Certification of HUD Approval or UBC Approval;
or
(b) It meets or exceeds City Building Codes; or
(c) Mobile homes manufactured after June 15, 1976, comply
with the requirements of the National Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC
1501, et seq.) and all rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder; or
(d) Mobile homes manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, and
subsequent to the effective date of the Colorado Housing Act
of 1970 (C.R.S. 24-32-701, et seq.), comply with the
requirements of said Act and all rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder; or
(e) Mobile homes manufactured prior to the effective date of the
Colorado Housing Act of 1970 (C.R.S. 24-32-701, et seq.) are
certified by a registered professional engineer, or architect, to
meet or exceed, on an equivalent engineering performance
basis, the standards established pursuant to the Colorado
Housing Act of 1970 or the National Mobile Home
Construction Act of 1974.
(2) The mobile home or other structure is in good condition, safe and fit
for residential use, and the utility connections are set up are safe,
conform to plumbing and electrical code requirements and pose no
safety or fire hazard.
(D) (Repealed by Ord. 1669, 7-2-1998)
(E) Additions to manufactured structures must meet the requirements of City
Building Codes. All such additions must have a foundation capable of
supporting that addition without dependence upon the manufactured
structure frame for support of any kind.
(F) It shall be unlawful to occupy any mobile home or manufactured structure
until an occupancy permit is obtained following an inspection by the City to
determine that it was installed in accordance with all applicable
requirements.
(G) Any mobile home or other factory built housing or structure which at the
effective date of this Section or at the time of annexation, if annexed
subsequent to the effective date of this Section, was lawfully existing and
maintained in accordance with previously applicable state, county or city
regulations and ordinances, but which does not conform or comply with all
of the regulations provided for in this Section, may be continued to be
maintained or used at its existing site, but shall not be enlarged, moved or
replaced except in a conformity with this Section. Provided however,
mobile homes lawfully located within the City on the effective date of this
Section or the date of annexation subsequent thereto, which doesn’t comply
with Subsection (C) (1) above, may be moved and occupied at another site
with the City subject to compliance with other applicable provisions of this
Section, other City ordinances and regulations, and with applicable natural
gas and electrical inspection and other requirements. If any such a mobile
home is removed from the City, it may not be thereafter relocated within
the City unless it also complies with Subsection (C) (1) above. Provided
further, spaces in an existing mobile home park lawfully used or designated
for travel homes on the effective date of this Section, may continue to be so
used. Any mobile home or other factory built housing or structure which
was previously unlawful or illegal under previously applicable regulations
shall remain unlawful or illegal and subject to abatement or other
enforcement action.
Chapter 4-13
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Sections:
4-13-1 DEFINITIONS
4-13-2 APPLICABILITY
4-13-3 STANDARDS
4-13-4 EXEMPTIONS
4-13-5 LIGHTING PLAN REQUIRED
Chapter 4-13
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Sections:
4-13-1 DEFINITIONS
4-13-2 APPLICABILITY
4-13-3 STANDARDS
4-13-4 EXEMPTIONS
4-13-5 LIGHTING PLAN REQUIRED
4-13-1: For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BULB: The source of electric light. To be distinguished from the
whole assembly (See Luminaire).
CANDELA: Unit of luminous intensity.
EXTERIOR LIGHTING: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed, located
or used in such a manner to cause light rays to shine outside.
Fixtures that are installed indoors that are intended to light
something outside are considered exterior lighting for the
purpose of this Chapter.
FIXTURE: The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. It
includes the elements designed to give light output control,
such as a reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens), the ballast,
housing, and the attachment parts.
FLOOD LIGHT: Light that produces up to 1800 lumens and is designed to
“flood” a well-defined area with light. Generally, flood lights
produce from 1000 to 1800 lumens.
FLUX: Unit is erg/sec or watts.
FOOTCANDLE: Illuminance produced on a surface one foot from a uniform
point source of one candela. A unit of illuminance is equal to
one lumen per square foot and is measured by a light meter.
FULL CUT-OFF FIXTURES: Fixtures, as installed, that are designed or shielded in
such a manner that all light rays emitted by the fixture, either
directly from the lamps or indirectly from the fixture, are
projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest
point on the fixture where light is emitted.
GLARE: Intense light that results in discomfort and/or reduction of
visual performance and visibility.
HOLIDAY LIGHTING: Festoon type lights, limited to small individual bulbs on a
string.
IESNA: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. The
professional society of lighting engineers, including those
from manufacturing companies, and others professionally
involved in lighting.
LIGHT: The form of radiant energy acting on the retina of the eye to
make sight possible: brightness, illumination, a lamp, etc.
LIGHT POLLUTION: Any adverse effect of manmade light including, but not
limited to, light trespass, up-lighting, uncomfortable
distraction to the eye, or any manmade light that diminishes
the ability to view the night sky. Often used to denote urban
sky glow.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light emitted by a luminaire that shines beyond the
boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located.
LIGHTING: Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to produce light.
LUMEN: Unit of luminous flux; the flux emitted within a unit solid
angle by a point source with a uniform luminous intensity of
one candela. One footcandle is one lumen per square foot.
One lux is one lumen per square meter.
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting system consisting of a lamp or lamps
together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to
position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to a
power supply.
MOTION SENSOR DEVICE: A device that will sense motion electronically and
switch on a security light necessary for public health, safety,
and welfare for a brief duration.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE: Outdoor, electrically powered illuminating devices,
lamps and similar devices, permanently installed or portable,
used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall
include, but are not limited to, search, spot and flood lights
for:
Buildings and structures;
Recreational areas;
Parking lot lighting;
Billboard and other signs;
Landscape lighting;
Street lighting;
Building overhangs and open canopies;
Product display area lighting.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: Lighting that directly illuminates areas not completely
enclosed by a structure.
PARTIALLY SHIELDED: The bulb of the fixture is shielded by a translucent siding
and the bulb is not visible at all. Light may be emitted at the
horizontal level of the bulb.
RECESSED: When a light is built into a structure such that the light is fully
cut-off and no part of the light extends or protrudes beyond
the underside of that structure.
SHIELDED: When the light emitted from the fixture is projected below a
horizontal plane running through the lowest point of the
fixture where light is emitted. The bulb is not visible with a
shielded light fixture, and no light is emitted from the sides of
the fixture. Also considered a full cut-off fixture.
UP-LIGHTING: Lighting that is directed in such a manner as to shine light
rays above the horizontal plane.
4-13-2: APPLICABILITY
(A) This Chapter applies to the following new development, construction, and
changes in use, excluding single family dwelling units, farms and ranches:
(1) Subdivision pursuant to Chapter 4-7, and specifically Section 4-7-7.
For subdivisions, deviations from the standards set forth herein may
be granted pursuant to Section 4-7-7 (B).
(2) New construction or addition to existing structure(s) that requires a
building permit and site plan pursuant to § 4-1-12, or any action that
requires a sign permit or coordinated sign plan pursuant to § 4-4-22.
For new construction or addition to existing structure(s), or for any
action that requires a sign permit or coordinated sign plan, variances
from the standards set forth herein may be granted pursuant to § 4-1-
12 (H). (Ord. 2265, 02-15-2011)
(3) Change in use to an existing building, structure or premises which
change in use requires a rezone pursuant to Chapter 4-4, Section 27,
or a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 4-4, Section 24. For
rezones and conditional use permits, variances from the standards set
forth herein may be granted pursuant to Section 4-4-26.
(4) Where a use located within a commercial or industrial zone, other
than a single family residence, farm or ranch, is abandoned or
discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) months, all outdoor and
exterior lighting shall be brought into compliance upon resumption
of the prior or a substantially similar use, or upon issuance of a
building permit.
4-13-3: STANDARDS
(A) Exterior and outdoor lighting, including illuminated signs, shall be
designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to prevent
light trespass, up-light and glare at any location on or off the property. All
such lighting shall be full cut-off fixtures with the light source fully
shielded as set forth in the IESNA Guidelines adopted pursuant to Chapter
4-1, Section 1, with the following exceptions:
(1) Luminaires that have a maximum output of 260 lumens per fixture,
regardless of number of bulbs (equal to one 20 watt incandescent
light), may be left unshielded provided the fixture has an opaque top
to keep light from shining directly up.
(2) Luminaires that have a maximum output of 1,000 lumens per fixture,
regardless of number of bulbs (equal to one 60 watt incandescent
light) may be partially shielded, provided the bulb is not visible, and
the fixture has an opaque top to keep light from shining directly up.
(3) For security purposes, floodlights with external shielding may be
angled provided that no light escapes above a twenty-five (25)
degree angle, measured from the vertical line from the center of the
light extended to the ground, and only if the light does not cause
glare or light to shine on adjacent property or public rights-of-way.
Floodlights with directional shielding, photocells with timers, and
motion sensor devices are encouraged.
(B) In addition to Subsection (A) above, street lights shall comply with the
following:
(1) Street lights along both residential and nonresidential streets shall be
limited to a one hundred (100) watt high pressure sodium (hps) light,
except that lights at the intersection of arterial and/or collector
streets shall be two hundred fifty (250) watt hps.
(2) The mounting height for street lights shall not exceed sixteen (16)
feet from ground level for fixtures that do not protrude over the
street, and thirty (30) feet from ground level for fixtures which do
protrude over the street.
(C) In addition to Subsection (A) above, parking area lights shall comply with
the following:
(1) Parking area lights shall be no higher than twenty-five (25) feet
above the stand/pole at ground level. With the intent of minimizing
light pollution and glare, all parking area lights are encouraged to be
greater in number, lower in height, and lower in light level, as
opposed to fewer in number, higher in height and higher in light
level.
(D) The maximum height for light fixtures used to light pedestrian walkways,
crossings, or trails shall be no higher than sixteen (16) feet above the
stand/pole base at ground level.
(E) All other freestanding luminaires, including the fixture, shall be no higher
than twenty-five (25) feet above the stand/pole base at ground level, except
that luminaires used for playing fields shall be exempt from the height
restriction, provided all other provisions of this Chapter are met and the
light is used only while the field is in use.
(F) Building mounted luminaires shall be attached only to walls, and the top of
the fixture shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height above ground level.
(G) Lighting of Gasoline Station/Convenience Store Aprons and Canopies shall
meet the recommendations of the IESNA Guidelines for gas station
lighting. Light fixtures mounted on canopies shall be surface or recessed so
that the lens is flush with the bottom surface of the canopy. Lights shall not
be mounted on the top or side of the canopy. The facia of the canopy shall
not be illuminated for any purpose with the exception of internally
illuminated signage, which shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 4-4,
Section 22, Sign Regulations.
4-13-4: EXEMPTIONS
(A) The following luminaires and lighting fixtures are exempt from the
requirements of this Chapter:
(1) Holiday lights;
(2) Illuminated signs or other lighting installed for the benefit of public
health, safety and welfare;
(3) Airport lighting;
(4) Emergency lighting, providing such lighting is temporary and is
discontinued upon completion or abatement of the emergency.
(5) Lighting of the American Flag, provided all such lighting shall be
selected and installed to shield the lamp(s) from direct view to the
greatest extent possible, and to minimize upward lighting and light
trespass. (Ord. 2063, 06-16-2005)
4-13-5: LIGHTING PLAN REQUIRED
(A) A lighting plan shall be submitted for all construction or development
subject to the requirements of this Chapter. The submission shall contain
four complete sets of the following:
(1) The location and types of all outdoor and exterior lighting and
fixtures, both existing and proposed on the premises, including point
by point lighting level print-outs, with calculation areas delineated
where required. Where requested by the City, the plan shall also
include a mounting height, mounting method, location, type, lumen
output, manufacturer’s catalog cuts, photometric report with candela
distribution, and shielding information;
(2) The above required plans and descriptions shall be sufficiently
complete to enable the City to readily determine whether compliance
with the requirements of this Chapter are met. If such plans,
descriptions and data cannot enable this determination, the applicant
shall submit further evidence of compliance, as required by the City.
Chapter 4-14
ADULT BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Sections:
4-14-1 DEFINITIONS
4-14-2 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
4-14-3 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE
4-14-4 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
4-14-5 CONDUCT IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
4-14-6 HOURS OF OPERATION
4-14-7 MINIMUM AGE
4-14-8 SIGNS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
4-14-9 UNLAWFUL ACTS
4-14-1: For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ADULT ARCADE - Any commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or
invited where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture
projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image or virtual reality
producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
are used regularly to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic, digital or electronic reproductions describing, simulating or depicting
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO – A
commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or
rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(A) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations, however produced, that depict or describe
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
(B) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
ADULT CABARET - Means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, concert hall, auditorium or
other commercial establishment that features:
(A) Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
(B) Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by the exhibition of "specified sexual activities."
ADULT MOTEL - A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that offers
accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other media productions, however produced, which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," and which
commercial establishment has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of media production.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER - A commercial establishment that is
distinguished or characterized by the showing, for any form of consideration, of films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions, on more
than 100 days per year, that have an "X" rating or that have an emphasis on depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT THEATER - A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT - May have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" and still be categorized as a sexually oriented business. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as a sexually oriented business so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that
depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." The term
"commercial establishment" includes clubs, fraternal organizations, social organizations,
civic organizations or other similar organizations with paid memberships.
EMPLOYEE - A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other
compensation by the operator of said business.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS - Includes any of
the following:
(A) The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
(B) The conversion of an existing business into a sexually oriented business;
(C) The addition of a different sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
(D) The relocation of a sexually oriented business.
FOYER - An architectural element of a building that consists of an entry hall or
vestibule that is completely enclosed and contains one door to provide access to areas
outside of the building and a separate door to provide access to areas inside of the
building.
MANAGER-An operator, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a
manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the
business.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY:
(A) The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
(B) A state of dress which fails opaquely and fully to cover human buttocks,
anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of the
female breast.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO - Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity
or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided for money or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or
similarly depicted by other persons.
OPERATOR -Includes the owner, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of
any sexually oriented business.
PEEP BOOTH - A room, semi-enclosure or other similar area located within a sexually
oriented business wherein a person may view representations of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities."
PERSON - An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association, or other legal entity.
PRINCIPAL BUSINESS PURPOSE - Any establishment, having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade the items listed in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of
the definition of adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store above and
having on the premises at least thirty percent of the establishment’s display space
occupied by the display of the items described therein.
PRINCIPAL OWNER - Any person owning, directly or beneficially:
(A) Any membership or partnership interest in a limited liability company or
limited liability partnership if such person has any legal control or authority
over the management or operation of the entity; or
(B) In the case of any other legal entity, five (5) percent or more of the
ownership interests in the entity, except for shareholders, but including
such shareholders who are corporate officers or directors or who otherwise
have any legal control or authority over the management or operation of the
entity.
PUBLIC PARK - An area of land owned by a governmental entity or private association
and intended to be used for recreational purposes, including any such land that contains
no improvements and is intended only for open space purposes, and including any such
land that is intended for use only for pathway purposes.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS - An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, peep booth or nude model studio. The definition of sexually oriented business
shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the State of Colorado engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy, or a college, junior college or other
institution which houses an adult model studio for artistic or educational purposes.
SEMINUDE OR SEMINUDITY - A state of dress in which clothing covers no more
than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the
body covered by supporting straps or devices, which supporting straps or devices are
used to support or enable the wearing of such clothing.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - As used herein means and includes any of the
following:
(A) Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, that are not completely and
opaquely covered; or
(B) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and
opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS - Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, sexual
assault, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not
limited to, distribution of obscenity, prostitution, or pandering.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - Includes any of the following:
(A) The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(B) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, or sodomy;
(C) Masturbation, actual or simulated;
(D) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or
(E) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in subsections A through D of this definition.
4-14-2: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
(A) It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business outside of the General Industrial Zone, "I-2".
(B) A sexually oriented business shall not locate within the General Industrial
Zone, "I-2", within one thousand (1000) feet of:
(1) Any church;
(2) Any public or private school;
(3) Any residentially zoned property as the same is established by this
Code;
(4) A public park;
(5) A licensed childcare facility or established daycare business;
(6) Any property, public or private, used for and equipped with facilities
for recreation, especially by children. A playground may be
incidental to school use but is not limited to school use or school
facilities as defined herein;
(7) Any building owned, leased or held by the United States of America,
the State of Colorado, Montrose County, or the City of Montrose,
any school district or other agency or political subdivision, which
building is used for governmental purposes.
(C) It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business within the General Light Industrial Zone, "I-2", on any property
within 500 feet of a Highway Corridor as that term is set forth in Section 4-
1-15 of this Code.
(D) It shall be unlawful to operate or to permit the operation, establishment, or
maintenance of a sexually oriented business within 100 feet of any other
sexually oriented business.
4-14-3: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE
(A) The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from
the closest exterior structural wall of each business, or in the case of a
sexually oriented business operating within a condominium estate or
leasehold estate, from the closest airspace boundary of such condominium
estate or from the closest wall of such leasehold estate.
(B) The distance between any sexually oriented business and any church,
school, dwelling, public park, childcare facility playground, highway
corridor or public building as set forth above shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior structural wall of the sexually oriented business to the nearest
property line of the premises of a church, school, dwelling, public park,
childcare facility playground, highway corridor or public building as set
forth above. If the premises where the sexually oriented business is
conducted is comprised of a condominium estate or leasehold estate, such
distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest airspace boundary of the
condominium estate or the nearest wall of the leasehold estate used as part
of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, dwelling, public
park, childcare facility playground, highway corridor or public building as
set forth above.
4-14-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
(A) All exterior windows in a sexually oriented business shall be opaque to
such an extent that interior objects viewed from outside shall be so obscure
as to be unidentifiable. Exterior windows in sexually oriented businesses
shall not be used for any display or sign except for a sign that complies
with the requirements of this Section.
(B) All doors for ingress and egress to a sexually oriented business, except
emergency exits used only for emergency purposes, shall be located on the
front of the sexually oriented business. For purposes of this subsection, the
front of a sexually oriented business shall be deemed to be that facade of
the building that faces the front lot line of the lot or parcel on which the
business is located. Every sexually oriented business shall have a foyer at
every point of ingress or egress, except for emergency exits. In the case of a
sexually oriented business having more than one front lot line, the sexually
oriented business shall be oriented such that the front of the business faces
away from the nearest of any of the land uses listed in Subsection 4-14-2.
(C) The interior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to
which patrons are permitted access shall be equipped with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place (including
peep booths) at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, manager and
employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
(D) Any adult cabaret or adult theater shall have one or more separate areas
designated as a stage. Entertainers shall perform only upon a stage. The
stage shall be fixed and immovable and located inside the building in which
the adult use operates. No seating for the audience shall be permitted within
three (3) feet of the edge of the stage. No members of the audience shall be
permitted upon the stage or within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage.
4-14-5: CONDUCT IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
(A) No owner, operator, manager or employee mingling directly with the
patrons of a sexually oriented business, or serving food or drinks, shall be
in a state of nudity.
(B) No owner, operator, manager or employee shall encourage or knowingly
permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or breasts of any person.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to
receive tips from patrons except as set forth in subsections (D) and (E) of
this Subsection.
(D) An owner, operator, manager or employee who desires to provide for tips
from its patrons shall establish one or more boxes or other containers to
receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patron of the
sexually oriented business into the tip box.
(E) A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons as
provided in this section shall post one or more signs to be conspicuously
visible to the patrons on the premises, in bold letters at least one inch high
to read as follows:
"All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to
employees. Any physical contact between a patron and
employees is strictly prohibited."
4-14-6: HOURS OF OPERATION
(A) It shall be unlawful for a sexually oriented business to be open for business
or for the owner, operator, manager or any employee of a sexually oriented
business to allow patrons upon the premises during the following time
periods:
(1) On any Monday through Friday, other than January 1, from 12:00
a.m. until 8:00 a.m.;
(2) On any Saturday and Sunday from 2:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m.
4-14-7: MINIMUM AGE
(A) Except for such employees as may be permitted by law, it shall be unlawful
for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be upon the
premises of a sexually oriented business.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, manager or any employee of
the licensee to allow anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years, except
for such employees or delivery persons as may be permitted by law, to be
upon the premises of a sexually oriented business.
4-14-8: SIGNS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
(A) In addition to complying with all other sign regulations of this Code, a
sexually oriented business shall display a sign, clearly visible and legible at
the entrance to the business, that gives notice of the adult nature of the
sexually oriented business and of the fact that the premises is off limits to
minors or those under the age of twenty-one (21) years, as the case may be.
No sign for a sexually oriented business shall contain flashing lights,
words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations that emphasize specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
4-14-9: UNLAWFUL ACTS
(A) It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, manager or employee of a
sexually oriented business to violate any of the requirements of this
Chapter, or knowingly to permit any patron to violate the requirements of
this Chapter.
(B) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of
this Ordinance, but which is in violation of its provisions, will be permitted
to continue for a period of six (6) months from the effective date hereof.
TITLE V
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Licenses
2 Hotel Room Tax
3 Police Alarm Systems
4 Hotel (Rep. By Ord. 1025, 5-3-79)
5 Mobile Homes, Trailers, Coaches and Parks; Location
Regulations (Rep. By Ord. 1029, 7-5-79)
6 Transient Merchants
7 Peddlers Prohibited
8 Travel Trailer Parks (Rep. By Ord. 1029, 7-5-79)
9 Sales of Cigarettes (Rep. By Ord. 757, 6-21-73)
10 Licensing Gasoline Filling Stations
(Rep. By Ord. 803, 6-27-74)
11 Pawn Brokers
12 Alcoholic Beverages
13 Alcoholic Liquors (Rep. By Ord. 972, 3-2-78)
14 Alcoholic Beverage Occupation Tax
(Rep. By Ord. 1927, 10-17-2002)
15 Sales and Use Tax
16 Telephone Utility Occupation Tax
Chapter 5-1
LICENSES
Sections:
5-1-1 CARNIVALS
5-1-2 HANDBILLS
Chapter 5-1
LICENSES
Sections:
5-1-1 CARNIVALS
5-1-2 HANDBILLS
5-1-1: CARNIVALS
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to manage, operate or to carry on any
carnival, circus or similar business which has rides or large tents, unless a
license has been issued by the City.
(B) Applications for such license shall be made to the City and shall include the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner, operator and
local manager.
(2) The dates and places at which the business is to be conducted, and a
description of the facilities and activities to be involved.
(3) Any other information required by the City to administer the
provisions of this Section and other regulations and ordinances of
the City.
(C) The application shall be accompanied by payment of a license fee as set by
Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations Manual and by a
certificate of insurance that the applicant has liability insurance for bodily
injury of not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per
person; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per incident, issued by an
insurance company lawfully doing business in the State of Colorado.
(Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(D) Applicant shall deposit with the City the amount of two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in cash as a bond, conditioned upon no damage
to public or private property, and that all private and public property shall
be properly cleaned and picked up following the completion of the carnival.
Such bond shall be returned to the applicant upon compliance with the
above conditions.
(E) The City Manager shall issue a license to any applicant meeting all the
requirements of this Section. Such license may be revoked by the City
Council following a hearing upon reasonable notice to the applicant
thereof, for any violation of any of the provisions of this Section, or any
other applicable ordinances or regulations of the City of Montrose,
Colorado. In the event of any immediate threat to the public health, safety
or welfare, such license may be temporarily suspended by the City Manager
pending such a hearing.
5-1-2: HANDBILLS
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any handbill, picture or advertisement to any
utility pole, sign, tree, motor vehicle or other property of another without the owner's
permission; or to distribute handbills in a manner such that it results in litter.
Chapter 5-2
HOTEL ROOM TAX
Sections:
5-2-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX
5-2-2 EXEMPTIONS
5-2-3 COLLECTION OF TAX
5-2-4 ENFORCEMENT
5-2-5 TOURISM PROMOTIONAL FUND
5-2-6 TOURISM PROMOTIONAL BOARD
5-2-7 (Rep. Ordinance 1460, 10-26-92)
5-2-8 REGULATIONS
Chapter 5-2
HOTEL ROOM TAX
Sections:
5-2-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX
5-2-2 EXEMPTIONS
5-2-3 COLLECTION OF TAX
5-2-4 ENFORCEMENT
5-2-5 TOURISM PROMOTIONAL FUND
5-2-6 (Repealed – Ordinance 2258, 11-04-10)
5-2-7 (Repealed – Ordinance 1460, 10-26-92)
5-2-8 REGULATIONS
5-2-1: IMPOSITION OF TAX
(A) There is hereby levied and charged a hotel room tax in the amount of nine
tenths of a percent (0.9%) of the entire amount charged for furnishing
rooms or accommodations for consideration in a hotel, motel, apartment
hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch or other similar
lodging business. The entire amount subject to tax shall not include City or
State sales taxes or charges for food service, beverages, telephone, laundry,
or other services incidental to the furnishing of lodging or accommodations
for which a separate charge or bill is made.
(B) There is hereby levied and charged an excise tax of eight-tenths of a percent
(0.8%) upon the amount charged by restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, and
like places of business for food and drink sales. The amount subject to tax
shall not include City or State sales taxes or charges, or charges for
alcoholic beverages for which a separate charge or bill is made. (Ord. 1344,
8-20-87, eff. 8-1-87)
5-2-2: EXEMPTIONS
The following transactions shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Chapter:
(A) Accommodations, food and drink provided to the United States, State of
Colorado, the City of Montrose, or any of their agencies or political
subdivisions.
(B) Accommodations, food and drink provided to religious, charitable and
eleemosynary corporations in the conduct of regular religious, charitable or
eleemosynary functions and activities. (Ord. 1303, 6-26-86)
(C) Accommodations provided to an individual who is a permanent resident of
a hotel, motel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guest house,
guest ranch or other similar business and who enters into a written
agreement for occupancy for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive
days. (Ord. 1192, 6-24-83, eff. 7-1-83)
(D) Food and drink sales for consumption on the premises made by grocery
stores, convenience stores, or similar establishment whose principal
business is not the sale of food and drink for consumption without further
preparation, or made by fraternal organizations or at senior citizen's meal
sites. (Ord. 1303, 6-26-86)
5-2-3: COLLECTION OF TAX
(A) Every vendor providing accommodations taxable by this Chapter shall
collect the tax from each customer and shall remit such tax and make a
return to the City on or before the twentieth (20th) day of each month, on
account of accommodations provided in the preceding month. Said return
shall contain such information and be in such form as the City may
prescribe.
(B) The burden of proving that any transaction is exempt from the tax shall be
upon the vendor. (Ord. 1192, 6-24-83, eff. 7-1-83)
(C) In the event any vendor collects more than the amount of tax imposed by
this Chapter, such amount shall nonetheless be remitted in full to the City.
(Ord. 1344, 8-20-87, eff. 8-1-87)
(D) The tax collected by the vendor shall be held in trust by the vendor for the
City until remitted to the City.
(E) The vendor shall maintain, keep and preserve suitable records of all
transactions and such other books and accounts as may be necessary to
determine the amount of taxes for which the vendor is liable. All such
records shall be kept for at least a period of three (3) years and shall be
open to inspection and audit by the City at any reasonable time.
5-2-4: ENFORCEMENT
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay the tax imposed by this
Chapter or for any vendor to fail to collect it and remit it to the City or for
any person to otherwise violate any provisions of this Chapter.
(B) A penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the tax due or the sum of
ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, shall be imposed upon the vendor
and become due in the event the tax is not remitted by the twentieth (20th)
of the month, as required by this Chapter, and one percent (1%) interest
shall accrue each month on the unpaid balance.
(C) If any vendor fails to make a return and pay the tax imposed by this
Chapter, the City may make an estimate, based upon available information
of the amount of tax due, and add the penalty and interest provided above.
The City shall mail notice of such assessment to the vendor at his address
as indicated in City records. If payment is not made within ten (10) days
from the date of mailing, the City may proceed as provided in this Section
or otherwise allowed by law to collect such estimate and other amounts
due.
(D) The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be a lien upon the goods and
business fixtures of the vendor and upon the real property and appurtenant
premises at which the taxable transactions occurred. The City may
foreclose such lien in accordance with law and record notices of such lien
in the Montrose County records.
(E) The City may certify the amount of any delinquent taxes as a delinquent
charge upon the property at which the taxable transaction occurred to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as delinquent general
ad valorem taxes are collected.
(F) Any person convicted of violation of any provisions of this Chapter may be
sentenced to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
imprisonment in jail not to exceed one (1) year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; provided, however, no person under the age of eighteen (18)
may be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. (Ord. 1614, 1-19-96)
5-2-5: TOURISM PROMOTIONAL FUND
(A) There is hereby created a fund to be known as the "Tourism Promotional
Fund". All of the revenues derived from the tax imposed by this Chapter,
less all out-of-pocket costs incurred by the City in the collection or
enforcement of this Chapter, shall be placed in such fund.
(B) All expenditures for such fund shall be used for the purpose of promoting
tourism, advertising the community, attracting conferences, conventions
and meetings or for other purposes related to attracting tourist and visitor
business to the City, as may be authorized by the City Council pursuant to
subsequent ordinance, resolution, or contract. (Ord. 1914, 07-11-2002)
5-2-6: (Repealed – Ordinance 2258, 11-04-10)
5-2-7: (Repealed – Ordinance 1460, 10-26-92)
5-2-8: REGULATIONS
The City Manager may adopt such regulations as necessary for the interpretation and
administration of this Chapter, including but not limited to providing for definition of
businesses to be taxed as a restaurant. (Ord. 1303, 6-26-86)
Chapter 5-3
POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections:
5-3-1 LICENSE REQUIRED
5-3-2 INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
5-3-3 DIRECT DIAL SYSTEMS
5-3-4 AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS
5-3-5 FALSE ALARMS
Chapter 5-3
POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections:
5-3-1 LICENSE REQUIRED
5-3-2 INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
5-3-3 DIRECT DIAL SYSTEMS
5-3-4 AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS
5-3-5 FALSE ALARMS
5-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain police alarm
systems in the City without first having obtained a police alarm system
contractor's license. This requirement shall not apply to persons who sell
systems, but do not install or maintain them, nor to persons who install and
maintain their own systems.
(B) A license application shall be filed with the City on forms furnished by the
City and shall provide at the minimum the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and each employee or agent
who will engage in business within the City on behalf of the
applicant, and except for corporation a stock of which is traded
publicly, the name and address of any person owning more than a
ten percent (10%) interest in the applicant.
(2) Information concerning any criminal record of such persons, and
other background information.
(3) Fingerprint cards of all persons who will be doing installation and
maintenance work within the City.
(C) Accompanying the application shall be an application fee as set by
Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations Manual, along with a ten
thousand dollar ($10,000.00) surety bond in a form approved by the City
guaranteeing the faithful and honest conduct of business under the license
running in favor of the City and customers of the applicant.
(Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(D) Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and may be renewed by
submitting an application with any updated information and a renewal fee
as set by Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations Manual.
(Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(E) A license may be revoked by the City Council following notice and hearing
for a violation of this Chapter or the criteria for a license.
5-3-2: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
(A) Following receipt of a properly completed application, the City shall
conduct a background investigation of the applicant, its agents, employees
and owners to determine if they are of good moral character.
(B) The City shall issue the license unless it is determined that the application
is deficient, the applicant or any of his officers, agents or owners are not of
good moral character, a misleading or fraudulent statement of a material
fact has been submitted with the application, or the applicant has had a
similar type permit previously revoked for cause within the past year.
(C) If the criteria for issuance of a license are met, a license shall be issued to
the applicant along with identification cards which shall be carried by those
persons doing business within the City.
(D) Any applicant whose application is denied may appeal the denial to the City
Council which shall decide the matter following a hearing with reasonable
notice.
5-3-3: DIRECT DIAL SYSTEMS
No person may install a direct dial police alarm system coded to any telephone number
without the permission of the person to whose telephone it is coded.
5-3-4: AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS
Any person maintaining an audible alarm as part of a building police alarm system, shall
post a notice stating the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to
render repair or service and to secure the premises if any alarm is activated. Such notice
shall be posted near the alarm in a position legible from the ground outside the building
where the alarm system is located.
5-3-5: FALSE ALARMS
(A) It shall be unlawful to maintain a defective police alarm system.
(B) A police alarm system shall be deemed to be defective if it causes in excess
of one (1) alarm signal which meets the definition of a “false alarm” as set
forth in this Section 5-3-5, in any one (1) year period as defined herein:
(Ord. 2153, 3-15-2007)
(1) The term “false alarm” as used in this Section 5-3-5 shall mean an
alarm signal eliciting notification to and a response by the police
when there is no evidence of a crime or other activity that warrants a
call for immediate police assistance, and no person who was on or
near the property or has viewed a video communication from the
property called for the police dispatch or confirmed the need for
police assistance. The term “false alarm” does not include an alarm
signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary
circumstances beyond the control of the alarm user.
(2) As used in this Section 5-3-5, a one (1) year period shall be
calculated beginning the first day of May of each year, and shall
extend through the last day of April of the year following. The
City’s tally of the number of false alarms for all alarm users or
police alarm systems shall return to zero (0) at 12:01 AM the first
day of May each year.
(3) The term “alarm user” as used in this Section 5-3-5 shall mean any
individual, partnership, corporation or other form of association that
owns or leases a police alarm system or on whose premises a police
alarm system is maintained for the protection of the premises.
(4) The term “police alarm system” as used in this Section 5-3-5 means
any system, device, or mechanism for the detection and reporting of
any unauthorized entry or attempted entry or property damage upon
premises protected by said system that may be activated by sensors
or other techniques and, when activated, automatically transmits a
telephone message or omits an audible, visible, or electronic signal
that can be heard, seen or received by persons outside of the
protected premises and is intended to summon police assistance.
(C) A defective police alarm system is hereby declared to be a nuisance which
may be abated by the City in any lawful manner. (Ord. 2153, 3-15-2007)
(D) Police alarm systems which cause more than one (1) false alarm during any
one (1) year period as calculated herein, shall incur a fee to the alarm user
for all false alarms after the first false alarm during said period. Said fees
shall be assessed in amounts as set forth in Section 3-1-1 of the City of
Montrose Regulations Manual. (Ord. 2153, 3-15-2007)
(1) The City may enforce collection of such amounts in any lawful
manner and may certify such amounts as a delinquent charge to the
County Treasurer to be collected similarly as delinquent taxes
against the property upon which such police alarm system is located.
It shall be unlawful to fail to pay such amounts within thirty (30)
days after billing by the City.
(2) Disputes as to any fee assessed pursuant to this Section 5-3-5 may be
appealed by the alarm user to the City Manager, who shall decide the
matter following a hearing in compliance with the requirements of
due process.
Chapter 5-6
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Sections:
5-6-1 DEFINITIONS
5-6-2 LICENSE REQUIRED
5-6-3 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
5-6-4 LOCAL SPONSOR
5-6-5 REVOCATION OF LICENSE
5-6-6 INTERSTATE COMMERCE PROVISIONS
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply unless in conflict
with the context or plain meaning.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, whether a resident of the City or not, who
engages in the business of selling or soliciting orders for goods or services, who does not
have a regularly established place of business within Montrose County, and includes
transient drummers, peddlers, hawkers and salesmen. Provided, however; wholesalers;
real estate and insurance agents licensed by the State; persons engaged in noncommercial
religious activities; persons selling only religious literature; and persons
soliciting donations not involving any sales, and persons representing Montrose County
nonprofit organizations, shall not be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
5-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in the business of
a transient merchant without obtaining a license from the City in
accordance with this Chapter or being sponsored as provided in Section 5-
6-4 of this Chapter.
(B) A license application shall be filed with the City on forms furnished by the
City, and shall provide the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and each employee or agent
thereof, who will engage in business within the City. (Ord. 2086,
10-06-2005)
(2) A description of the nature of the business and goods or services
offered, and the locations within Montrose in which the business will
be conducted.
(C) Accompanying the application shall be an application fee as set by
Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations Manual.
(Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(D) A Surety Bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) conditioned
upon:
(1) Compliance with all ordinances of the City, and statutes of the State,
including payment of all city, county and state taxes and fees, and
(2) Payment of any judgment rendered in favor of a resident of the City
against the applicant or any of his agents or employees, shall be
submitted with the application. Such bond shall remain in effect for
a minimum period of nine (9) months beyond the expiration date of
the transient merchant license issued to the applicant. The bond
must be approved by the City Attorney prior to the issuance of the
license. In lieu of a bond, the applicant may deposit one thousand
dollars ($1,000) in cash, to be held by the City upon the same
conditions provided above, which amount shall be returned to the
applicant following compliance with the above stated conditions.
(E) Also submitted with the application shall be an instrument appointing the
Montrose City Clerk as the true and lawful agent with full power and
authority to acknowledge service of process for and on behalf of the
applicant, and each of his agents or employees, upon a form to be provided
by the City. If any process is served upon the City Clerk, the City shall
send a copy of such process to the applicant at the address listed on the
application by registered or certified mail.
5-6-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
(A) Following receipt of a properly completed application accompanied by the
no return bond, appointment of agent for service of process and the
application fee, the City shall issue the transient merchant's license for a
term of ninety (90) days.
(B) The license shall state the expiration date and describe the goods or services
to be offered. The license shall contain a notice to customers that a one
thousand dollar ($1,000) bond has been filed with the City, conditioned on
compliance with all City Ordinances and State laws, and the payment of
any judgment rendered against the applicant in favor of a resident of the
City, and that the Montrose City Clerk is the licensee’s agent for service of
process.
(C) The applicant shall post a copy of the license at his place of doing business.
The applicant and each employee or agent shall carry his copy of the
license with him at all times, and produce it upon request to any customer,
any police officer, or other agent or employee of the City.
5-6-4: LOCAL SPONSOR
(A) In lieu of the provisions of Section 5-6-2 and 5-6-3, a transient merchant
may be sponsored by a merchant with an established place of business
within the City who has paid City sales taxes without delinquency for the
previous year.
(B) The sponsoring merchant shall file a sponsor letter with the City, on forms
provided by the City, in which the sponsoring merchant shall take
responsibility for the business related acts of the transient merchant and
each agent or employee thereof, and shall guarantee payment of all City,
county and state taxes due or judgment rendered against the transient
merchant as a result of the business, and shall act as the transient merchant's
agent for service of process, and handling of warranty and customer
complaints.
(C) After approval of the sponsor letter by the City, the transient merchant may
conduct the business described thereon. The applicant and each agent or
employee shall carry a copy of the approved letter and produce it upon
request of any employee or agent of the City, or any customer. A copy
shall be posted at the transient merchant's place of business.
(D) The transient merchant shall keep accurate and complete records of all
commercial transactions in which it has been involved during the ninety
(90) day license period. Said records shall be made available to the City
upon request at all reasonable times. The transient merchant’s taxes are due
to be paid to the City within five (5) business days of the expiration or
termination of the transient merchant’s license. (Ord. 2086, 10-6-2005)
5-6-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE
(A) The license issued hereunder may be revoked by the City Council
following notice and hearing on account of any material misstatement
contained in the application, any violation of this Chapter, any violation of
other City Ordinances and regulations applicable to the business activity of
the applicant, or upon conviction of any felony.
(B) Notice of hearing shall be either served upon the applicant in accordance
with the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure or mailed, postage
prepaid, to the applicant at the address set forth in the application for
license.
(C) No license shall be issued to any applicant, or agent or employee thereof,
for whom a license has been revoked, until at least one year has elapsed
since revocation.
5-6-6: INTERSTATE COMMERCE PROVISIONS
In the event any applicant believes that the license fee required by this
Chapter constitutes an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may
apply to the City Council for an adjustment in the amount of the fee, in
which event a hearing shall be heard before the Council to consider the
matter. The applicant may appear and present such evidence as he may
desire at the hearing. Following the hearing, the Council shall determine a
license fee which is fair and reasonable and does not constitute a burden on
interstate commerce.
Any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be sentenced to
such fines and/or imprisonment as set forth in Section 1-2-3 of this
Municipal Code; provided, however, no person under the age of eighteen
(18) years may be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
(Ord. 2086, 10-6-2005)
Chapter 5-7
PEDDLERS PROHIBITED
Sections:
5-7-1 PROHIBITED PRACTICE
5-7-2 SUPPRESSION BY POLICE
Chapter 5-7
PEDDLERS PROHIBITED
Sections:
5-7-1 PROHIBITED PRACTICE
5-7-2 SUPPRESSION BY POLICE
5-7-1: PROHIBITED PRACTICE
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the City, by solicitors, peddlers,
hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been
requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said
private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, and
merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor.
5-7-2: SUPPRESSION BY POLICE
The Police of the City, are hereby required and directed to suppress the same and to abate
such nuisance as it is described in Section 5-7-1. (Ord. No. 226;11-4-1937)
Chapter 5-11
PAWNBROKERS
Sections:
5-11-1 LICENSE REQUIRED
5-11-2 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
5-11-3 REQUIREMENTS FOR PAWNBROKING
5-11-4 HOLD ORDER
5-11-5 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
5-11-6 RETURN OF STOLEN PROPERTY
5-11-7 LIABILITY
5-11-8 RIGHT OF INSPECTION
Chapter 5-11
PAWNBROKERS
Sections:
5-11-1 LICENSE REQUIRED
5-11-2 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
5-11-3 REQUIREMENTS FOR PAWNBROKING
5-11-4 HOLD ORDER
5-11-5 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
5-11-6 RETURN OF STOLEN PROPERTY
5-11-7 LIABILITY
5-11-8 RIGHT OF INSPECTION
5-11-1: LICENSE REQUIRED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of being a
pawnbroker as defined and regulated by C.R.S. 12-56-101, et. seq., without
obtaining a license from the City.
(B) Applications for licenses shall be submitted annually, on forms provided by
the City which may require all information necessary or convenient for the
enforcement and administration of this Chapter accompanied by the
following:
(1) An annual license fee as set by Resolution and referred to in the City
Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(2) A good and sufficient bond, with surety, to be approved by the City
Attorney in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)
conditioned upon the faithful observance of the requirements of this
Chapter and of C.R.S. 12-56-101, et. seq. and for the safekeeping or
return of all articles held on pledge by the pawnbroker.
(3) All-risk property insurance insuring all pledged property against loss
from fire, theft or other casualty.
(C) The City Manager, after receipt of any application, shall conduct an investigation
to insure that the applicant and the application meet all of the
requirements of this Chapter. If the City Manager determines that the
application meets the requirements of this Chapter, he shall grant a license
which shall expire on December 31 of the year for which it is issued. In the
event the applicant or application does not meet all the requirements of this
Chapter, the City Manager shall deny the license.
(D) All licenses shall be non-transferable.
(E) The City Council may revoke any license, following notice to the licensee
and a hearing, upon a finding that the licensee is in violation of any of the
requirements of this Chapter.
5-11-2: REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
(A) No license, required by this Chapter, shall be issued to or held by any of the
following:
(1) Any person who is not of good moral character.
(2) Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders
holding over ten percent (10%) of the outstanding and issued capital
stock, thereof, are not of good moral character.
(3) Any partnership, association or company, any of whose officers or
any of whose members holding more than ten percent (10%) interest
therein, are not of good moral character.
(4) Any person employed or assisted by or financed in whole or in part
by any other person who is not of good moral character and
reputation satisfactory to the City.
(5) Any person, unless he is, with respect to his character, record and
reputation, satisfactory to the City.
(B) In making a determination as to character, when considering the conviction
of a crime, the City shall be governed by the provisions of C.R.S. 24-5-101.
(C) No license shall be issued for or used in connection with any premises
licensed under the Colorado Beer Code or Colorado Liquor Code, or for
any place of amusement or entertainment.
5-11-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR PAWNBROKING
(A) All Pawnbrokers shall comply with the requirements of C.R.S. 12-56-101,
et. seq., the requirements of this Chapter, and of any regulations issued
pursuant hereto.
(B) No pawnbroker shall acquire any property from any person who the pawnbroker
knows has a reputation of being a thief or has been convicted of
theft or a similar offense without first notifying the City Manager or a
member of the Police Department.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to be open for business on Sunday,
New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas
Day or on any other day from nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. in the evening until
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the following morning.
(D) No pawnbroker shall enter into any transaction with any person under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
5-11-4: HOLD ORDER
The City Manager, or any Colorado peace officer, may order a pawnbroker to hold any
article in his custody for purposes of investigation of theft or similar offense by the police
department. No sale or any disposition of any such article may be made until the hold
order is vacated.
5-11-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
The City Manager shall make such additional rules and regulations as are necessary and
convenient for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter, including required
forms and requirements for additional reports.
5-11-6: RETURN OF STOLEN PROPERTY
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a pawnbroker who accepts in pledge any
article as security for a loan from a person who is not the lawful owner thereof, shall
obtain no interest in such article in derogation of the right of the lawful owner either by
maturation of the loan, by transference of the pawn ticket to the pawnbroker, or
otherwise, regardless of whether or not pawnbroker knew such person was not the lawful
owner of the article. In the event of sale of such article to a third person, the pawnbroker
shall be liable to the lawful owner of the article. The lawful owner of any such article
may recover it from a pawnbroker, upon proof of ownership.
5-11-7: LIABILITY
The licensee shall be liable for the loss or damage of any pledged article whether caused
by fire, theft, or otherwise, resulting from his failure to exercise reasonable care, but he
shall not be liable, in the absence of an express agreement to the contrary, for the loss or
damage to a pledged article, for injury which could not have been avoided by the exercise
of such care. The pawnbroker shall maintain, at all times, casualty insurance insuring
pledged property against loss or damage by fire, theft or other casualty.
5-11-8: RIGHT OF INSPECTION
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the requirements of this Chapter and
C.R.S. 12-56-101, the City Manager, or his authorized representative, shall have the right
to enter upon the licensee's premises and to examine the books, accounts, papers, records
and pledged property used or kept by any licensed pawnbroker or other person engaged
in the business of pawnbroking. If any licensee shall refuse such access or inspection,
City Manager shall have recourse, as provided by law, including obtaining a warrant
from the Municipal Court. He may also issue a subpoena duces tecum for a hearing
before the City Manager or City Council, which subpoena may be enforced by the
District Court or other Court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1251, 9-6-84)
Chapter 5-12
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sections:
5-12-1 LICENSING AUTHORITY
5-12-2 DEFINITIONS
5-12-3 UNLAWFUL ACTS
5-12-4 PRESUMPTIONS
5-12-5 PENALTY
5-12-6 CONSUMPTION IN PARKS
5-12-7 OPTIONAL PREMISES LICENSES
5-12-8 SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
5-12-1: LICENSING AUTHORITY
(A) The Montrose City Council is hereby designated the local licensing
authority for purposes of exercising the duties and powers provided for in
the Colorado Beer Code and the Colorado Liquor Code.
(B) The Montrose City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue temporary permits
upon a determination that the request for such permit meets the
requirements of C.R.S. 12-46-106.5, 12-47-106.5, 12-47-106(l)(b.5) or
other applicable provisions of the Colorado Beer Code or Liquor Code.
Any person aggrieved by a failure of the Clerk to issue a temporary license
may appeal the denial to the City Council. (Ord. 1435, 8-15-91)
(C) Fees collected by the City for licensing of liquor establishments shall be set
by Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations Manual. Such fees
shall not exceed the limits set by Colorado State Statute.
(Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
5-12-2: DEFINITIONS
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this Section:
(A) "Alcoholic beverage" shall mean any "fermented malt beverage” as defined
by the Colorado Beer Code and all “malt, vinous or spirituous liquors" as
defined by the Colorado Liquor Code; including, but not limited to,
beverages commonly known as liquor, wine and beer with an alcoholic
content of more or less than 3.2% by weight.
(1) C.R.S. secs. 12-46-101 et seq.
(2) C.R.S. secs. 12-47-101 et seq.
(B) "Fermented malt beverage" shall mean any beverage defined as such by the
Colorado Beer Code including, but not limited to, beverages commonly
referred to as "3.2% beer" or beer containing not more than 3.2% alcohol
by weight.
(C) "Malt, vinous or spirituous liquors" shall have the meaning as defined by
the Colorado Liquor Code, and shall include, but not be limited to, liquor,
wine and beer having more than 3.2% alcohol content by weight.
5-12-3: UNLAWFUL ACTS
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts:
(A) To consume any alcoholic beverage in or at any public place within the
City of Montrose, Colorado, including, but not limited to, the following
public places: restaurants, retail liquor stores, pool halls, dance halls,
business premises, school premises, parks, recreation halls, public
buildings, places of public gathering for amusement or entertainment,
parking areas or the surrounding premises of any of the aforementioned
places and streets, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots or publicly owned
property; provided however, this provision shall not apply to premises or
events licensed for consumption thereon pursuant to law.
(Ord. 1913, 7-11-2002)
(B)
(1) To possess an unsealed or open container containing any alcoholic
beverage in any public place, including but not limited to, the
following public places: restaurants, retail liquor stores, pool halls,
dance halls, business premises, school premises, parks, recreation
halls, public buildings, places of public gathering for amusement or
entertainment, parking areas or surrounding premises of any of the
aforementioned places, and streets, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots or
publicly owned property; provided however, that this provision shall
not apply to premises or events licensed for consumption thereon
pursuant to law. (Ord. 1913, 7-11-2002)
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person in
possession of one opened but resealed container of partially
consumed vinous liquor which was lawfully removed from the
licensed premises of liquor licensee pursuant to Section 12-47-421,
C.R.S. as it may be amended. (Ord. 2108, 4-20-2006)
(C) For any person owning or having possession of any premises to allow the
consumption of an alcoholic beverage or the possession of unsealed or open
alcoholic beverage container upon such premises by any such person in
violation of subsections (A) and (B) of this Section. (Ord. 972, 3-2-78)
(D) For any person under the age of twenty one (21) years old to purchase,
possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage except that a person who was
eighteen (18) years of age or older on July 29, 1987, may continue to
purchase and consume fermented malt beverages.
(E) To provide, sell, distribute or give any alcoholic beverage to any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years of age, except that fermented malt
beverages may be provided, sold, distributed or given to persons who were
eighteen (18) years of age or older on July 29, 1987. (Ord. 1345, 9-17-87)
(F)
(1) For any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to enter or remain
upon the premises of a business establishment holding a tavern
liquor license, as that term is defined in C.R.S. sec. 12-47-412,
during business hours, unless such person is accompanied by such
person's parent or legal guardian, is an employee of such premises,
or is temporarily on the premises making a delivery.
(2) For any person holding a tavern liquor license, as that term is
defined in C.R.S. sec. 12-47-412, for a business establishment, or
any agent or employee thereof, to allow a person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years of age to enter or remain upon the premises
during business hours, unless such person is accompanied by such
person's parent or legal guardian, is an employee of such premises,
or is temporarily on the premises while making a delivery.
(3) The provisions of Subsections (1) and (2) above shall not apply to
such business establishments where the sale of liquor does not
constitute the primary business purpose, as determined by gross
sales receipts, or that percentage of customer floor area actually
utilized for the sale and consumption of liquor.
(Ord 1919, 10-03-2002)
5-12-4: PRESUMPTIONS
(A) It shall be prima facie evidence that any beverage or liquid is an alcoholic
beverage if it is or was contained within a container labeled as an alcoholic
beverage container of any sort and if it either looks like, smells like or
tastes like an alcoholic beverage.
(B) Except for those offenses in this Chapter which specifically involve only
malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, it shall not be necessary in order to prove
a violation of any provision of this Chapter to distinguish between beers
having more or less than 3.2% alcohol by weight or to offer proof as to the
alcoholic content of the beer or other malt liquors or fermented malt liquors
or fermented malt beverage involved.
5-12-5: PENALTY
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not more one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by a term of imprisonment of not
more than one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment; provided however, no person
under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
(Ord.1614, 12-19-96)
5-12-6: CONSUMPTION IN PARKS (Ord. 1913, 07-11-2002)
(A) Alcohol Consumption Permits for beer and wine may be obtained from the
City, subject to fees, terms and conditions as administered by the City, for
the following designated locations within City parks:
(1) Within the pavilion picnic structure located at Rotary Park and a 20-
foot perimeter thereof, during times when school is not in session.
(2) Within the pavilion picnic structure located at Riverbottom Park and
a 20-foot perimeter thereof.
(3) Within La Raza Park at a specified location to be determined by the
City.
(B) All other possession or consumption of alcohol in City parks is prohibited
pursuant to the provisions of 5-12-3(A), (B) and (C).
5-12-7: OPTIONAL PREMISES LICENSES
(A) Optional premises licenses and hotel and restaurant licenses with optional
premises may be approved pursuant to C.R.S. 12-47-135.5 upon showing
that the following specific standards are met.
(1) The type of qualifying outdoor sports and recreation facilities shall
consist of golf courses.
(2) The scope of the premises shall include all or part of the entire golf
course property as designated by the applicant.
(3) The applicant for an optional premises license shall be either the
following:
(a) The applicant for or holder of a hotel and restaurant license
associated with the golf course clubhouse, whether or not
such applicant has any ownership interests or operational
responsibilities with respect to golf course operation, or
(b) The owner, lessee or operator of a golf course.
(B) The provisions of subsections 5-12-3(A), (B) and (C) shall not apply to golf
courses. (Ord. 1433, 7-11-91)
5-12-8 SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
(A) Pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-48-107(5)(a) the City Council of the City of
Montrose, acting as the local liquor licensing authority, hereby elects to
exercise exclusive local control over the issuance of liquor license special
event permits for events within the City. The preceding recitals are adopted
as specific findings and determinations of the Council.
(B) The provision of this section notwithstanding, the City Clerk shall report to
the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division, within ten (10) days after the
City issues any special event permit, the name of the organization to which
the permit was issued, the address of the permitted location, and the
permitted dates of alcohol beverage service.
(C) Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit the City Clerk
shall, as required by C.R.S. § 12-48-107(5)(c), access information made
available on the web site of the state licensing authority to determine the
statewide permitting activity of the organization applying for the permit.
The City shall consider compliance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 12- 48-
105(3) limiting to fifteen (15) the number of special event permits issued in
any one year to any one organization, before approving any application.
(D) In addition, before approval, the City Clerk shall confirm the
following when appropriate:
(1) For special event licenses:
(a) Timely and proper posting of a conspicuous public
notice sign as required by Article 48, Title 12, C.R.S.,
as amended.
(b) Whether the applicant satisfies the eligibility criteria set
forth in Article 48, Title 12, C.R.S., as amended.
(c) After investigation, no sufficient grounds for denial
appear to exist and no protests have been filed by
affected persons.
(d) That the applicant has not exceeded and does not
propose to exceed the maximum number of special
event calendar days permitted by Article 48, Title 12,
C.R.S., as amended.
(e) Each application for a special event permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount equal
to the local licensing fee established by C.R.S. § 12-48-
107(2).
(Ord 2299, 03/05/2012)
Chapter 5-15
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:
5-15-1 SHORT TITLE
5-15-2 WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED
5-15-3 SALES TAX LICENSE
5-15-4 SALES TAX LEVIED
5-15-5 COLLECTION AND REMITTANCE OF SALES TAX
5-15-6 ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5-15-7 RATE OF INTEREST
5-15-8 EXEMPTION FROM SALES TAX
5-15-9 DISPUTES AND REFUNDS
5-15-10 RETURN CONFIDENTIAL
5-15-11 REVIEW OF RETURN
5-15-12 INTEREST ON UNDERPAYMENT
5-15-13 SALES OR USE TAX-DEFICIENCY DUE TO NEGLIGENCE
5-15-14 INVESTIGATIONS AND HEARINGS
5-15-15 RECORD OF SALES
5-15-16 TAX LIEN
5-15-17 RECOVERY OF TAXES, PENALTIES AND INTEREST
5-15-18 APPEALS TO CITY MANAGER
5-15-19 APPEALS
5-15-20 NOTICES
5-15-21 AUTHORIZATION OF USE TAX
5-15-22 EXEMPTIONS
5-15-23 MONTHLY RETURN, COLLECTION
5-15-24 TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN; EXEMPTION FROM LIEN
5-15-25 USE TAX; NEGLECT OR REFUSAL TO MAKE RETURN OR TO PAY
5-15-26 PENALTY INTEREST ON UNPAID USE TAX
5-15-27 VEHICLES
5-15-28 LIMITATIONS
5-15-29 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
5-15-30 REMITTANCE OF TAX ELECTRONIC DATABASE; RETAILER HELD
HARMLESS
5-15-31 PENALTY AND REMEDIES
5-15-32 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND
5-15-33 RETAIL SALES ENHANCEMENT
5-15-34 1/2 % SCHOOL DISTRICT SALES AND USE TAX INCREASE
REPEALED; SALES AND USE TAX RATE TO REVERT TO 3 %
5-15-35 COORDINATED AUDIT
5-15-36 INTERCITY CLAIMS FOR RECOVERY
5-15-37 NOTICE OF SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE AMENDMENT
5-15-38 PARTICIPATION IN SIMPLIFICATION MEETINGS
5-15-39 SALES TAX CREDIT
5-15-1: SHORT TITLE
This Chapter may be known and cited as the City's Sales and Use Tax. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85,
eff. 1-1-86)
5-15-2: WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED
The following words and phrases as used in this Chapter shall have the following
meaning:
ACCESS SERVICES: The services furnished by a local exchange company to its
customers who provide telecommunications services which
allow them to provide such telecommunications services.
ACQUISITION
CHARGES OR COSTS: Includes Purchase Price.
AUCTION: Any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an
auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such
property or is in fact the owner thereof.
AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE: Any vehicle or device in, upon, or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public
highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight
in the air. Automotive vehicle includes, but is not limited to,
motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, or mobile homes.
Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
BUSINESS: All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the
object of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect.
CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION: Any entity organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or
educational purposes, or to foster national or international
amateur sports competition (but only if no part of its activities
involve the provision of athletic facilities or equipment), or
for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of
the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual, no substantial part of the activities
of which is Charitable carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
Organization (cont.) attempting, to influence legislation, and
which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the
publishing or distributing of statements), any political
campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office.
CITY: The City of Montrose, or any authorized officer, employee or
agent thereof.
CONSTRUCTION
MATERIALS: Tangible personal property which, when combined with other
tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an
integral and inseparable part of a completed structure or
project including public and private improvements.
Construction materials include, but are not limited to, such
things as: asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware, caulking
material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring, and
connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling
equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime,
lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe
valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty,
reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer
pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees,
shrubs and other landscaping materials, wallboard, wall
coping, wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen,
water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above
materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not
remain as an integral or inseparable part of a completed
structure or project are not construction materials.
CONSUMER: 1) Any individual person, or 2) person engaged in business in
the City who uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes
in the City tangible personal property or taxable services
purchased from sources inside or outside the City.
DRUGS DISPENSED
IN ACCORDANCE
WITH A
PRESCRIPTION: Drugs dispensed in accordance with any order in writing,
dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts,
or given orally by a practitioner, and immediately reduced to
writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy
intern, specifying the name and address of the person for
whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions,
if any, to be placed on the label.
ENGAGED IN BUSINESS
IN THE CITY: Performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting,
delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage,
use or consumption within the City. Engaged in business in
the City includes, but is not limited to, any one of the
following activities by a person:
(A) Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a
building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other
place of business within the taxing jurisdiction;
(B) Sends one or more employees, agents or
commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction
to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair,
service, or assist in the use of its products, or for
demonstration or other reasons;
(C) Maintains one or more employees, agents or
commissioned sales persons on duty at a location
within the taxing jurisdiction;
(D) Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over
real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction;
or
(E) Makes more than one delivery into the taxing
jurisdiction within a twelve (12) month period.
EXEMPT COMMERCIAL
PACKAGING
MATERIALS: Containers, labels and shipping cases sold to a person
engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling,
jobbing, retailing, packaging, distributing or bottling for sale,
profit or use that meets all of the following conditions: 1) is
used by the manufacturer, compounder, wholesaler, jobber,
retailer, packager, distributor or bottler to contain or label the
finished product; 2) is transferred by said person along with
and as a part of the finished product to the purchaser; and 3)
is not returnable to said person for reuse.
FARM CLOSEOUT SALE: Full and final disposition of all tangible personal property
previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching
operations which are being abandoned.
FINANCE DIRECTOR: The Finance Director of the City or such other person
designated by the municipality; "Finance Director" shall also
include such person's designee.
FOOD: Food for domestic home consumption as defined in 7 U.S.C.
section 2012(g) as amended, for purposes of the Federal Food
Stamp Program as defined in 7 U.S.C. section 2012(h), as
amended, except that "food" does not include carbonated
water marketed in containers; chewing gum; seeds and plants
to grow food; prepared salads and salad bars; cold
sandwiches; deli trays; and food or drink vended by or
through machines or non-coin operated coin-collecting food
and snack devices on behalf of a vendor.
GROSS SALES: The total amount received in money, credit, property or other
consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals
of tangible personal property or services.
LICENSE: A City sales and use tax license.
LINEN SERVICES: Services involving provision and cleaning of linens, including
but not limited to rags, uniforms, coveralls and diapers.
LODGING SERVICES: The furnishing of rooms or accommodations by any person,
partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative
capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever
name known to a person who for a consideration uses,
possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a
hotel, inn, bed and breakfast residence, apartment hotel,
lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer
coach, mobile home, auto camp, or trailer court and park, or
similar establishment, for a period of less than thirty (30) days
under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use,
or other agreement, or otherwise.
MEDICAL SUPPLIES: Drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription; insulin in
all its forms dispensed pursuant to the direction of a licensed
physician; glucose usable for treatment of insulin reactions;
urine and blood-testing kits and materials; insulin measuring
and injecting devices, including hypodermic syringes, and
needles; prosthetic devices; wheelchairs and hospital beds;
drugs or materials when furnished by a doctor as part of
professional services provided to a patient; and corrective
eyeglasses, contact lenses, or hearing aids.
MOBILE MACHINERY
AND SELF-PROPELLED
CONSTRUCTION
EQUIPMENT: Those vehicles, self-propelled or otherwise, which are not
designed primarily for the transportation of persons or cargo
over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which
may have originally been designed for the transportation of
persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor
vehicles which may have originally been designed for the
transportation of persons or cargo but which have been
redesigned or modified by the mounting thereon of special
equipment or machinery, and which may be only incidentally
operated or moved over the public highways. This definition
includes but is not limited to wheeled vehicles commonly
used in the construction, maintenance, and repair of roadways,
the drilling of wells, and the digging of ditches.
NEWSPAPER: A publication, printed on newsprint or electronically for
distribution over the Internet, intended for general circulation,
and published regularly at short intervals, containing
information and editorials on current events and news of
general interest, along with advertising which may be
integrated into the newspaper layout, or inserted as a
supplement or pamphlet. The term “newspaper” does not
include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit
bulletins, advertising pamphlets not inserted into a
newspaper, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs,
reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings,
publications that include an updating or revision service, and
books or pocket editions of books. (Ord 2294, 03/05/2012)
PAY TELEVISION: Shall include, but not be limited to, cable, microwave or other
television service for which a charge is imposed.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person
acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether
appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination
acting as a unit.
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS
FOR ANIMALS: Drugs dispensed in accordance with any order in writing,
dated and signed by a practitioner, or given orally by a
practitioner, specifying the animal for which the medicine or
drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the
label.
PRICE or PURCHASE
PRICE: The price to the consumer, exclusive of any direct tax
imposed by the Federal government or by this Chapter, and,
in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of
property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the
property exchanged at the same time and place of the
exchange, if:
(A) Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the
usual course of the retailer's business; or
(B) Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged
for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to
licensing, registration, or certification under the laws
of this State, including, but not limited to, vehicles
operating upon public highways, off-highway
recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any
money or other consideration paid over and above the
value of the exchanged property is subject to tax.
PRICE or PURCHASE
PRICE INCLUDES:
(A) The amount of money received or due in cash and
credits.
(B) Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not
for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business.
(C) Any consideration valued in money, such as trading
stamps or coupons whereby the manufacturer or
someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the
purchase price and other media of exchange.
(D) The total price charged on credit sales including
finance charges which are not separately stated. An
amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of
the purchase price is not part of the purchase price
unless the amount added to the purchase price is
included in the principal amount of a promissory note;
except the interest or carrying charge set out separately
from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the
face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An
amount charged for insurance on the property sold and
separately stated is not part of the purchase price.
(E) Transportation charges are taxable if they are not both
(1) separable from the sales transaction, and (2) stated
separately on a written invoice or contract.
(Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(F) Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as
taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock.
(Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(G) The gross purchase price of articles sold after
manufacturing or after having been made to order,
including the gross value of all the materials used,
labor and service performed and the profit thereon.
(Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
PRICE or PURCHASE
PRICE SHALL NOT
INCLUDE:
(A) Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado
or by any political subdivision thereof.
(B) The fair market value of property exchanged if such
property is to be sold thereafter in the retailers usual
course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in
Colorado. Out of state trade-in's are an allowable
adjustment to the purchase price.
(C) Discounts from the original price if such discount and
the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually
passed on to the purchaser. An anticipated discount to
be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not
an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross
sales.
(D) Transportation charges are not taxable if they are both
separable from the sales transaction, and stated
separately on a written invoice or contract. (Ord.
2084, 10-6-2005)
(1) “Transportation Charges” include carrying,
handling, delivery, mileage, freight, postage,
shipping, trip charges, stand-by, and other
similar charges or fees.
(2) Separable charges. Transportation charges are
separable from the sales transaction if they are
performed after the taxable property or service
is offered for sale, and the seller allows the
purchaser the option either to use the seller’s
transportation services use alternative
transportation services (including but not
limited to the purchaser picking up the property
at the seller’s location). The fact that
transportation charges are stated separately does
not, in and of itself, mean the charges are a
separable charge.
(3) Stated Separately. Transportation charges will
be regarded as “separately stated” only if they
are set forth separately in a written sales
contract, retailer’s invoice, or other written
document issued in connection with the sale.
(4) Intermediate or “Freight in” charges.
Transportation charges incurred in connection
with transporting tangible personal property
from the place of production or the
manufacturer to the seller or to the seller’s agent
or representative, or to anyone else acting in the
seller’s behalf, either directly or through a chain
or wholesalers or jobbers or other middlemen,
are deemed “freight-in” charges and are not a
transportation charge exempt from tax.
(5) Overstated Transportation Charges. The
amount of transportation charges excluded for
the calculation of tax shall be the amount of
transportation charges separately stated in
accordance with subparagraph (3) of this
subsection, provided that such separate
statement is not to avoid the tax upon the actual
sales price of tangible personal property.
PRIVATE
COMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES: Telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber, which
entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use or any
communication channel or groups of channels, or to the
exclusive or priority use of any interstate intercommunications
system for the subscriber's stations.
PROSTHETIC DEVICES: Any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use
which aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed,
manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular individual;
and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts.
Prosthetic devices include but are not limited to prescribed
auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, therapeutic, or
orthopedic devices or appliances, oxygen concentrators and
oxygen with related accessories.
PURCHASE or SALE: The acquisition for any consideration by any person of
tangible personal property or taxable services that are
purchased, leased, rented, sold, used, stored, distributed, or
consumed, but excludes a bona fide gift of property or
services. These terms include capital leases, installment and
credit sales, and property and services acquired by:
(A) Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or
possession or both to tangible personal property;
(B) A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a
license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible
personal property or taxable services;
(C) Performance of taxable services; or
(D) Barter or exchange for other property or services
including coupons.
PURCHASE AND SALE
DO NOT INCLUDE: (A) A division of partnership assets among the partners
according to their interests in the partnership;
(B) The formation of a corporation by the owners of a
business and the transfer of their business assets to the
corporation In exchange for all the corporation's
outstanding stock, except qualifying shares, in
proportion to the assets contributed;
(C) The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation
or dissolution of professional corporations;
(D) The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the
corporation's assets to Its stockholders;
(E) A transfer of a partnership interest;
(F) The transfer in a reorganization qualifying under
section 368(a)(1) of the "Internal Revenue Code of
1954", as amended;
(G) The formation of a partnership by the transfer of assets
to the partnership or transfers to a partnership in
exchange for proportionate interests in the partnership;
(H) The repossession of personal property by a chattel
mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder;
(I) The transfer of assets from a parent corporation to a
subsidiary corporation or corporations which are
owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent
corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for
stock or securities of the subsidiary corporation;
(J) The transfer of assets from a subsidiary corporation or
corporations which are owned at least eighty percent
(80%) by the parent corporation to a parent
corporation or to another subsidiary which is owned at
least eighty percent (80%) by the parent corporation,
which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or
securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary
which received the assets;
(K) The transfer of assets between parent and closely held
subsidiary corporations, or between subsidiary
corporations closely held by the same parent
corporation, or between corporations which are owned
by the same shareholders in identical percentage of
stock ownership amounts, computed on a share by
share basis, when a tax imposed by this Chapter was
paid by the transferor corporation at the time it
acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is
an increase in the fair market value of such assets
resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or
physical changing of the assets by the transferor
corporation. To such an extent any transfer referred to
in this subsection (K) shall constitute a sale. For the
purposes of this subsection (K), a closely held
subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent
corporation owns stock possessing at least eighty
percent (80%) of the total combined voting power of
all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least
eighty percent (80%) of the total number of shares of
all other classes of stock.
RECREATION
SERVICES: All services relating to athletic or entertainment participation
events including but not limited to pool, golf, billiards,
skating, tennis, bowling, health/athletic club memberships,
coin operated amusement devices, video games and video
club memberships.
RETAIL SALES: All sales except wholesale sales.
RETAILER OR
VENDOR: Any person selling, leasing or renting tangible personal
property or services at retail. Retailer shall include any:
(A) Auctioneer;
(B) Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who
makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains
such property or services sold from a dealer,
distributor, supervisor or employer;
(C) Charitable organization or governmental entity which
makes sales of tangible personal property to the public,
notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may
have been acquired by gift or donation or that the
proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental
purposes.
RETURN: The sales and use tax reporting form used to report sales and
use tax.
SALES TAX: The tax to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales
taxed under this Chapter.
SECURITY SYSTEM
SERVICES: Electronic security system services. Such term does not
include non-electronic security services such as consulting or
human or guard dog patrol services.
SOUND SYSTEM
SERVICES: Sound system services involving provision of broadcast or
prerecorded audio programming to a building or portion
thereof. Such term does not include installation of sound
systems where the entire system becomes the property of the
building owner or the sound system services is for
presentation of live performances.
STORAGE OR
STORING: Any keeping or retention of or exercise of dominion or
control over, tangible personal property in this City.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL
PROPERTY: Corporeal personal property.
TAX: The use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from
retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also
consumes.
TAX DEFICIENCY: Any amount or tax that is not reported or not paid on or
before the due date.
TAXABLE SALES: Gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in
this Chapter.
TAXABLE SERVICES: Services subject to tax pursuant to this Chapter.
TAXPAYER: Any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the
terms of this Chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICE: The transmission of any two-way interactive electromagnetic
communications including but not limited to voice, image,
data and any other information, by the use of any means but
not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave,
radio wave or any combinations of such media.
"Telecommunications service" includes but is not limited to
basic local exchange telephone service, toll telephone service
and teletypewriter service, including but not limited to
residential and business service, directory assistance, cellular
mobile telephone or telecommunication service, specialized
mobile radio and two-way pagers and paging service,
including any form of mobile two-way communication.
"Telecommunications service" does not include separately
stated non-transmission services which constitute computer
processing applications used to act on the information to be
transmitted.
THERAPEUTIC
DEVICE: Devices, appliances, or related accessories that are sold to
correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically
created abnormality; if such device, appliance or related
accessory has a retail value of more than one hundred dollars
($100.00), it must be sold in accordance with a written
recommendation from a licensed doctor to qualify as a
"therapeutic device" for purposes of this Chapter.
TOTAL TAX LIABILITY: The total of all tax, penalties or interest owed by a taxpayer
and shall include sales tax collected in excess of such tax
computed on total sales.
USE TAX: The tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using,
storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal
property or taxable services inside the City.
WATTS/800 SERVICE: Any outbound or inbound interstate wide area
telecommunications service or other similar service which
entitles the subscriber, upon payment of a periodic charge,
based upon a flat amount and/or usage, to make or receive a
large volume of telephonic communications to or from
persons having telephone or radio telephone stations in
specified areas which are outside the telephone system area in
which the subscriber's station is located.
WHOLESALE SALES: Sales to licensed retailers, jobbers, dealers or wholesalers for
resale. Sales by wholesalers to consumers are not wholesale
sales. Sales by wholesalers to unlicensed retailers are not
wholesale sales.
WHOLESALER: Any person selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other
wholesalers, for resale, and not for storage, use, consumption,
or distribution. (Ord. 1439, 11-7-91)
5-15-3: SALES TAX LICENSE
(A) It shall be unlawful for any retailer to engage in the business of selling at
retail, without first having obtained an annual license therefore, which
license shall be granted and issued by the City and shall be in force until
December 31 of the year issued or until revoked or suspended. Such
license shall be granted or renewed only upon application stating the name
and mailing address of the person desiring such a license, the name of such
business and the location, including the street number of such business, and
such other facts as the City may require. Each application shall be
accompanied by a new application fee or renewal fee as set by Resolution
and referred to in the City Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(B) In case business is transacted at two (2) or more separate places by one
person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required.
(C) Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence, and
place of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be
transferable. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(D) The City Council, after reasonable notice and a hearing, may revoke or
suspend the license of any person found by the City Council to have
violated any provision of this Chapter.
(E) No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the
business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under this
Chapter. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85. eff. 1-1-86)
5-15-4: SALES TAX LEVIED
(A) There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax at
the rate of three percent (3%), as follows (Ord. 2201, 08-07-2008):
(1) On the purchase price paid or charged upon all sales and purchases
of tangible personal property at retail.
(2)
(a) In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property,
on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair
market value of the property exchanged at the time and place
of the exchange, excluding, however, from the consideration
or purchase price the fair market value of the exchanged
property if:
(i) Such exchanged property, other than factory built
housing as defined in C.R.S. 24-32-703(3) is to be sold
thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business;
or
(ii) Such exchanged property is a vehicle other than a
mobile home as defined in C.R.S. 42-1-102(82)(b) and
is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are
subject to licensing, registration or certification under
the laws of this State, including but not limited to
vehicles operating upon public highways, off highway
recreation vehicles, water-craft and aircraft.
(b) The exchange of three (3) or more vehicles of the same type
by any person in any calendar year in transactions subject to
the provisions of this Chapter shall be prima facie evidence
that suchperson is engaged in the business of selling vehicles
of the type involved in such transaction as a retailer, and that
he is thereby subject to licensing requirements.
(3) On the purchase price of telephone services for all local calls
originating in the City on telephone instruments located in the City.
(4) On the purchase price of gas and electric service, whether furnished
by Municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises, for gas
and electricity furnished and sold for domestic and commercial
consumption and not for resale.
(5) On the purchase price paid or charged for food or drink served or
furnished in or by restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias,
hotels, drug stores, clubs, cabarets, resorts, snack bars, caterers,
carry out shops, and other like places of business at which prepared
food or drink is regularly sold to the public. Cover charges shall be
included as part of the amount paid for such food or drink. (Ord.
1291, 12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
(6) On the purchase price paid or charged to any person or persons for
lodging services. (Ord. 1439, 11-7-91)
(B) Credit Sales: Whenever an article is sold under a conditional sales contract
whereby the seller retains title as security for all or part of the purchase
price, or whenever the seller takes a chattel mortgage on the article to
secure all or part of the purchase price, the total tax based on the total
selling price shall become immediately due and payable. This tax shall be
charged and collected by the seller. No refund or credit shall be allowed to
either party to the transaction in case of repossession. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85,
eff. 1-1-86)
5-15-5: COLLECTION AND REMITTANCE OF SALES TAX
(A) Every retailer shall, irrespective of the provisions of subsection (G) be
liable and responsible for the payment of an amount calculated using the
rate set forth in Section 5-15-4(A) of this Chapter, known as the City’s
Sales Tax rate on all sales made by him of commodities or services as
specified in Section 5-15-4, and shall, before the twentieth (20th) day of
each month, make a return to the City for the preceding calendar month and
remit an amount equivalent to said percent of such sales to the City. One
and one-third percent (1 1/3%) of such tax to cover the vendor's expense in
the collection and remittance of said tax may be retained by the retailer
unless he is delinquent in payment of the tax. Licensed retailers shall
submit a return each month whether or not any taxable sales are made.
Such returns of the taxpayer, or his duly authorized agent, shall contain
such information and be made in such manner and upon such forms as the
City may prescribe, including the State's standard Municipal sales and use
tax reporting form. The City Manager may extend the time for making
returns and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and
regulations as he may prescribe. The burden of proving that any person is
exempt from collecting the tax on any goods sold and paying the same to
the City, or from making such returns, shall be on said person. (Ord. 2084,
10-6-2005)
(B) Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not
any such sale is exempt from taxation hereunder, nevertheless the seller
shall collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax and the seller shall
thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt, or certificate, on forms
prescribed by the City showing the name of the seller and purchaser, the
items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid, and a brief statement
of the claim of exemption. The purchaser thereafter may apply to the City
for a refund of such taxes and it shall then be the duty of the City to
determine the question of exemption. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
(C) It shall be unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to the
public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof imposed by this Chapter will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer
or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if
added, that all or any part thereof will be refunded. Provided, however,
retailers selling alcoholic beverages by the drink may include the sales tax
as part of the sales price to the consumer, using the schedule set out in
Subsection (G). Retailers selling by vending machine or vending box shall
remit a percentage of total sales set forth in Section 5-15-4(A) of this
Chapter as the City’s Sales Tax rate. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(D) Reports of Vendors: if the accounting methods regularly employed by the
vendor in the transaction of his business, or other conditions are such that
reports of sales are made on a calendar month basis will impose
unnecessary hard ship, the City Manager, upon written request of the
vendor, may accept reports at such intervals as will, in his opinion, better
suit the convenience of the tax payer and will not jeopardize the collection
of the tax; provided, however, the City Manager may by regulation permit
taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than fifty dollars ($50.00) to
make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every three (3)
months.
(E) A retailer doing business in two (2) or more places or locations, taxable
hereunder, shall file separate Sales and Use Tax returns for each License
issued under Section 5-15-3(B) of this Chapter. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(F) If any vendor during the reporting period collects as a tax on his total
taxable sales an amount in excess of the percent set forth in Section 5-15-
4(A) of this Chapter, he shall remit to the City the full net amount of the tax
herein imposed and also such excess. The retention by the retailer or
vendor of any excess of tax collections over the percent set forth in Section
5-15-4(A) of this chapter for the total taxable sales of such retailer or
vendor, or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the City the full
amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this Chapter, is
unlawful. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(G) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, retailers shall add the percent
of tax imposed, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or
charge, to be computed in accordance with the schedules or systems
approved by the City Manager. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
5-15-6: ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(A) The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration, interpretation
and enforcement of this Chapter.
(B) The City Manager shall adopt such regulations as may be necessary or
desirable for the administration and interpretation of this Chapter.
(C) The City may use regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of
Revenue applicable to the State sales and use tax in the administration and
interpretation of this Chapter to the extent such regulations are applicable to
and consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and regulations issued
hereunder.
5-15-7: RATE OF INTEREST
When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provision of this Chapter,
the annual rate of interest shall be that established by the State Commissioner of banking
pursuant to C.R.S. 39-21-110.5, except as otherwise provided.
5-15-8: EXEMPTION FROM SALES TAX
There shall be exempt from the sales tax under the provisions of this Chapter, the
following:
(A) All sales to the United States Government, to the State, its departments and
institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof (including the City) in
their governmental capacities only.
(B) All sales made to religious and charitable corporations for use in the
conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions and activities.
(C) All sales which the City is prohibited from taxing under the constitution or
laws of the United States or the State of Colorado or the charter or
ordinances of the City.
(D) All sales of cigarettes.
(E) All sales and purchases of rooms or accommodations under the provisions
of subsection 5-15-4(A)6 to any occupant who is a permanent resident of an
apartment hotel, lodge housing, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch,
mobile home, auto camp, trailer court or park, and who enters into or has
entered into a written agreement for occupancy for a room or rooms or
accommodations for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days during
the calendar year or preceding year.
(F) All sales of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the
motor fuel tax prescribed by the Colorado Motor Fuel Tax of 1933 and
amendments thereto.
(G) Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property by a person engaged in
the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use, any
article, substance, commodity, which tangible personal property enters into
the processing of or become an ingredient or component part of the product
or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the
container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof, shall be deemed to
be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation under this Chapter.
(H) Sales and purchases of electricity, coal, fuel oil, gas or coke for use in
processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, building
construction, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and
railroad transportation services and all industrial uses, the newsprint and
printer's ink for use by publishers of newspapers and commercial printers
shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation
under this Chapter.
(I) All sales and purchases of the following for use on farms or ranches for
farming or ranching operations:
(1) Feed for livestock, fish or poultry.
(2) Salt, seed, plants, orchard trees.
(3) Fertilizer, insecticides, herbicides, and chemicals or compounds.
(Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(4) Twine, bailing wire, bags, boxes, other containers.
(5) Barbed wire and other fencing materials and posts; irrigation pipe
and fixtures; grain bins; stock watering, feeding and handling
equipment.
(6) Livestock, and poultry.
(J) All sales and purchases of farm machinery, and parts for farm machinery.
(K) All sales and purchases of motor vehicles, trailers, mobile homes or other
vehicles which are required to be registered under the Colorado Motor
Vehicle laws, whether new or used under the following conditions:
(1) The purchaser, if a natural person, is not a resident of the City, and
(2) The vehicles or mobile home is to be registered under an address
outside of the City and will be primarily housed, located or occupied
at such address or other place outside the City.
(L) Sales of tangible personal property shall be exempted from the operation of
this Chapter if both the following conditions exist:
(1) The sales are to those who are residents or doing business outside
the City, and
(2) The articles purchased are to be delivered to the purchaser outside
the City by common carrier or by the conveyance of the seller or by
mail. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
(M) All sales and purchases of medical supplies. (Ord. 1439, 11-7-91)
(N) Fifty percent (50%) of the purchase of 1) factory built housing (including
mobile homes), as such housing is defined in C.R.S. 24-32-703(3), and of
2) other buildings or structures including conventional buildings, shall be
exempt from taxes under the provisions of this Chapter; except that the
entire purchase price in any subsequent sale of factory built houses or other
buildings severed from real estate after such housing or severed building
has once been subject to the payment of sales or use tax under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be exempt from taxes under the provisions
of this Chapter.
(O) The sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in
C.R.S. 29-2-109, if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the
purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or
other documentation acceptable to the City evidencing that a local use tax
has been paid or is required to be paid. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
(P) The sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services
if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully
imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule
municipality equal to or in excess of the percent set forth in Section 5-15-
4(A) of this Chapter as the City’s Sales and Use Tax rate. A credit shall be
granted against the City's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in
amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the
purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality. The
amount of the credit shall not exceed the City’s sales tax rate. (Ord. 2084,
10-6-2005)
(Q) All sales to and purchases by nonprofit associations of motor vehicles for
use in the operation and maintenance of U.S. Government-owned irrigation
facilities. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85. eff. 1-1-86)
(R) All sales and purchases of newspapers. (Ord. 1439, 11-7-91)
5-15-9: DISPUTES AND REFUNDS
(A) A refund shall be made, or a credit allowed, for the tax paid under dispute
by any purchaser who has an exemption as this Chapter provided. Such
refund shall be made by the City after compliance with the following
conditions precedent:
(1) Applications for refund must be made within sixty (60) days after
the purchase of the goods whereon an exemption is claimed.
(2) Application for refund of taxes paid in error or by mistake shall be
made within three (3) years after the date of purchase.
(3) Applications must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser
accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and
certificate issued by the seller; and be made upon such forms as shall
be prescribed by the City, which forms shall contain such
information as City shall prescribe.
(B) Upon receipt of such application, the City shall examine the same with all
due speed and shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of the
decision thereon. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85; eff. 1-1-86)
(C) The City may at its sole option perform an audit, the scope of which shall
be determined by the City on a case-by-case basis in the City’s singular
discretion. The purpose of said audit shall be to determine whether a
refund is due, or to verify information provided by the applicant in any
amended return. If the City chooses to perform an audit, the satisfactory
completion thereof shall be a condition precedent to any refund. (Ord.
2084, 10-6-2005)
(D) Aggrieved applicants, within thirty (30) calendar days after such decision is
mailed to them, may petition the City Manager for a hearing on the claim in
the manner provided in §§ 5-15-18 and 5-15-19. (Ord. 2263, 01-18-2011)
(E) The right of any person to a refund under this Section shall not be
assignable and such application for refund must be made by the same
person who purchased the goods and paid the tax thereon as shown in the
invoice of the sale thereof. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(F) The burden of proving that sales, services, and commodities on which tax
refunds are claimed, are exempt from taxation under this Chapter, or were
not at retail, shall be on the one making such claim. Should the applicant
for refund be aggrieved at the final decision of the City Manager, he may
proceed to have the same reviewed in the manner provided for review of
other decisions of the City Manager in Sections 5-15-18 and 5-15-19.
(Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
5-15-10: RETURN CONFIDENTIAL
(A) Except in accordance with court order, as necessary in any action brought
or defended by the City, or as otherwise herein provided, the City shall not
release any return for inspection, or copying, or divulge any information
gained from any return filed under the provisions of this Chapter from
which the volume of sales or amount of taxes paid of any individual retailer
can be determined.
(B) Sales and use tax returns shall be considered confidential financial
information under the State Public Records Act.
(C) Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery
to a person or his duly authorized representative of a copy of any return or
report filed by him in connection with his own tax, nor to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular reports or returns and the items thereof nor to prohibit the
inspection, reproduction and use by the City in the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter.
(D) Reports and returns shall be preserved for three (3) years and thereafter
until the City Manager orders them destroyed.
5-15-11: REVIEW OF RETURN
(A) As soon as practicable after the return is filed, the City shall examine it. If it
then appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted is greater or less
than that shown in the return to be due, the tax shall be recomputed.
(B) If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded
or credited against any subsequent remittance from the same persons. (Ord.
1291, 12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
(C) If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the difference, together with
interest thereon as provided in § 5-15-12, shall be paid by the vendor thirty
(30) calendar days after written assessment and demand to him from the
City. The taxpayer may appeal such assessment to the City Manager
pursuant to § 5-15-18. (Ord. 2263, 01-18-2011)
5-15-12: INTEREST ON UNDERPAYMENT
(A) If any amount of sales or use tax is not paid on or before the last date
prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed under
Section 5-15-7 shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date
paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without
regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined
without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of
jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In
the case of a tax in which the last date for payment is not otherwise
prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date the
liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date
notice and demand for the tax is mailed by the City.
(B) Interest prescribed under this Chapter shall be paid upon notice and demand
and shall be assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner as the tax to
which it is applicable,
(C) If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no
interest shall be imposed under this Section on the portion of the tax so
satisfied for any period during which, if the credit has not been made,
interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment.
(D) Interest prescribed under this Chapter on any sales or use tax may be
assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to
which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. (Ord. 1291, 12-
19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
5-15-13: SALES OR USE TAX-DEFICIENCY DUE TO NEGLIGENCE
If any part of the deficiency in payment of the sales or use tax is due to negligence or
intentional disregard of the ordinances or of authorized rules and regulations of the City
with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten percent
(10%) of the total amount of the deficiency, and interest in such case shall be collected at
the rate imposed under § 5-15-7, in addition to the interest provided by § 5-15-12, on the
amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to
file the return, which interest and addition shall become due and payable thirty (30)
calendar days after written notice and demand to him by City. If any part of the
deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added one
hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency and in such case, the whole
amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable thirty
(30) calendar days after written notice and demand by the City and an additional three
percent (3%) per month on said amount shall be added from the date the return was due
until paid. (Ord. 2263, 01-18-2011)
5-15-14: INVESTIGATIONS AND HEARINGS
(A) For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the
purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the City
may audit the business records and examine all relevant books, papers,
records, or memoranda of any such person at his place of business, or
elsewhere, and it shall be the duty of such person to make such relevant
information available during reasonable hours for the examination of the
City. In the event the City cannot ascertain the correctness of the return or
the amount of tax due by such examination, the City may hold further
investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this Chapter
and may issue subpoenas to require the attendance and testimony of any
person or the production of any documents.
The City Manager or his duly authorized deputies shall have power to
administer oaths to such persons.
(B) The City Manager or any party in an investigation or hearing before the
City Manager may take the depositions of witnesses residing within or
without the State to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like
depositions in civil actions in courts of this State and to that end the City
may compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books,
papers, records or memoranda.
(C) The district court, upon the application of the City Manager, may enforce
any subpoena issued by the City for attendance of witnesses, the production
of books, papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony.
(D) If the results of any audit indicate that taxes paid were in excess or less than
what was due, the procedures of Sections 5-15-11 and 5-15-18 shall be
followed. Interest and penalties shall be assessed pursuant to Sections 5-
15-12 and 5-1 5-13. Amounts due may be collected as provided in this
Chapter for any delinquent taxes.
5-15-15: RECORD OF SALES
(A) It shall be the duty of every person engaged or continuing in business in
this City, for the transaction of which a license is required under this
Chapter, to keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by him and
such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount
of tax for the collection of which he is liable. Each retailer shall keep
sufficient information to establish deductions for wholesale sales, including
purchaser's name and State sales tax license number, and to establish
deductions for sales to and purchases from tax-exempt entities, including
State tax exempt numbers of the purchaser. Exemptions or deductions
taken without documentation shall be disallowed. It shall be the duty of
every person to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all
invoices of goods and merchandise purchased for resale and all such books,
invoices and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the
City. Violations shall be subject to prosecution. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(B) The penalty for any violation of this Section shall be as stated in Section 5-
15-31 of the City of Montrose Municipal Code. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
5-15-16: TAX LIEN
(A) The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be a first and prior lien upon the
goods and business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title
retaining contract, or other contract arrangement, excepting stock of goods
sold or for sale in the ordinary course of business, and shall take precedence
on all such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature.
(B) Any retailer who shall sell out his business or stock of goods, or shall quit
business, shall be required to make out the return as provided in this
Chapter, within ten (10) days after the date he sold his business or stock of
goods, or quit business, and his successor in business shall be required to
withhold sufficient purchase money to cover the amount of said taxes due
and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from
the City showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate that no taxes
are due.
(C) If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold the
purchase money as above provided and the taxes shall be due and unpaid
after the ten (10) day period allowed, he, as well as the vendor, shall be
personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by the former owner.
Likewise, anyone who takes any stock of goods or business fixtures of or
used by any retailer under lease, title retaining contract or other contract
arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale, or otherwise, takes the same
subject to the lien for any delinquent sales tax owed by such retailer, and
shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such prior
owner, not, however, exceeding the value of property so taken or acquired.
(Ord. 2263, 01-18-2011)
(D) Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this Chapter
shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of
creditors, or seized under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties
and interest imposed by this Chapter and for which said retailer is in any
way liable under the terms of this Chapter shall be a prior and preferred
claim against all the property of said taxpayer, except as to pre-existing
claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor, or
purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice
as provided in § 5-15-17 on the property of the taxpayer, other than the
goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer. No sheriff,
receiver, assignee, or other officer shall sell the property of any person
subject to this Chapter under process or order of any court, without first
ascertaining from the City, the amount of any taxes due and payable under
this Chapter, and if there be any such taxes due, owing or unpaid, it shall be
the duty of such officer to pay the amount of said taxes out of the proceeds
of said sale before making payment of any moneys to any judgment
creditor or other claims of whatsoever kind or nature, except the costs of
the proceedings and other pre-existing claims or liens as above provided.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "taxpayer" includes "retailer".
(Ord. 2263, 01-18-2011)
5-15-17: RECOVERY OF TAXES, PENALTIES AND INTEREST
(A) All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the retailer or seller as taxes
imposed by this Chapter shall be and remain public money, the property of
the City, in the hands of such retailer and he shall hold the same in trust for
the sole use and benefit of the City until paid to the City, and for failure to
pay the same to the City, such person shall be punished for a violation
hereof.
(B)
(1) If any person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the
tax or to pay any tax, as required by this Chapter, the City shall
make an estimate based on such information as may be available of
the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is
delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to that set forth in
this Chapter, or the City Regulations Manual for such failure, or ten
percent (10%) thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the
rate set under Section 5-15-7, plus one-half percent (½%) per month
from the date when due, not exceeding eighteen percent (18%) in the
aggregate. Promptly thereafter, the City Manager shall give to the
delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty
and interest, which notice shall be sent by first class mail, directed to
the last address of such person on file with the City. (Ord. 2084,
10-6-2005)
(2) Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such
assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to
the City thirty (30) calendar days from the date of mailing; provided,
however, that within said thirty (30) calendar day period such
delinquent taxpayer may petition the City Manager, pursuant to
§ 5-15-18 for a revision or modification of such assessment. (Ord.
2263, 01-18-2011)
(C) If any taxes, penalty or interest imposed by this Chapter and shown due by
returns filed by the taxpayer or as shown by assessments duly made as
provided herein, are not paid within five (5) days after the same are due, the
City shall issue a notice, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount
of the tax, then-current penalties and interest as set forth in the City
Regulations Manual, and the Official Municipal Code of the City of
Montrose, the date of the accrual thereof, and that the City claims a first
and prior lien therefore on the real and tangible personal property of the
taxpayer except as to pre-existing claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee,
pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached
prior to the filing of the notice as herein provided on property of the
taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade, and business fixtures of such
taxpayer. Said notice shall be on forms prepared by the City and shall be
verified by the City Manager or his duly qualified deputy or any duly
qualified agent of the City, whose duties are the collection of such tax, and
may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in this
State in which the taxpayer owns real or tangible personal property, and the
filing of such notice shall create such lien on such property in that county
and constitute a notice thereof. After said notice has been filed, or
concurrently therewith, or at any time when taxes due are unpaid, whether
such notice is filed or not, the City may issue a warrant directed to any duly
authorized revenue collector or to the sheriff of any county in this State
commanding him to levy upon, seize and sell sufficient of the real and
personal property of the tax debtor found within his county for the payment
of the amount due, together with interest, penalties and costs, subject to
valid pre-existing claims or liens as above provided. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(D) Such revenue collector or sheriff shall forthwith levy upon sufficient
property of the taxpayer, or any property used by such taxpayer in
conducting his retail business, and said property so levied upon shall be
sold in all respects, with like effect and in the same manner as is prescribed
by law in respect to executions against property upon judgment of a court
of record, and the remedies of garnishments shall apply. The sheriff shall
be entitled to such fees in executing such warrant as are allowed by law for
similar services.
(E) Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the county clerks and
recorders as herein provided shall, upon the payment of all taxes, penalties
and interest covered thereby, be released by the City in the same manner as
mortgages or judgments are released.
(F) The City Manager may also treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due
and unpaid as a debt due the City from the vendor. In case of failure to pay
the tax, or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due,
the City may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest
in any county or district court of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or
has his principal place of business having jurisdiction of the amounts
sought to be collected. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made
by the City, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount
due. Such actions may be actions in attachments, and writs of attachment
may be issued to the sheriff, and in any such proceeding no bond shall be
required of the City, nor shall any sheriff require of the City an
indemnifying bond for executing the Writ of Attachment, or Writ of
Execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings; and the City
may prosecute appeals in such cases without the necessity of providing
bond therefore. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney when requested by
the City Manager to commence action for the recovery of taxes due under
this Chapter, and the remedy shall be in addition to all other existing
remedies, or remedies provided in this Chapter.
(G) In any action affecting the title to real estate or the ownership or rights to
possession of personal property, the City may be made a party defendant
for the purpose of obtaining a judgment or determination of its lien upon
the property involved therein.
(H) The City Manager is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown,
any interest or penalty assessed as in this Chapter. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85,
eff. 1-1-86)
5-15-18: APPEALS TO CITY MANAGER
(A) Any person aggrieved by an assessment made upon him or refund denied
by the City may apply to the City Manager by petition in writing within
thirty (30) calendar days after the notice of assessment or denial is mailed
to him for a hearing and a correction of the amount of the tax so assessed,
in which petition he shall set forth the reasons why the amount by which
such tax should be reduced or refund granted. The City Manager shall
notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place fixed by him for such
hearing. After such hearing, the City Manager shall make such order in the
matter as is just and lawful. (Ord. 2263, 01-18-2011)
(B) Whenever the City determines pursuant to subsection (A) that sales or use
taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the
City shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The
deficiency notice shall state the additional sales and use taxes due. The
deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type,
that the taxpayer has the right to elect a State hearing on the deficiency
pursuant to C.R.S. 29-1-106.1(3). The taxpayer shall also have the right to
elect a State hearing on the City denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund
of sales or use tax paid.
(C) The hearing before the City Manager shall be informal and no transcript,
rules of evidence, or filing of briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may
elect to submit a brief, in which case the City may submit a brief. The City
Manager shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within
ninety (90) days after the City's receipt of the taxpayer's written request
therefore, except the City may extend such period if the delay in holding
the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer,
but, in any such event, the City shall hold such hearing and issue the
decision thereon within one hundred eighty (180) days of the taxpayer's
request in writing therefore.
5-15-19: APPEALS
(A) The taxpayer may elect a State hearing on the City Manager's final decision
on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set
forth in this Section.
(B) As used in this Section, "State hearing" means a hearing before the
executive director of the Department of Revenue or delegate thereof as
provided in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(3).
(C) The taxpayer shall request the State hearing within thirty (30) days after the
taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to
such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails to request
such hearing within the time period provided for in this subsection (C). For
purposes of this subsection (C), "exhaustion of local remedies" means:
(1) The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the
City Manager and such City Manager has held such hearing and
issued a final decision thereon, pursuant to Section 5-15-18.
(2) The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the
City Manager and the City Manager has failed to hold such hearing
or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods
prescribed in Section 5-15-18 (C).
(D) If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in subsection (C)
above, the taxpayer may request a State hearing on such deficiency notice
or claim for refund, and such request shall be made and such hearing shall
be conducted in the same manner as set forth in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(3)
through (7).
(E) If the deficiency notice or claim for a refund involves only the City, in lieu
of requesting a State hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency
notice or denial of a claim for refund to the district court of the County as
provided in C.R.S. 29-2-106.1(8); provided the taxpayer complies with the
procedures set forth in subsection (C) of this Section.
(F) If the City reasonably finds that the collection of sales or use tax will be
jeopardized by delay, the City may utilize the procedures set forth in C.R.S.
39-21-111.
5-15-20: NOTICES
Except as otherwise provided, all notices required to be given to the retailer shall be in
writing and either mailed first class, postage prepaid, addressed to his latest mailing
address on file with the City, or served upon the retailer as provided for service of
process in civil actions. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
5-15-21: AUTHORIZATION OF USE TAX
There is hereby imposed and shall be collected from every person in this City a tax or
excise at the same rate as that set forth in Section 5-15-4(A) of this Chapter, on storage or
acquisition charges or costs for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the City
any articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail. Such tax shall be payable to
and shall be collected by the City and shall be computed in accordance with schedules or
systems approved by the City Manager. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
5-15-22: EXEMPTIONS
The use tax imposed by Section 5-15-21 shall not apply:
(A) To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the
sale of which is subject to the retail sales tax imposed under the other terms
of this Chapter and for which sales tax has been paid to the City.
(B) To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property as
specifically exempted under Subsections 5-15-8 (D), (F), (G), (H), (I), (J),
(M), (N), and (Q).
(C) To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought
into this City by a nonresident natural person thereof for his own storage,
use or consumption while temporarily within this City.
(D) To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the
United States Government, the State of Colorado, its departments and
institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof (including the City of
Montrose) in their governmental capacities only, and by non-profit
associations of motor vehicles for use in the operation and maintenance of
U.S. Government-owned irrigation facilities.
(E) To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by
religious and charitable corporations for use in the conduct of their regular,
religious or charitable functions and activities.
(F) To the storage of construction and building materials. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-
85, eff. 1-1-86)
(G) To the storage, use, or consumption of any article of tangible personal
property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a sales or
use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality legally imposed on
the purchaser or user equal to or in excess of the City of Montrose’s rate
set forth in Section 5-15-4 (A) of this Chapter. A credit shall be granted
against the City's use tax with respect to the person's storage, use, or
consumption in the City of tangible personal property, the amount of the
credit to equal the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or
use tax of the previous statutory or home rule municipality on his purchase
or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the
amount that would have been paid at the rate set forth in Section 5-15-4 (A)
of this Chapter. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(H) To the use or consumption of tangible personal property within the City
which occurs more than three (3) years after the most recent sale of the
property if, within the three (3) years following such sale, the property has
been significantly used within the State for the principal purpose for which
it was purchased.
(I) Proration as Applied to Certain Construction Equipment:
(1) Construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of
the City for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days shall
be subjected to the full applicable use tax of the City. (Ord. 1291,
12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
(2) Construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of
the City for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less shall be
subjected to the City's use tax in an amount calculated as follows:
the purchase price of the equipment shall be multiplied by a fraction,
the numerator of which is one (1) and the denominator of which is
twelve (12), and the result shall be multiplied by the percent set forth
in Section 5-15-4 (A) of this Chapter. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(3) Where the provisions of subsection (I)(2) above are utilized, the
credit provisions of subsection 5-15-22(G) shall apply at such time
as the aggregate sales and use taxes legally imposed by and paid to
other statutory and home rule municipalities on any such equipment
equal to the percent set for the in Section 5-15-4(A) of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(4) In order to avail himself of the provisions of subsection 2 above, the
tax payer shall comely with the following procedure:
(a) Prior to or on the date the equipment is located within the
boundaries of the City, the taxpayer shall file with the City an
equipment declaration on a form provided by the City. Such
declaration shall state the dates on which the taxpayer
anticipates the equipment will be located within and removed
from the boundaries of the City, and shall include a
description of each such anticipated piece of equipment, shall
state the actual anticipated purchase price of each such
anticipated piece of equipment, and shall include such other
information as reasonably deemed necessary by the City.
(b) The taxpayer shall file with the City an amended equipment
declaration reflecting any changes in the information
contained in any previous equipment declaration no less than
once every ninety (90) days after the equipment is brought
into the boundaries of the City for a project of less than ninety
(90) days duration, no later than ten (10) days after substantial
completion of the project.
(c) The taxpayer need not report on any equipment declaration
any equipment for which the purchase price was under two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 1291, 12-19-
85, eff. 1-1-86)
(5) If the equipment declaration is given as provided in subsection (I)
(4) of this Section, then as to any item of construction equipment for
which the customary purchase price is under two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) which was brought into the boundaries
of the City temporarily for use on a construction project, it shall be
presumed that the item was purchased in a jurisdiction having a local
sales or use tax as high as that set forth in Section 5-15-4(A) of this
Chapter, and that such local sales or use tax was previously paid. In
such case the burden of proof in any proceeding before the City, the
executive director of the Department of Revenue, or the district
court, shall be on the City to prove such local sales or use tax was
not paid. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-2005)
(6) If the taxpayer fails to comply with the provisions of subsection
(I)(4) of this Section, the taxpayer may not avail himself of the
provisions of subsection (I)(1) of this Section and shall be subject to
the provisions of subsection (I)(1) of this Section. However,
substantial compliance with the provisions of subsection (I)(4) of
this Section shall allow the taxpayer to avail himself of the
provisions of subsection (I)(2) of this Section. (Ord. 2084, 10-6-
2005)
5-15-23: MONTHLY RETURN, COLLECTION
(A) Every person subject to the provisions of Section 5-15-21 of this Chapter,
who has not paid the sales and use tax imposed hereby to a retailer, on or
before the twentieth day of each month, shall make to the City on forms
provided by the City, a return showing in detail the tangible personal
property stored, used, or consumed by him within the City in the preceding
calendar month which is subject to the tax herein imposed, and on which
the tax has not been paid to the retailer. Such return shall be verified by
oath or affirmation of the taxpayer or his agent and shall be accompanied
by a remittance of the tax shown thereon to be due. Returns shall be
reviewed by the City pursuant to the procedure of this Chapter for
reviewing sales tax return.
(B) Every retailer doing business in this City and making sales of tangible
personal property for storage, use, or consumption in the City, and not
exempted as provided in Section 5-15-22, at the time of making such sales
or taking the orders therefor, or, if the storage, use, or consumption of such
tangible personal property is not then taxable under this Chapter, then at the
time such storage, use, or consumption becomes taxable under this Chapter,
shall collect the tax imposed by Section 5-15-21, from the purchaser and
shall give to the purchaser a receipt therefor, which receipt shall identify the
property, the date sold or the date ordered, and the tax collected and paid.
The tax required to be collected by such retailer from such purchaser shall
be displayed separately from the advertised price listed on the forms or
advertising matter on all sales, checks, orders, sales slips, or other proof of
sales.
(C) It is unlawful for such retailer or agent to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by such retailer or agent, or that will
not be added to the selling price of the property sold, of if added, that it or
any part thereof will be refunded. The tax required to be collected by such
retailer or agent, shall be remitted to the City in like manner as otherwise
provided in this Article for the remittance of sales taxes collected by
retailers, and all such retailers or agents collecting the tax imposed by
Section 5-15-21 shall make returns on forms provided by the City at such
times and in such manner as is provided for the making of returns in the
payment of the sales taxes. The procedure for assessing and collecting said
taxes from such retailers or agents, or from the user when not paid to a
retailer or agent, shall be the same as provided in this Chapter for the
collection of sales taxes, including collection by distraint warrant, and said
taxes due and owing from any retailer or agent for the storage, use, or
consumption of tangible personal property shall bear interest and be subject
to the same penalties as is provided in this Article for nonpayment or
delinquencies of sales tax.
(D) All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by
this Article shall be and remain public money, the property of the City in
the hands of such retailer, and he shall hold the same in trust for the sole
use and benefit of the City until paid to the City. For failure to so pay to
the City, such retailer shall be punished as provided by law.
5-15-24: TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN; EXEMPTION FROM LIEN
(A) The tax imposed by Section 5-15-21 shall be a first and prior lien on the
tangible personal property stored, used, or consumed, subject only to any
valid mortgage or other liens of record on and prior to the recording of
notice as required by Section 5-15-17, and when such tax is collected by
retailers or agents, shall be a first and prior lien on all the stock of goods or
business fixtures of or used by such retailer excepting goods sold in the
ordinary course of business, which lien shall have precedence over all other
liens whatsoever, kind or nature, except as to pre-existing claims or liens of
a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor, or purchaser whose
rights have attached prior to the filing of the notice on property of the
taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade, and business fixtures of such
taxpayer.
(B) Upon default of payment thereof, the City, after demand upon the person
owing such tax, may bring an action in attachment, and seize property as
authorized by this Section to secure the payment of said tax, interest, and
penalties. In any such proceeding, no bond shall be required of the City,
nor shall any sheriff require from the City an indemnifying bond for
executing the writ of attachment or levy, and no sheriff shall be liable in
damages when acting in accordance with such writs. The remedies
provided in this Section shall be in addition to all other remedies.
5-15-25: USE TAX; NEGLECT OR REFUSAL TO MAKE RETURN OR TO PAY
If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the use tax or to pay any
use tax as required, the City shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may
be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is
delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof and interest
on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under Section 5-15-7, plus one-half (½) of
one percent (1%) per month from the date when due. Such amount shall be processed in
the same manner as assessments for sales taxes under this Chapter.
5-15-26: PENALTY INTEREST ON UNPAID USE TAX
Any use tax due and unpaid shall be a debt to the City, and shall draw interest at the rate
imposed under Section 5-15-25 in addition to the interest provided by Section 5-15-7,
from the time when due until paid.
5-15-27: VEHICLES
Any resident natural person who purchases any motor vehicle, or other new vehicle for
which registration is required, whether new or used, outside the corporate limits of the
City for use or storage within this City, shall be subject to the use tax imposed by Section
5-15-21, and shall make a return showing such transaction to the City, pay the use tax
applicable thereto as provided in this Chapter, or shall pay such use tax to the County
Clerk when registering said vehicle. Registration of any vehicle at any address outside
the City by a City resident, or by a business with a principal place of business within the
City with respect to a vehicle to be stored or used in the City, shall constitute prima facie
evidence of an attempt to willfully evade payment of City sales and use tax.
5-15-28: LIMITATIONS
(A) No sales or use tax, or interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto,
shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant
issued, or suit for collection be instituted, nor any other action to collect the
same be commenced, more than three (3) years after the date on which the
tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except
for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with
respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in
which case such lien shall continue only for one year after the filing of
notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade tax, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be
assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at
any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer
and the City may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so
agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing.
(B) In the case of failure to file a return, the sales tax, use tax, or both, may be
assessed and collected at any time.
5-15-29: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
(A) The sales and use tax imposed by this Chapter upon construction materials
utilized in construction projects for which a building permit is required,
shall be collected in accordance with this Section, when the construction
value (excluding land) is over two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
(B) At the time the building permit is issued, the percent of sales and use tax set
forth in Section 5-15-4(A) shall be assessed and collected upon the
following percentages of the construction value. (Excluding land): (Ord.
2084, 10-6-2005)
(1) On single-family residences, fifty percent (50%) of the construction
value.
(2) On other construction, the Building Inspector shall determine the
percentage of construction value reasonably attributable to
construction materials taxable by this Chapter for the particular type
of construction involved.
(C) When the sales and use tax on construction materials has been prepaid
pursuant to this Section, additional taxes shall not be required to be paid nor
shall any vendor be required to collect additional tax, when the construction
materials are purchased, on the conditions that:
(1) The vendor delivers such materials to the site of the job for which
the building permit was issued.
(2) The purchaser provides proof of the prepayment to the vendor in
accordance with regulations issued by the City Manager.
(D) Vendors of building materials shall keep records as required by the City
Manager of the amount of sales made and charged against each building
permit for which sales and use taxes have been prepaid in accordance with
this Section.
(E) It is unlawful to use, or to aid or abet the use of a prepayment exemption
granted in accordance with the section to avoid paying sales and use taxes
on construction materials. The exemption granted by this Section shall
terminate upon the issuance of an occupancy permit or upon expiration of a
period of one year from the date of the issuance of a building permit,
whichever occurs sooner; provided, however, that exemptions for an
additional period may be obtained upon a showing that the project has not
been completed for which the permit was issued.
(F) This method of payment of sales and use taxes does not satisfy sales and
use taxes imposed on furnishing and equipment such as stoves,
refrigerators, drapes, carpets, rugs, or other furniture nor upon the purchase
of materials for use for construction jobs with a construction value of less
than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
5-15-30: REMITTANCE OF TAX ELECTRONIC DATABASE; RETAILER
HELD HARMLESS (Ord. 2198, 07-17-2008)
(A) Any retailer that collects and remits sales tax to the manager of revenue as
provided in this article may use an electronic database of state addresses
that is certified by the state department of revenue pursuant to § 39-26-
105.3, C.R.S., to determine the jurisdictions to which tax is owed.
(B) Any retailer that uses the data contained in an electronic database certified
by the state department of revenue pursuant to § 39-26-105.3, C.R.S., to
determine the jurisdictions to which tax is owed shall be held harmless for
any tax, penalty, or interest owed the city that otherwise would be due
solely as a result of an error in the electronic database, provided that the
retailer demonstrate that it used the most current information available in
such electronic database on the date that the sale occurred. Each retailer
shall keep and preserve such records as prescribed by the manager of
revenue to demonstrate that it used the most current information available
in the electronic database on the date that the sale occurred.
Notwithstanding the above, if the error in collecting and remitting is a
result of a deceptive representation, a false representation, or fraud, the
provisions of this section shall not apply.
5-15-31: PENALTY AND REMEDIES
(A) It shall be unlawful to willfully fail or refuse to make any sales or use tax
return required in this Chapter, to willfully make a false or fraudulent sales
or use tax return, to willfully fail to pay any sales or use tax owed, to aid or
abet another in an attempt to evade payment of any sales or use tax, or to
violate any provision of this Chapter.
(B) Any person convicted of such a violation may be punished by a fine of up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or a jail sentence of up to one (1) year,
or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, no person
under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be subject to any term of
imprisonment, except for contempt of court. (Ord. 1614, 12-19-96)
(C) Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the City from utilizing any other
applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of sales
or use taxes. (Ord. 1291, 12-19-85, eff. 1-1-86)
(D) Fees for the late payment of sales and use taxes shall be as set forth in
Chapter 10 of Title 5 of the City of Montrose Regulations Manual. (Ord
2238, 11-19-2009)
5-15-32: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND
(A) There is hereby created a Capital Improvements Fund.
(1) Beginning on January 1, 2011, and continuing until amended by
Ordinance, four hundred thousand U.S. Dollars ($400,000.00) shall
be appropriated to the Capital Improvements Fund.
(2) For the year 2010 only, zero U.S. Dollars ($0.00) shall be
appropriated to the Capital Improvements Fund, from the revenues
realized by the one percent (1 %) sales and use tax rate increase
enacted by People's Ordinance No. 1986-1.
(Ord 2233, 10-15-2009)
(B) Amounts in said Fund shall be expended only for acquisition or
construction of real property, capital equipment, and capital improvements,
including the construction and reconstruction of streets, sidewalks, curbs,
gutters and other public facilities and improvements. (Ord. 1986-1, 7-8-86,
eff. 9-1-86)
5-15-33: RETAIL SALES ENHANCEMENT
(A) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 5-15-5 (A) or any other
provisions of this Chapter to the contrary, effective with sales tax returns
due in November, 1990, the percentage of the sales tax collected by the
vendor which may be retained by the retailer, unless he is delinquent, to
cover the vendor's expense in collection and remittance of said tax shall be
reduced to one and one-third percent (1 1/3%) of such tax.
(B) The City shall determine each month the amount of additional revenue paid
to the City attributable to this reduction in the vendor's fee and cause such
amounts to be placed into a separate fund or account.
(C) Amounts in such fund or account shall be used by the City only for
purposes reasonably related to the enhancement of retail sales within the
City, as may be authorized by the City Council pursuant to subsequent
ordinance, resolution, or contract.
5-15-34: 1/2 % SCHOOL DISTRICT SALES AND USE TAX INCREASE
REPEALED; SALES AND USE TAX RATE TO REVERT TO 3 %
(Ord. 2201, 08-07-2008)
(A) The rate of the City’s Sales and Use Tax was amended by People’s
Ordinance 2002-01, to increase by 1/2 %. Said People’s Ordinance 2002-
01 has expired by its own terms, as the pledge of money made therein from
the 1/2 % tax increase has been collected.
(B) The rate of the Sales and Use Tax in this Chapter shall, pursuant to the
terms of said People’s Ordinance 2002-01, revert to the rate set forth in
Section 5-15-4 (A), effective as of 12:00:01 AM, August 1, 2008.
5-15-35: COORDINATED AUDIT
(A) Any taxpayer licensed in this City pursuant to Section 5-15-3, and holding
a similar sales tax license in at least four (4) other Colorado Municipalities
that administer their own sales tax collection, may request a coordinated
audit as provided herein.
(B) Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any
municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may
provide to the Finance Director of this City, by certified mail return receipt
requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the
municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the
name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a
list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales
tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license and a declaration
that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time based limitation
upon this City's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period.
(C) Except as provided in subsection (G) of this Section, any taxpayer that
submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a
waiver of any passage-of-time based limitation upon the City's right to
recover taxes owed for the proposed audit period may be audited by this
City during the twelve (12) months after such request is submitted only
through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to
participate in such an audit.
(D) If this City desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer that submits a
complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to subsection (C) of this
Section, the Finance Director shall so notify the Finance Director of the
municipality whose notice of audit prompted the taxpayer's request within
ten (10) days after receipt of the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit.
The Finance Director shall then cooperate with other participating
municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated
audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit
will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a
coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be
required for completion of the coordinated audit.
(E) If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice
of audit issued by the City, this City's Finance Director shall facilitate
arrangements between this City and other municipalities participating in the
coordinated audit unless and until an official from some other participating
municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The Finance Director
shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever
practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the
taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the
participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those
municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only
among such participating municipalities.
(F) If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice
of audit issued by this City, this City's Finance Director shall, once
arrangements for the coordinated audit between the City and other
participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the
taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be
audited and the records most likely to be required by participating
municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The Finance
Director shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit.
(G) The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this Section shall not apply:
(1) When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit;
(2) To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective
date of this Section;
(3) When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of any provision
that could limit, based upon passage of time, the City's right to
recover for a portion of the audit period; or
(4) When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a
coordinated audit as provided in subsection (B) of this Section.
5-15-36: INTERCITY CLAIMS FOR RECOVERY
(A) The intent of this Section is to streamline and standardize procedures
related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect
municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of
the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect and remit sales and use
taxes to the City.
(B) As used herein, "Claim for Recovery" means a claim for reimbursement of
sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction.
(C) When it is determined by the Director of Finance of the City that sales and
use tax owed to the City has been reported and paid to another
municipality, the City shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being
improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice the
vendor must cease improper tax collection and remittances.
(D) The City may make a written Claim for Recovery directly to the
municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the City,
or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from
the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a Claim for Recovery lies in
the sole discretion of the City. Any Claim for Recovery shall include a
properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor
releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to
substantiate the Claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny
in whole or in part, the Claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The
municipality to which the City submits a Claim for Recovery may, for good
cause, request an extension of time to investigate the Claim, and approval
of such extension by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(E) Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a Claim for Recovery, the City shall
verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed
was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the
Claim in writing that the Claim is either approved or denied in whole or in
part, including the reasons for the decision. If the Claim is approved in
whole or in part, the City shall remit the undisputed amount to the
municipality submitting the Claim within thirty (30) days of approval. If a
Claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the
check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a Claim for Recovery
may only be made for good cause.
(F) The City may deny a Claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a
Claim for Recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer.
(G) The period subject to a Claim for Recovery shall be limited to the thirty six
(36) month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid
the tax received the Claim for Recovery.
5-15-37: NOTICE OF SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE AMENDMENT
(A) In order to initiate a central register of sales and use tax ordinances for
municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the Finance
Director of the City shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to
the effective date of this Section a copy of the City sales and use tax
ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date of this
Section.
(B) In order to keep current the central register of sales and use tax ordinances
for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the Finance
Director of the City shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to
the effective date of any amendment a copy of each sales and use tax
ordinance amendment enacted by the City.
(C) Failure of the City to file such ordinance or ordinance amendment pursuant
to this Section shall not invalidate any provision of the sales and use
ordinance or any amendment thereto.
5-15-38: PARTICIPATION IN SIMPLIFICATION MEETINGS
The Finance Director shall cooperate with and participate on an as needed basis with a
permanent statewide sales and use tax committee convened by the Colorado Municipal
League which is composed of state and municipal sales and use tax officials and business
officials. Said committee will meet for the purpose of discussing and seeking resolution
to sales and use tax problems which may arise. (Ord. 1439, 11-7-91)
5-15-39: SALES TAX CREDIT
Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this Chapter 5-15, and in order to implement
the provisions of the Development Agreement for Oxbow Crossing and River Landing by
and among River Landing Development, LLC, a Colorado limited liability company
(“River Landing”), Deer Trail Development, LLC, a Colorado limited liability company
(“Deer Trail”), Oxbow Crossing Development, LLC, a Colorado limited liability
company (“Oxbow Development”), Oxbow Crossing Real Estate I, LLC, a Colorado
limited liability company (“Oxbow Real Estate,” and together with River Landing, Deer
Trail and Oxbow Development, “Owner”) and the City of Montrose (the “Agreement”),
there shall be granted to each person or entity obligated to pay, collect or remit the sales
tax on the sale or provision of goods or services occurring within the property legally
described in Exhibit A attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference (the
“Property”), which are subject to City of Montrose sales taxes pursuant to this Chapter 5-
15, a tax credit against collection of the sales tax as hereinafter set forth. All capitalized
terms used in this section and not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings given
to them in the Agreement. Such tax credit shall be granted in the form of a reduction in
the applicable sales tax in an amount equal to the amount of revenues generated from the
imposition and collection of the Credit PIF with respect thereto, and shall attach to a
particular transaction only to the extent that the Credit PIF Revenues are received by the
PIF Collecting Agent for such transaction. The tax credit for sales tax shall be automatic,
but shall be subject to the applicable retailer’s (as reflected on the retailer’s periodic sales
tax report) remittance to and receipt by the PIF Collecting Agent of the Credit PIF
Revenues in accordance with the PIF Covenant and the Agreement. The tax credit for
sales tax shall be granted during the Credit PIF Period, which shall commence on January
1, 2012 with respect to the Phase One Retailers and on the effective date of this
Ordinance with respect to Phase Two Retailers. The tax credit for sales tax shall
terminate when the Credit PIF Period terminates in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the Agreement. The amount of tax credit granted hereunder shall equal the
amount of the Credit PIF Revenues imposed and collected on Taxable Transactions
within the Property by the application and imposition of the Credit PIF (i) at the rate of
0.10% with respect to Phase One Retailers; and (ii) at the rate of 2.15% with respect to
Phase Two Retailers. (Ord. 2227, 09-17-2009)
EXHIBIT A
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPERTY
Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 10, Oxbow Crossing Subdivision, County of Montrose, State
of Colorado, according to the plat thereof recorded August 24, 2005 at Reception
No. 742626;
Lots 7, 8 and 9, Oxbow Crossing Subdivision Amended, County of Montrose,
State of Colorado, according to the plat thereof recorded December 6, 2006 at
Reception No. 747751;
Lots 3 and 4, Oxbow Crossing Subdivision 3rd Amended, County of Montrose,
State of Colorado, according to the plat thereof recorded December 13, 2006 at
Reception No. 765109;
Outlot A, Oxbow Crossing Subdivision 2nd Amended Plat, County of Montrose,
State of Colorado, according to the plat thereof recorded August 30, 2007 at
Reception No. 780195;
Lots 3 and 4, River Landing North 2nd Amended Plat, County of Montrose, State
of Colorado, according to the plat thereof recorded June 5, 2009 at Reception
No. 803114;
Lots 5 and 6, River Landing North, County of Montrose, State of Colorado,
according to the plat thereof recorded March 11, 2008 at Reception No. 787619;
Lots 1 and 2, River Landing North, Amended Plat, County of Montrose, State of
Colorado, according to the plat thereof recorded May 23, 2008 at Reception
No. 790747;
Lots 10, 11, 13, 14, and 18, River Landing Filing No. 1 2nd Amended Plat,
County of Montrose, State of Colorado, according to the plat thereof recorded
December 13, 2005 at Reception No. 765110;
Lots 12, 15, 16 and 19 and Tract A, River Landing Filing No. 2 Amended Plat,
County of Montrose, State of Colorado, according to the plat thereof recorded
December 13, 2006 at Reception No. 765111; and
Lot 17, River Landing Lot 17, County of Montrose, State of Colorado, according
to the plat thereof recorded May 23, 2008 at Reception No. 790748.
(Ord. 2227, 09-17-2009)
Chapter 5-16
TELEPHONE UTILITY OCCUPATION TAX
Sections:
5-16-1 LEVY OF TAX
5-16-2 PAYMENT
5-16-3 DELINQUENT PAYMENTS
5-16-4 BOOKS AND RECORDS SUBJECT TO INSPECTION
5-16-1: LEVY OF TAX
(A) There is hereby levied on and against each telephone utility operating
within the City a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a
telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the City, and of
supplying local exchange telephone service to the City. The quarterly
amount of such tax shall be equal to one dollar eleven cents ($1.11) per
telephone account for which local exchange telephone service is provided
within the City on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 each year.
(B) The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the
performance of local functions, and is not a tax upon those functions
relating to interstate commerce.
5-16-2: PAYMENT
(A) The tax levied by this Chapter shall be due and payable on or before March
31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year.
(B) Each telephone company shall file with each quarterly tax remittance a
statement showing the total telephone accounts for which local exchange
telephone service was provided within the City as of the first day of said
quarter.
5-16-3: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS
If any telephone utility company shall fail to pay the quarterly tax as provided in Section
5-16-2 above, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of tax due shall be imposed
upon such delinquent taxes, and interest shall accrue on all delinquent taxes computed
from the date said taxes were due until paid or collected at a daily rate equivalent to the
rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum. The City may maintain an action to collect any
delinquent amounts in accordance with law. Such delinquent taxes shall be a lien upon
all property owned by the telephone utility company which may be enforced in
accordance with the law.
5-16-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS SUBJECT TO INSPECTION
The City shall have the right at all reasonable times to examine and copy the books and
records of the telephone company which are subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1015, 3-15-79)
TITLE VI
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
2 ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
3 LITTER AND JUNK
4 NUISANCES
5 WEEDS
6 OPEN BURNING
7 CURFEW (Rep. by Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
8 UNWHOLESOME BUSINESS (Rep. by Ord. 1086,
7-17-80)
9 ABANDONED VEHICLES (Rep. by Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
10 DRUGS (Rep. by Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
Chapter 6-1
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Sections:
6-1-1 COMPLICITY
6-1-2 CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF A CORPORATION
6-1-3 CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF AN INDIVIDUAL FOR CORPORATE
CONDUCT
6-1-4 CRIMINAL ATTEMPT
6-1-5 ACCESSORY TO AN OFFENSE
6-1-6 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS
6-1-7 PETTY THEFT
6-1-8 SHOPLIFTING
6-1-9 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
6-1-10 UNLAWFUL ENTRY
6-1-11 TRESPASS
6-1-12 WINDOW PEEPING
6-1-13 DISCHARGE OF GUNS PROHIBITED
6-1-14 DISORDERLY CONDUCT
6-1-15 INDECENT CONDUCT
6-1-16 INTERFERENCE WITH AN OFFICER
6-1-17 REFUSAL TO PERMIT INSPECTIONS
6-1-18 RESISTING ARREST
6-1-19 FALSE IDENTIFICATION
6-1-20 SWIMMING PROHIBITED
6-1-21 UNREASONABLE NOISE
6-1-22 AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES
6-1-23 SOUND VEHICLES LIMITED
6-1-24 TAMPERING WITH UTILITY FACILITIES
6-1-25 SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED
6-1-26 LOITERING
6-1-27 UNDERAGE POSSESSION OF TOBACCO
6-1-28 GRAFFITI
6-1-1: COMPLICITY
A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting a
violation of any provision of the City Charter or any City ordinance, if, with the intent to
promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, he aids, abets, or advises the other
person in planning or committing the offense.
6-1-2: CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF A CORPORATION
A corporation is guilty of an offense if the conduct constituting the offense consists of an
omission to discharge a specific duty or affirmative performance imposed on the
corporation by the City Charter or ordinance; or the conduct constituting the offense is
engaged in, authorized, solicited, requested, commanded or knowingly tolerated by the
board of directors, or by a high managerial agent, acting within the scope of employment
or in behalf of the corporation.
6-1-3: CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF AN INDIVIDUAL FOR CORPORATE
CONDUCT
A person is criminally liable for conduct constituting an offense which he performs or
causes to occur in the name of or on behalf of a corporation to the same extent as if that
conduct were performed or caused by him in his own name or behalf.
6-1-4: CRIMINAL ATTEMPT
(A) A person commits criminal attempt, if, acting with the kind of culpability
otherwise required for commission of a violation of the City Charter or a
City ordinance, he engages in conduct constituting a substantial step
towards the commission of the offense. A substantial step is any conduct,
whether act, omission or possession which is strongly corroborative of the
firmness of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense.
Factual or legal impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense, if
the offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances
been as the actor believed them to be, nor is it a defense if the crime
attempted was actually perpetrated by the accused.
(B) A person who engages in conduct intending to aid another to commit an
offense commits criminal attempt if the conduct would establish his
complicity under Section 6-1-1 were the offense committed by the other
person, even if the other is not guilty of committing or attempting the
offense.
(C) It is an affirmative defense to the charge under this Section that the
defendant abandoned his effort to commit the offense or otherwise
prevented its commission under circumstances manifesting the complete
and voluntary renunciation of his criminal intent.
6-1-5: ACCESSORY TO AN OFFENSE
(A) A person is an accessory to an offense, if, with intent to hinder, delay, or
prevent the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of another for the commission of a violation of the City Charter
or a City ordinance, he renders assistance to such person.
(B) "Renders assistance" means to:
(1) Harbor or conceal the other; or
(2) Warn such person of impending discovery or apprehension; or
(3) Provide such person with money for transportation, weapon,
disguise, or other things to be used in avoiding discovery or
apprehension; or
(4) By force, intimidation, or deception, obstruct anyone in the
performance of any act which might aid in the discovery, detection,
apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of such person;
or
(5) Conceal, destroy or alter any physical evidence which might aid in
the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of such person.
6-1-6: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS
(A) Definition: For the purposes of this Section, the term "cannabis" shall
include all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds, or resin but shall not include the mature stalks of such
plant, fiber produced from its stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of
such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of its mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber,
oil, cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of
germination. The term "cannabis concentrate" shall mean hashish,
tetrahydrocannabinois, or any alkaloid, salt, derivative, preparation,
compound or mixture, whether natural or synthesized of
tetrahydrocannabinois.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of cannabis
or cannabis concentrate, as both are hereinabove defined, and upon
conviction thereof, he or she shall be punished by a fine of not more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
(C) (1) Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, drug paraphernalia
means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are
used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis, as defined in
Section 6-1-6 (A), into the human body. Drug paraphernalia
includes, but is not limited to:
(a) Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use
in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or
purity of cannabis under circumstances in violation of the
laws of this state;
(b) Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for
use in weighing or measuring cannabis;
(c) Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise
cleaning or refining cannabis;
(d) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding
cannabis;
(e) Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small
quantities of cannabis;
(f) Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or
designed for use in storing or concealing cannabis;
(g) Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis into the
human body, such as:
(i) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent
screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
(ii) Water pipes;
(iii) Carburetion tunes and devices;
(iv) Smoking and carburetion masks;
(v) Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning
material such as a marijuana or cannabis cigarette that
has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
(vi) Chamber pipes;
(vii) Carburetor pipes;
(viii) Electric pipes;
(ix) Air-driven pipes;
(x) Chillums;
(xi) Bongs; or
(xii) Ice pipes or chillers
(2) Determination, Considerations
(a) In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the
Court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other
relevant factors, the following:
(i) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
(ii) The proximity of the object to cannabis.
(iii) The existence of any residue of cannabis on the object.
(iv) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of
an owner, or of anyone in control of the object or
evidence that such person reasonably should know that
it will be delivered to persons who he/she knows or
reasonably should know could use the object to
facilitate a violation of Section 6-1-6.
(v) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
(vi) Descriptive materials accompanying the object, which
explain or depict its use.
(vii) National or local advertising concerning its use.
(viii) Manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
(ix) Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object
is a supplier of like or related items to the community
for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or
dealer of tobacco products.
(x) Existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the
community.
(xi) Expert testimony concerning its use.
(b) In the event a case brought pursuant to Section 6-1-6 is tried
before a jury, the Court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on
issues raised pursuant to this Section. Such hearing shall be
conducted in camera.
(3) Violations
(a) It is unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia if
he/she knows or reasonably should know that the drug
paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation
of the laws of the City of Montrose, Colorado as provided
herein.
(b) Any person who commits a violation of Subsection 6-1-
6(C)(3)(a) hereinabove shall be punished by a fine of not
more that one hundred dollars ($100.00)
(Ord. 1784, 07-06-2000)
(D) (1) It shall be affirmative defense to a violation of this Section 6-1-6 that
the Defendant is a patient engaged in the medical use of marijuana
as declared lawful by paragraph (4)(a) of Section 14 of Article XVIII
of the Colorado Constitution, in accordance with the limitations and
provisions of said Section 14 Article XVIII, provided that the patient
has a current and valid registry identification card and that the
possession or use of marijuana was not in plain view of, or in a place
open to the general public.
(2) For the purposes of this section “patient”, “medical use”, “registry
identification card”, shall be defined as set out in said Section 14
Article XVIII.
(Ord. 2267, 02-15-2011)
6-1-7: PETTY THEFT
(A) It is unlawful for any person to knowingly obtain or exercise control over
anything of value, having a value less than one thousand U.S. Dollars
($1000.00), of another without authorization, or by threat or deception or
knowing said thing of value to have been stolen; and (Ord. 2180, 01-03-
2008)
(1) Intend to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit
of the thing of value; or
(2) Knowingly use, conceal, or abandon the thing of value in such a
manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or
benefit; or
(3) Use, conceal or abandon the thing of value intending that such use,
concealment, or abandonment will deprive the other person
permanently of its use and benefit; or
(4) Demand any consideration to which he is not legally entitled as a
condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person.
(B) If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise
owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or any other
mercantile establishment, whether such concealment is on his own person
or otherwise, and whether on or off the premises of such store or mercantile
establishment, such concealment shall constitute prima facie evidence that
such person intended to commit the offense of petty theft.
(C) The offense of petty theft shall not include theft from the person of another.
(Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
6-1-8: SHOPLIFTING
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully take possession of any
goods, wares, or merchandise, having a value of less than one thousand
U.S. Dollars ($1000.00), and owned or held by and offered or displayed for
sale or by any store or mercantile establishment, with the intention of
converting such goods, wares or merchandise to his own use without
paying the purchase price. (Ord. 2180, 01-03-2008)
(B) If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise
owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or any other
mercantile establishment, whether such concealment is on his own person
or otherwise, and whether on or off the premises of such store or other
mercantile establishment, such concealment shall constitute prima facie
evidence that such person intended to commit the offense of shoplifting.
(Ord. 2180, 01-03-2008)
6-1-9: DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy or damage real or
personal property belonging to another. (Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
(B) This Section shall not apply where, in a single criminal episode, the
aggregate damage to personal and real property is four hundred dollars
($400.00) or more. (Ord. 1503 3-24-94)
6-1-10: UNLAWFUL ENTRY
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the premises of another
which are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders, or are
fenced, when he is not licensed, invited or otherwise privileged to do so.
(B) For purposes of this Section "premises" shall mean real property, buildings
and other improvements on real property, excluding a dwelling or a motor
vehicle.
6-1-11: TRESPASS
(A) It shall be unlawful to commit trespass in the City. A person commits
trespass by:
(1) Entering upon and refusing to leave any private property of another
having been given notice by the owner, manager, employee, security
officer, occupant, tenant, or person responsible for the property that
such entry and continued presence is prohibited. (Ord. 1746, 12-16-
99)
(2) Entering upon and refusing to leave any public or private parking lot
during the hours it is closed to business invitees when such property
has been posted with official City signs, which state the hours such
property is closed and advises that any person who enters upon and
remains upon such property is subject to penalties for trespass under
Sections 1-2-3 and 6-1-11 of the Montrose City Code, and which
have been posted by the City at either a) the traffic entrances to the
property or b) at a minimum of two (2) highly visible and
conspicuous locations upon the premises, in the event such traffic
entrances are not present. The costs of the materials and labor
construction, installation, and maintenance of each sign shall be
borne by the requesting business. The cost to be borne by the
requesting business shall be set forth in the City of Montrose
Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1992, 01-08-2004)
(3) Entering upon and refusing to leave any public place after being
ordered to do so by any police officer or firefighter displaying or
presenting indicia of acting under the color of his official authority.
(Ord. 1746, 12-16-99)
(4) Refusing to leave the property of any school, public or private,
including colleges, and vocational/technical schools, where such
property is used for the education of persons, when asked to do so by
a member of the administration, teacher, or staff member. (Ord.
1746, 12-16-99)
(5) Entering upon and remaining in any public cemeteries of the City
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., when posted at the
entrances with official City signs, which advise that any person who
enters and remains upon the property is subject to penalties for
trespass under Sections 1-2-3 and 6-1-11 of the Montrose City Code.
An employee of the City acting in the course of his employment is
an exception to this provision. (Ord. 1746, 12-16-99)
(6) Entering upon and remaining in any public park operated by the City
during the hours such park is closed, when such park is posted at the
traffic entrances with official City signs, which state the hours the
park is closed and advise that any person who enters and remains
upon the premises is subject to penalties for trespass under Sections
1-2-3 and 6-1-11 of the Montrose City Code. (Ord. 1746, 12-16-99)
(7) For the purposes of this Section, "official City sign" means a sign
designed and installed by the City of Montrose, which contains the
language required for proper notice in accordance with this Section.
(Ord. 1808, 10-19-2000)
(B) For the purpose of this subsection, “private property” shall include private
property where the public is a business invitee. (Ord. 1746, 12-16-99)
6-1-12: WINDOW PEEPING
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon the property of another with
the intent to peer or peep into any window of a dwelling of another. (Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
6-1-13: DISCHARGE OF GUNS PROHIBITED
(A) It is unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer to
discharge a firearm, spring gun, air gun, pellet gun, BB gun or any other
gun within the City except as allowed under subsection (B) of this Section.
(B) This Section shall not apply in the following circumstances:
(1) The lawful use of a gun for protection of persons or property.
(2) The discharge of guns upon a range totally enclosed within a
building adequately constructed so that no noise or odor is
observable and no projectiles travel off of the range premises.
(3) Pellet guns may be used for pest control by any person over the age
of eighteen (18) years if they have obtained a permit for such use
from the City. The City shall issue such a permit when an
application has been properly completed and submitted on forms
provided by the City and a fee submitted as set by Resolution and
referred to in the City Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(4) Guns may be discharged within the City at civic events when a
permit has been obtained from the City. The City shall issue a
permit when the City Manager determines:
(a) That the applicant for the permit has the permission of the
owner of the premises upon which the guns will be fired and
upon which any projectiles may impinge,
(b) That the applicant is a nonprofit civic organization which has
adequate liability insurance for conducting such an event,
(c) That the location and conduct of such an event will not create
any unreasonable risk to persons or property, and
(d) That the applicant has a plan of participant and crowd control
adequate to insure safety. (Ord. 1156, 5-6-82)
(5) Shotguns and other weapons may be used for pest control on
premises devoted to agricultural activity by persons over the age of
18 if they have obtained a permit for such use from the City. The
City may issue such a permit when an application has been properly
completed and submitted on forms provided by the City and the City
has determined that the size and location of the property and
limitations and conditions of the permit will allow reasonable safety
in the use of the weapons. (Ord. 1667, 7-2-98)
6-1-14: DISORDERLY CONDUCT
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly:
(A) Fight with another person, except in an amateur or professional contest of
athletic skill; or
(B) Not being a police officer, display a deadly weapon in a manner calculated
to alarm; or
(C) Repeatedly insult, taunt, verbally abuse, threaten or challenge another in a
manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response; or
(D) Make an obscene gesture to another person in a public place in a manner
likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response; or
(E) Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject another to physical contact with
intent to harass.
6-1-15: INDECENT CONDUCT
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any place except sanitary
facilities constructed for that purpose connected to the City sewage collection system or
to any individual sewage treatment or other authorized sewage collection system.
6-1-16: INTERFERENCE WITH AN OFFICER
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or by using or threatening to use
violence, force or physical interference or obstacle, to obstruct, impair, or hinder the
enforcement of the law or preservation of the peace by a peace officer acting under color
of his official authority, or the performance of a governmental function by an officer,
employee or agent of the City acting in the lawful performance of his duties.
6-1-17: REFUSAL TO PERMIT INSPECTIONS
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to produce or make available property owned by
him or under his control at a reasonable hour, for a legally authorized inspection by any
officer, employee or agent of the City.
6-1-18: RESISTING ARREST
(A) It shall be unlawful to prevent or attempt to prevent a peace officer acting
under color of his official authority, from effecting the arrest of the actor or
another person by using or threatening to use physical force or violence
against the peace officer or another, or by using any other means which
creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the peace officer or
another.
(B) It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the peace officer
was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful, if he was
acting under the color of his official authority, and in attempting to make
the arrest he was not restoring to unreasonable or excessive force giving
rise to the right of self-defense.
6-1-19: FALSE IDENTIFICATION
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or use any document, card, license or other
evidence of identification or age of such person for the purpose of making sales or
purchases, cashing checks, gaining admission to any place or for any other purpose,
where such identification is false, fraudulent, incorrect, forged or altered, or
misrepresents such person, or his age, or does not belong to such person.
6-1-20: SWIMMING PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or wade in the Rotary Park Pond, in the
Uncompahgre River adjacent to the Riverbottom Park, in the Riverbottom Park Ponds, or
in other places within the City at which the City has posted signs restricting swimming or
wading.
6-1-21: UNREASONABLE NOISE
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause to be made or continued,
or to allow any unreasonable noise which unreasonably annoys, injures, or
endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of others.
(B) Unreasonable noise is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated
in accordance with law.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise from use of engine
brakes in connection with the operation of any motor vehicle. For the
purposes of this provision, the term “engine brakes” (commonly referred to
by brand names such as jacobs brake, jake brake, or dynatard brake) means
an engine retarder or dynamic braking device used primarily on large trucks
for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an
air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
(Ord. 1897, 03/07/2002)
(D) If sound broadcast from speakers or similar equipment from a motor
vehicle is audible within other motor vehicles on the road with the windows
up, or audible within an occupied structure with the doors and windows
closed, it shall be prima facie evidence that such sound is “unreasonable
noise” for the purposes of Subsection (A) above. (Ord 2220, 05-07-2009)
(E) If sound broadcast from speakers or similar equipment from an occupied
structure is audible in another occupied structure with the doors and
windows closed, it shall be prima facie evidence that such sound is
“unreasonable noise” for the purposes of Subsection (A) above. For the
purposes of this Section, the words “occupied structure” shall not include
sports fields, fairgrounds, and stadiums. (Ord 2220, 05-07-2009)
6-1-22 : AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally enter into any place where an
admission fee is required without paying such fee.
6-1-23: SOUND VEHICLES LIMITED
It shall be unlawful to operate sound amplification equipment from a motor vehicle to
broadcast sound outside of such vehicle between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., or in any area where it is audible from a hospital or nursing
home. (Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
6-1-24: TAMPERING WITH UTILITY FACILITIES
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, tamper with, damage, destroy, or
operate any part of any utility system, including power, gas, telephone, CATV systems,
or to connect to such systems, or utilize service from such systems without lawful
authorization to do so. (Ord. 1104, 1980)
6-1-25: SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to skateboard on any property where
notices prohibiting skateboarding are posted.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to skateboard upon property owned by
the City, or the Montrose Downtown General Improvement District, No. 1,
including Centennial Plaza, City Hall, parking lots and street rights of way,
(including sidewalks) which streets and properties are located in an area
bounded by the southerly right-of-way line of South 1st Street, the easterly
right-of-way line of Park Avenue, the northerly right-of-way line of North
1st Street and the westerly right-of-way line of Selig Avenue. (Ord 1366,
3-17-88)
6-1-26: LOITERING
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to loiter on or
about any street, avenue, highway, road, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking lot,
alley, vacant lot, park, playground, yard, building, place of amusement, or
eating place, whether public or private, without the consent or permission
of the owner or occupant thereof, during the hours beginning at 12:00 a.m.
through 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday, and beginning at 10:00 p.m. on
Sunday night through Thursday night, and ending at 6:00 a.m. the
following day. No violation of this Subsection will have occurred if the
person under the age of 18 years is accompanied by a parent, guardian or
other adult person over the age of 21 years who is authorized by a parent or
guardian of such juvenile to take said parent's place in accompanying said
juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the care and custody of a juvenile under the age of 18 years to knowingly
permit or allow such juvenile to loiter at the places and within the time
prohibited by Subsection (A) of this Section. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should be reasonably expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent or guardian's
custody. It shall be no defense that a parent, guardian, or other person
having the care and custody of the juvenile was indifferent to the activities,
conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile.
(C) "Loitering" or "Loiter" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one
location, to be dilatory, to tarry, to dawdle and, shall include but not be
limited to, standing around, hanging out, sitting, kneeling, sauntering or
prowling.
6-1-27: UNDERAGE POSSESSION OF TOBACCO
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess, use
or consume any cigarettes or tobacco products as defined by C.R.S. 39-
28.5-101(5) including chewing tobacco, at or upon any public place.
(B) “Public place” for the purpose of this section shall include the following
places:
(1) Property owned or leased by the United States of America, State of
Colorado, Montrose County or the City or any agencies or political
subdivision thereof.
(2) The entire width of street and alley rights-of-way, parking areas and
grounds outside the establishments open to the public such as
restaurants, grocery stores, convenience stores, bars and other places
of public gathering for amusement and entertainment.
(3) The inside of vehicles located upon any of the above listed places.
(C) It shall be prima facie evidence that any substance is a cigarette or tobacco
product if it is, or was contained within a container or package labeled as
such, it either looks or smells like a cigarette or tobacco product, or it is
emitting smoke which looks or smells like cigar or cigarette smoke.
6-1-28: GRAFFITI
(A) Purpose and Intent: The City Council of Montrose Colorado is enacting
this Section to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish
a program for the removal of graffiti from public and private property. The
Council is authorized to enact this Ordinance pursuant to its police powers.
The Council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the
rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community.
Unless the City acts to remove graffiti from public and private property, the
graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti,
and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in
which to be, all to the detriment of the City.
The City Council intends, through the adoption of this Section, to provide
additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from
acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The Council does not intend for
this Section to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti State laws.
(B) Definitions: For the purposes of this Section 6-1-28, the following words
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(1) “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container that is
adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other
substances capable of defacing property.
(2) “Broad-tipped marker” means any felt tip indelible marker or similar
implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest
width, is greater than one-fourth (1/4th) of an inch, containing ink or
other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.
(3) “Etching equipment” means any tool, device, or substance that can
be used to make permanent marks on any natural or man made
surface.
(4) “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting
or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched,
sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any
surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to
the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the
owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization,
is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the City Council.
(5) “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a broadtipped
marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching
equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving
a visible mark on any natural or man-made surface.
(6) “Paint stick or graffiti stick” means any device containing a solid
form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable
of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at
least one-eighth (1/8th) of an inch in width.
(7) “Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative association,
private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee,
(C) Prohibited Acts; Defacement: It shall be unlawful for any person to apply
graffiti to any natural or man-made surface on any city-owned property or,
without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city-owned
property.
(1) Possession of Graffiti Implements
(a) By Minors at or Near School Facilities. It shall be unlawful
for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess
any graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds,
facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately
adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, or
upon private property without the prior written consent of the
owner or occupant of such private property. The provisions of
this Section shall not apply to the possession of broad-tipped
markers by a minor attending or traveling to or from a school
at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a
class at the school that formally requires the possession of
broad-tipped markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution
or violation of this Section shall be upon the minor student to
establish the need to possess a broad-tipped marker.
(b) In Designated Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any
person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any
public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational
facility, or other public building or structure owned or
operated by the City or while in or within fifty (50) feet of an
underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, recreation facility or
similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by
the City.
(D) Accessibility to Graffiti Implements:
(1) Furnishing to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or
otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned,
or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped
marker, or paint stick to any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the
person.
(2) Signage Required. Every person who operates a retail commercial
establishment selling graffiti implements shall:
(a) Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such
products stating: "Graffiti is against the law. Any person who
defaces real or personal property with paint or any other
liquid or device is guilty of a crime punishable by
imprisonment of up to one year and/or a fine up to $
1,000.00”.
(b) Place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for
accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating:
"Selling spray paint, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers to
persons under 18 years of age is against the law and
punishable by a fine of $ 1,000.00".
(E) Penalties:
(1) Fines and Imprisonment. Any person violating this Ordinance shall
be punished by no more than (i) a fine of two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) for the first offense; (ii) five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the second offense; (iii) and one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense, or by imprisonment in the
City jail for a term not to exceed one year, or by both fine and
imprisonment at the discretion of the court.
(a) In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be
jointly and severely liable with the minor for payment of all
fines.
(b) Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will
result in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's
property that includes the fine and administrative costs.
(c) Upon an application and finding of indigence, the court may
decline to order fines against the minor, parents or guardian.
(2) Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this Section,
the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for
damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense
in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a
minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and
severely liable with the minor to make the restitution.
(3) Community Service. In-lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified
in this Section, a minor or adult may be required to perform
community service as described by the court based on the following
minimum requirements:
(a) The minor or adult shall perform at least twenty (20) hours of
community service.
(b) At least one parent or guardian of the minor shall be in
attendance a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the period of
assigned community service.
(c) The entire period of community service shall be performed
under the supervision of a community service provider
approved by the Municipal Court.
(d) Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult
to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to
have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult,
including community service that involves graffiti removal.
(F) Rewards and Reimbursements for Information:
(1) The City may offer a reward in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council for information leading to the
identification and apprehension of any person who willfully
damages or destroys any public or private property by the use of
graffiti. In the event of damage to public property, the offender or
the parents or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor must
reimburse the City for any reward paid. In the event of multiple
contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by
the City in the manner it shall deem appropriate.
(2) Claims for rewards under this Section shall be filed with the City in
the manner specified by the City Council.
(3) No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the City investigates
and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the
requirements of this Section have been satisfied.
(4) The City shall reimburse to any person reporting by means of a
mobile or cellular phone an act of graffiti vandalism or existence of
graffiti within the City the amount of the direct phone charges,
exclusive of taxes, incurred by the person.
(G) Graffiti as Nuisance:
(1) The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of
this Ordinance is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and,
therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions
specified in this Section.
(2) It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti
has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who
has the right to possess such property to at all times keep the
property clear of graffiti.
(H) Removal of Graffiti by Perpetrator: Any person applying graffiti on public
or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twentyfour
(24) hours after notice by the City or private owner of the property
involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the Chief
of Police, the Director of the Department of Public Works, or any
additional City department head, as authorized by the City Council. Any
person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the
payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for
the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this Ordinance.
Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal
guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for
the removal.
(I) Removal of Graffiti by City: If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator
according to Section 6-1-28(H), graffiti may be removed pursuant to the
following provisions.
(1) Right of City to Remove:
(a) Use of Public Funds. Whenever the City becomes aware or is
notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or
privately owned property viewable from a public or quasipublic
place, the City shall be authorized to use public funds
for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing
of the graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide
for the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than
that where the graffiti is located, unless the City Manager, or
the designee of the City Manager, determines in writing that a
more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in
order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood
or community, or unless the property owner or responsible
party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the
more extensive area.
(b) Right of Entry on Private Property. Prior to entering upon
private property or property owned by a public entity other
than the City for the purpose of graffiti removal the City shall
attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or
responsible party and a release of the City from liability for
property damage or personal injury. If the property owner or
responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within
the time specified by this Ordinance, or if the City has
requested consent to remove or paint over the offending
graffiti and the property owner or responsible party has
refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the City and
consistent with the terms of this Section, the City shall
commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the
graffiti removal according to applicable municipal code
provisions.
(J) Ease of Removal Provisions:
(1) Common Utility Colors and Paint-type. Any gas, electric, telephone,
water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operating in the City
shall paint its above-surface metal fixtures with a uniform paint type
and color that meets with the approval of the City Manager.
(2) Condition Encroachment Permits. All encroachment permits issued
by the City shall, among such other things, be conditioned on:
(a) The permittee's application of an anti-graffiti material to the
encroaching object of a type and nature that is acceptable to
the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee;
(b) The permittee's immediate removal of any graffiti;
(c) The City's right to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching
object; or
(d) The permittee's providing the City with sufficient matching
paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the
painting of the encroaching object containing graffiti.
(K) Prevention Provisions:
(1) Design of Potential Graffiti-Attracting Surfaces. Any applicant for
design review approval, conditional use permit, special use permit,
unclassified use permit, development agreement, or other form of
development or building permit shall, to the extent deemed feasible
by the City Manager, or the designee of the City Manager, have
designed any building structures visible from any public or quasipublic
place in such a manner to consider prevention of graffiti,
including, but not limited to the following:
(a) Use of a protective coating to provide for the effective and
expeditious removal of graffiti;
(b) Use of additional lighting;
(c) Use of non solid fencing;
(d) Use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive walls
such as ivy or similar clinging vegetation; or
(e) Use of architectural design to break up long, continuous walls
or solid areas.
(L) Anti-Graffiti Account: The City Council hereby creates a restricted Anti-
Graffiti Account in the General Fund. Penalties assessed against violators
of this Ordinance shall be placed in the fund, along with any monetary
donations received from persons wishing to contribute to the fund. The
Council shall direct the expenditures of monies in the fund. Such
expenditures shall be limited to the payment of the cost of graffiti removal,
the payment, at the discretion of the City Manager, of rewards for
information leading to the conviction of violation of the Ordinance, the
costs of administering the Ordinance, and such other public purposes as
may be approved by the Council by resolution.
Chapter 6-2
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
Sections:
6-2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-2-2 RABIES VACINATIONS / LICENSING OF DOGS
6-2-3 ANIMAL ATTACKS
6-2-4 LIMIT ON DOGS AND CATS
6-2-5 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR TAGS
6-2-6 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED
6-2-7 POULTRY RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED
6-2-8 RELEASING RESTRAINED ANIMALS PROHIBITED
6-2-9 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
6-2-10 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
6-2-11 NUISANCE
6-2-12 FEMALE ANIMALS IN HEAT
6-2-13 FARM LIVESTOCK
6-2-14 PENALTY
6-2-15 POLICE DOGS
6-2-16 FARMS & RANCHES
Chapter 6-2
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
Sections:
6-2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-2-2 RABIES VACINATIONS / LICENSING OF DOGS
6-2-3 ANIMAL ATTACKS
6-2-4 LIMIT ON DOGS AND CATS
6-2-5 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR TAGS
6-2-6 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED
6-2-7 POULTRY RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED
6-2-8 RELEASING RESTRAINED ANIMALS PROHIBITED
6-2-9 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
6-2-10 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
6-2-11 NUISANCE
6-2-12 FEMALE ANIMALS IN HEAT
6-2-13 FARM LIVESTOCK
6-2-14 PENALTY
6-2-15 POLICE DOGS
6-2-16 FARMS & RANCHES
6-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) This Chapter shall be applicable to all property within the City, and to the
City owned dog pound property located outside of the City limits.
(Ord.1063, 12-6-79)
(B) For purposes of this Chapter "custodian" shall mean any person possessing,
harboring, keeping or exercising control over any animal.
(C) The City Manager may issue such regulations as may be necessary for the
enforcement, administration and interpretation of this Chapter, and any
amendment thereto.
(D) For purposes of this Chapter "City" shall mean the City of Montrose,
Colorado, and any agent or employee thereof authorized by the City
Manager to administer or enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
(E) For the purpose of this Chapter "animal" shall mean any mammal, bird or
reptile.
(F) The Animal Control Officer(s) of the City shall be deemed a peace officer,
as defined in Rule 203 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of
Procedure, for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter under the direction of the City Manager. The Animal Control
Officer(s) shall exercise the authority of a peace officer in the enforcement
of these provisions, including the power to issue summons and complaints
and initiate prosecution of violations hereof. (Ord. 1908, 6-13-2002)
6-2-2: RABIES VACINATIONS / LICENSING OF DOGS
(A) License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor,
or have custody of any dog over the age of six (6) months within the City,
unless such dog is licensed as provided in this Chapter.
(B) License Application: Application for such license shall be made by the
owner or custodian on a City form within ten (10) days after acquiring any
dog over six (6) months of age or within ten (10) days after a dog becomes
six (6) months of age; provided that any owner or custodian moving to the
City for the purpose of establishing residence or becoming a resident as a
result of any annexation, and otherwise required to obtain a license, shall
have until ten (10) days after moving or annexation to obtain such a license.
(1) Place of Application: The Montrose Animal Shelter and City Police
Department are locations from which such licenses shall be issued;
other locations may be designated by the City from time to time. (Ord
2239, 01-21-2010)
(2) If such licenses are distributed from a private place of business,
including but not limited to the offices of a veterinarian or animal
hospital, said private place of business may elect to charge a nominal
fee for use of its time and resources in distributing the licenses, not
to exceed twenty percent (20 %) of the cost of the license, as shown
in the City’s fee schedule.
(a) The City of Montrose shall provide City pet animal license forms
and tags to each pet animal license distributor at the City’s
expense. Said license distributors shall keep a log of all license
sales.
(Ord 2239, 01-21-2010)
(C) Proof of Rabies Vaccination, or Equivalent Required: All owners applying
for a license must show, as provided herein, that the animal for which the
license is being obtained has a current rabies vaccine.
(1) Vaccinations: It shall be unlawful to own or have custody of any
dog or cat six (6) months of age or older, unless such dog or cat has
been:
(a) Vaccinated against rabies with an approved vaccine by a
licensed veterinarian, and such vaccination is currently
effective; or
(b) Alternative To Rabies Vaccine (Alternative Practice): A
treatment or practice administered by a licensed veterinarian
as an alternative to traditional rabies inoculations, and having
effectiveness against rabies similar to traditional vaccinations,
shall be an acceptable alternative to such vaccinations. For
the purpose of this Chapter, all references to rabies
vaccinations shall include the alternatives thereto, described
in this Paragraph.
(c) The charge of not having a pet animal license shall be
considered a lesser included offense, when any person is also
charged with the offense of having custody of a dog not
vaccinated against rabies. (Ord 2239, 01-21-2010)
(2) Temporary Visits to City: No rabies vaccination or Alternative
Practice is required for a pet animal temporarily within the City for
less than thirty (30) days if said animal has a current rabies
vaccination, or such animal is currently licensed by another
governmental licensing authority.
(3) Rabies Tags and Certificate: The veterinarian administering the
rabies vaccine or Alternative Practice shall furnish to the owner or
custodian of the animal a tag indicating the vaccine or Alternative
Practice has been administered. Said veterinarian shall also execute
a certificate as proof of such, keeping a duplicate copy for his files.
Such certificates shall provide information appropriate for the
administration and enforcement of this, including a description of
the animal.
(a) Proof of Vaccination or Alternative Practice: It shall be
unlawful for any person who owns or has custody of any pet
animal included within the scope of this Chapter to fail or
refuse to produce the certificate of rabies vaccination or
Alternative Practice upon request by any person charged with
the enforcement of this Chapter.
(D) Display of License Tags: The license and rabies tags issued pursuant to
this Chapter shall both be attached to a collar or harness, and worn by the
licensed pet animal at all times unless on the property of the owner. It shall
be unlawful to own or have custody of any animal required by this Chapter
to be licensed, if said animal’s tags become worn or illegible. The owner or
custodian shall immediately replace worn or illegible tags. The City shall
issue replacement tags upon the payment of the fee as set forth in Section 3-
1 of the City of Montrose Regulations Manual.
(E) Counterfeits and Forgeries: It shall be unlawful for any person to have in
his possession, or otherwise make use of a stolen, counterfeit, or forged
rabies vaccination certificate or tag, or pet animal license certificate or tag.
(F) Non-transferability: Vaccination certificates, and license tags and
certificates are not transferable, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
attach any license or rabies tag to any animal other than the animal for
which such tag was originally issued.
(G) Payment of License Fee: A license fee shall be paid at the time of making
application. The license fees shall be as set forth in Section 3-1 of the City
of Montrose Regulations Manual.
(H) False Statement: It shall be unlawful to make any fraudulent statement or
misrepresentation with respect to any rabies vaccination, or pet animal
license application.
(I) Term of License: pet animal licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
be valid for the stated effective term of the individual dog’s rabies
vaccination, and shall require renewal each and every time a new rabies
vaccination is required, or upon a change of ownership or custodianship of
such animal, or a change in the address of the owner or custodian of the
animal, in which case a reapplication shall be made within ten (10) days.
(Ord 2239, 01-21-2010)
6-2-3: ANIMAL ATTACKS
(A) Anyone, including physicians, having knowledge of any case of an attack
or bite caused by any dog, cat or other animal occurring within the
Montrose City limits shall notify the City as soon as possible.
(B) Any animal which in known to have bitten or attacked any person, causing
puncture of the skin, shall be quarantined for a period of no less than 10
days from the date of the incident. It is unlawful for any person to refuse to
produce an animal for quarantine. The animal shall be quarantined and
observed at any veterinarian clinic or hospital of the owner or custodian’ s
choice, or at the City Animal Shelter, or at the residence of the owner or
custodian provided such confinement is secure and approved by the City.
Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner or custodian. (Ord.
1676, 9-3-98)
(C) In cases in which the attack or bite is made without provocation and the
animal is believed to be vicious as defined in the provisions of this Chapter,
the animal may be impounded until conclusion of legal proceedings. Such
impoundment in all cases shall be at the expense of the owner or custodian.
(Ord. 1676, 9-3-98)
(D) The owner or custodian of the dog, cat or other animal shall be liable for
the costs of confinement and the animal will not be returned until such
costs are paid. The animal may be sold or destroyed if such costs are not
paid by the owner or custodian.
(E) Any animal infected with rabies shall be destroyed.
6-2-4: LIMIT ON DOGS AND CATS: It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain,
harbor or possess upon the premises of any one household more than two
(2) dogs and two (2) cats.
6-2-5: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR TAGS: The
City Council may revoke or suspend any license or tags issued in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter upon a finding that the
licensee has violated any provision of this Chapter. A hearing shall be held
and reasonable notice given of the hearing to the licensee or custodian.
6-2-6: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to fail to
confine it or cause it to be confined to the premises of the said owner or
custodian, unless the animal is under effective and immediate control of the
owner or custodian by a leash, cord, chain or other restraining device.
(B) Any animal in violation of subsection (A) above may be impounded or
caused to be impounded by the City.
(C) (Repealed, Ord. 2004, 05-20-2004)
(D) The owner or a custodian of any animal so impounded may reclaim it
within five (5) working days from the date the notice is posted with the City
Clerk upon payment of a fee as set forth in Section 3-1 of the City of
Montrose Regulations Manual, plus any veterinary charges. No unlicensed
dog or cat will be released to the owner or custodian without his obtaining a
license if one is required by this Chapter. (Ord. 2004, 05-20-2004)
(E) The City shall keep all animals so impounded for a period of five (5)
working days from the date the notice is posted unless sooner reclaimed by
the owner. If at the expiration of said period the owner or custodian has not
reclaimed the animal, it may be destroyed or disposed of by sale. Any
purchaser shall pay all charges imposed by this Chapter. No unclaimed dog
or cat shall be sold without being vaccinated for rabies and licensed, if
required. (Ord. 1008,11-2-78)
(F) It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to fail to have
the animal under effective and immediate control of the owner or custodian
by a leash, cord, chain or other restraining device at all times that such
animal is within the City, unless the animal is upon the premises of said
owner or custodian. (Ord. 1063, 12-6-79)
6-2-7: POULTRY RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED: It shall be
unlawful for any person to keep fowl or poultry unless such fowl or poultry
are at all times kept in an enclosure upon the owner or custodian's premises
or confined or caged when being transported.
6-2-8: RELEASING RESTRAINED ANIMALS PROHIBITED: It shall be
unlawful for any person to release any animal impounded or quarantined
pursuant to this Chapter without permission of the City. It shall be
unlawful for any person to set any animal free of any restraint or
confinement without consent of the owner or custodian.
6-2-9: DANGEROUS ANIMALS
(A) VICIOUS ANIMALS
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian to keep or harbor any
vicious animal within the City, unless said animal is properly
confined in accordance with the provisions herein.
(2) A vicious animal is defined as any animal that, without provocation,
bites or attacks persons or other animals; approaches any person or
other animal with vicious or terrorizing behavior or an apparent
attitude of attack, whether or not the attack is consummated or is
capable of being consummated; or has acted in a manner that causes
or should cause its owner or custodian to know that the animal is
potentially vicious.
(3) It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this Subsection
that the actual or intended victim of any attack has made an unlawful
entry into the residential dwelling structure of the animal’ s owner or
custodian, or has threatened or attacked a person or animal lawfully
within said dwelling structure, or has threatened or attacked an
owner or custodian of the animal. “Dwelling structure”, for the
purposes of this Subsection, shall mean any enclosed building, or
portion thereof, which provides actual living facilities.
(4) Any animal which is reasonably believed to be vicious and which is
not properly confined in accordance with the provisions herein may
be impounded if it constitutes a danger to any person or animal. The
animal shall remain impounded until the completion of legal
proceedings. The owner or custodian shall be responsible for costs
of impoundment, and the animal may be destroyed if such costs are
not paid.
(5) “Proper confinement”, for purposes of this Subsection, shall mean
the following:
(a) While on the premises of the owner or custodian, the animal
shall be confined within a dwelling structure, or within a
securely fenced enclosure with fastened sides and top or with
four fastened sides of no less than six feet in height. The
enclosure must be permanently fastened at the bottom, and be
of such material and construction that the animal cannot exit
the enclosure on its own. Enclosures shall be properly signed
for warning.
(b) While off the premises of the owner or custodian, the animal
shall be leashed and muzzled and under the physical control
of the owner or custodian at all times, unless otherwise
confined within a closed vehicle.
(6) If the Court determines that the vicious animal poses a serious
danger to the health and safety of other persons or animals, it may
order the animal to be removed from the municipality or destroyed.
Such determination may be based upon, but is not necessarily
limited to, the frequency of violations of the provisions of this
Chapter by the owner or custodian of such animal, the severity of
any attack or bite or terrorizing behavior by such animal, or the
inability or unwillingness of the owner or custodian to properly
confine such animal.
(B) WILD AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or custodian to keep or harbor
any wild and dangerous animal within the City.
(2) Wild and dangerous animals shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) All poisonous snakes and reptiles; non-poisonous snakes
with a length greater than six (6) feet; all Crocodilians;
(b) All carnivorous, non-domestic animals. “Non-domestic
animals”, for purposes of this Subsection, includes those
animals not ordinarily domesticated so as to live and breed in
a tame condition.
(c) All wolves and wolf/hybrids;
(d) The provisions of this Subsection (2) shall not be applicable
to licensed circuses and carnivals, wildlife sanctuaries, nature
center, zoological parks, veterinary and rehabilitation clinics.
(Ord. 1676, 9-3-98)
6-2-10: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in custody of any animal to
fail to provide any animal with adequate food, water, shelter and veterinary
care when reasonably required.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, cruelly ill-treat, overload, overwork
or otherwise abuse any animal, or cause or permit any dog fight,
cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals
and humans.
(C) It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to abandon
such animal.
(D) For the purpose of this Section, “abandon” means to leave the animal
unattended for more than 48 consecutive hours.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to expose any known poisonous or
hazardous substance, including such substance when mixed with food, so
that a reasonable person would know or should know that such substance
would probably cause animals to be attracted thereto and be adversely
affected thereby; provided however that this Subsection does not apply to
the lawful removal of pests.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian to confine an animal within
a parked, closed vehicle, when insufficient ventilation exists, or when the
temperature within the closed vehicle is in excess of 90 degrees Fahrenheit,
thereby exposing the animal to serious health risk.
(G) The animal control officer or police officer may impound any animal which
is reasonably believed to be abandoned or otherwise subject to the
provisions of this Section. Any and all costs associated with the
impoundment and necessary care of such animals shall be borne by the
owner or custodian. (Ord. 1716, 8-5-99)
6-2-11: NUISANCE
(A) Any animal which produces or creates any unreasonable disturbance by
excessive or continued screeching, barking or other noise, or which is
reasonably believed to be vicious in accordance with this Chapter, or is at
large without control, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(B) Any animal which leaves excrement upon any public property, or upon any
private property absent the consent of that property owner, which is not
immediately removed by the owner or custodian of such animal, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
(C) It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to allow it to
become a nuisance, or to create a nuisance.
(D) The City may abate any such nuisance by an action in a court of proper
jurisdiction or otherwise in accordance with the law. The City may
undertake emergency abatement procedures in accordance with Section 6-
4-2, when such nuisance constitutes an immediate health or safety hazard.
(Ord. 1676, 9-3-98)
6-2-12: FEMALE ANIMALS IN HEAT: Any female dog or cat in heat shall be
confined in a building or secure enclosure adequate to prevent
indiscriminate contact with any male dogs or cats.
6-2-13: FARM LIVESTOCK
(A) It shall be unlawful to keep livestock within the City, except that one such
animal may be kept for each one acre of premises area. Premises devoted
to agricultural use, including the keeping of livestock, at the time annexed
to the City may continue to be so used unless such use is discontinued for a
period of six (6) months. No such agricultural use may be materially
enlarged from its extent existing at the time annexed.
(B) It shall be unlawful for anyone to herd or drive livestock through the streets
without having said animal under control as required by this Chapter,
except that stockmen may drive stock through the City if no other route is
practical; providing, that the Montrose City Police Department is given
twenty four (24) hours prior notice of such activity. Such stockmen driving
stock through the City shall be liable for all damages done to private or
public property by such stock whether or not such damage is caused by the
negligence of the said stock men or their agents. The City may specify the
route to be used.
6-2-14: PENALTY
(A) Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or by imprisonment of not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; provided, however, that no person under the age of eighteen
(18) years may be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
(Ord. 1614, 12-19-96)
(B) Upon a conviction of a violation of any provision of this Chapter, which
offense was committed within one year of the date of a previous conviction
for a violation of a provision of this Chapter, the minimum penalty shall be
a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), no portion of which may be suspended.
(Ord. 1008, 11-2-78)
6-2-15: POLICE DOGS
(A) Police dogs, while on duty, or under authorized training with or for the
Montrose Police Department or other law enforcement agencies shall not be
subject to the provisions of Sections 6-2-6, 6-2-9, 6-2-11 and 6-2-12.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to hit, kick, strike, beat, injure, disable
or kill any police dog on duty or under training, or to tease or torment any
police dog in a manner likely to provoke a violent response or to interfere
with the use of such police dog while such dog is being used by the
Montrose Police Department or other law enforcement agency for law
enforcement duties or while under training. (Ord. 1287, 11-21-85)
6-2-16: FARMS & RANCHES
(A) Farms and ranches established as a lawful use by right in the “RL” zoning
district shall not be subject to the provisions of 6-2-13(A) or 6-2-7 of this
Chapter so long as the poultry and livestock are kept on the farm or ranch
premises and the scope of the poultry or livestock operations is within the
scope of the uses by right in the “RL” zoning district. (Ord. 1693, 3-4-99)
Chapter 6-3
LITTER AND JUNK
Sections:
6-3-1 LITTERING
6-3-2 STORAGE OF LITTER
6-3-3 KEEPING OF JUNK
6-3-4 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 6-3
LITTER AND JUNK
Sections:
6-3-1 LITTERING
6-3-2 STORAGE OF LITTER
6-3-3 KEEPING OF JUNK
6-3-4 DEFINITIONS
6-3-1: LITTERING
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, or allow to be
deposited or thrown any litter or junk onto any public property or private
property of another, except into a receptacle or container for such purpose
which such person is authorized to use.
(B) Whenever litter or junk is thrown or deposited from any motor vehicle in
violation of this Section, the operator of said motor vehicle is presumed to
have caused or allowed the litter or junk to be so thrown or deposited.
6-3-2: STORAGE OF LITTER
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, store, or deposit litter upon his
own property, except within a trash can or container which has a tight
fitting lid, or a trash bag, or unless the litter is totally enclosed within a
building.
(B) The storage of litter in violation of this Section is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and may be abated in accordance with law.
6-3-3: KEEPING OF JUNK
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, throw or deposit junk upon his
own property, unless the junk is totally enclosed within a building, or is
screened by a fence or other enclosure from view off of such person's
property, or is kept within a receptacle for such purpose with a tight fitting
lid.
(B) The keeping of junk in violation of this Section is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and may be abated in accordance with law.
(C) This Section shall not apply to salvage businesses lawfully located in an 1-2
General Industrial District as of the effective date of this Section, and
operated continually thereafter.
6-3-4: DEFINITIONS
(A) For the purpose of this Chapter "litter" shall mean all rubbish, waste
material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris or other foreign substances, solid or
liquid of every form, size, kind and description.
(B) For the purpose of this Chapter "junk" shall include, but not be limited to,
discarded, unusable or broken machinery, appliances, furniture, furnishings,
or sporting equipment; used building or construction materials; motor
vehicles without current license plates or safety inspection sticker; and all
other items commonly known as junk.
(C) An item may be both "junk" and "litter" as defined in this Section. (Ord.
1086, 7-17-80)
Chapter 6-4
NUISANCES
Sections:
6-4-1 NUISANCES PROHIBITED
6-4-2 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
6-4-3 COST OF ABATEMENT
Chapter 6-4
NUISANCES
Sections:
6-4-1 NUISANCES PROHIBITED
6-4-2 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
6-4-3 COST OF ABATEMENT
6-4-1: NUISANCES PROHIBITED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause or maintain any
nuisance, or to permit any nuisance to exist upon or in connection with any
premises owned by him or under his control.
(B) The following are hereby declared to be a nuisance:
(1) Anything or activity which unreasonably annoys or interferes with
the use or enjoyment of public or private property or which
constitutes a health or safety hazard.
(2) Anything declared to be a nuisance by any City ordinance or by the
Statutes or regulations of the State.
(3) Any other thing or activity which under law constitutes nuisance.
(4) Any animal in violation of those provisions set forth in Section 6-2-
11. (Ord. 1676, 9-3-98)
(C) Any use or the manner of use of any property which is declared a nuisance
by this Section, shall be a nuisance subject to abatement under this Chapter
notwithstanding the fact that such a use might otherwise be allowed under
the City's Zoning, Land Use or Building Regulations.
6-4-2: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
(A) In addition to any other powers granted to the City by law to abate
nuisances, any nuisance may be abated in accordance with the provisions of
this Section.
(B) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin or abate a nuisance.
(C) The City may prosecute any person maintaining or allowing a nuisance to
exist in Municipal Court, and upon conviction the Court may enter an order
on such items as it deems appropriate for the abatement of the nuisance in
addition to any fine or jail sentence.
(D) The City may give notice in writing to any person responsible for the
maintenance of a nuisance, which notice shall allow a reasonable time for
such person to correct and eliminate the nuisance. If such person shall fail
to correct or eliminate the nuisance by the time specified in the notice, the
City may take action for the correction or elimination of the nuisance and
shall have the right to enter upon private property for such purpose. The
City may collect the cost of doing so in accordance with Section 6-4-3.
(E) The City may take all necessary steps, including the entry upon private
property, to abate or eliminate a nuisance without notice, when such
nuisance constitutes an immediate health or safety hazard. In those cases
where time is permitting, the City shall take reasonable efforts to provide
notice and obtain emergency abatement orders from the Municipal Court,
or any court of proper jurisdiction, to such effect. In any instance in which
emergency abatement procedures are taken, the costs incurred by the City
may be collected in accordance with Section 6-4-3. (Ord. 1676, 9-3-98)
(F) The Code Enforcement Officer of the City shall be deemed a peace officer,
as defined in Rule 203 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of
Procedure, for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter under the direction of the City Manager. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall exercise the authority of a peace officer in the enforcement of
these provisions, including the power to issue summons and complaints and
initiate prosecution of violations thereof, and the power to abate nuisances
in accordance with these provisions. (Ord. 1908, 6-13-2002)
6-4-3: COST OF ABATEMENT
(A) The City may recover all costs it incurs in abating any nuisance as provided
in this Section.
(B) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for
costs incurred in abating a nuisance.
(C) The cost incurred shall be a lien upon the property affected which may be
foreclosed by the City in accordance with law.
(D) The cost incurred by the City may be certified to the County Treasurer to be
collected as other delinquent charges in a manner similar to property taxes.
(Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
(E) Costs which the City may recover include, but are not limited to, all out-ofpocket
costs and expenses, costs attributable to City employee time and
equipment use, reasonable attorney's fees and an overhead and
administrative charge as set forth in the City of Montrose Regulations
Manual. (Ord. 1992, 01-08-2004)
Chapter 6-5
WEEDS
Sections:
6-5-1 WEED CONTROL
6-5-2 NUISANCE DECLARED
6-5-3 CONFLICTING STATUTES SUPERSEDED
Chapter 6-5
WEEDS
Sections:
6-5-1 WEED CONTROL
6-5-2 NUISANCE DECLARED
6-5-3 CONFLICTING STATUTES SUPERSEDED
6-5-1: WEED CONTROL
(A) It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or occupant of any property to fail
to control weeds on said property and upon that portion of abutting street
and alley rights of way lying between said property and the center line of
said rights of way in accordance with the requirements of this Section.
(B) All weeds shall be removed or kept mowed or clipped reasonably close to
the ground.
(C) Steps shall be taken to eradicate plants commonly known as leafy spurge
and diffuse, Russian and spotted knapweeds.
6-5-2: NUISANCE DECLARED
Weeds or plants in violation of the requirements of Section 6-5-1 are hereby declared to
be a nuisance and the City may abate them in any lawful manner including the
procedures specified in Chapter 4 of this Title.
6-5-3: CONFLICTING STATUTES SUPERSEDED
Any statute or regulation of the State in conflict with the requirements of this Chapter or
the procedures of Chapter 4 of this Title are hereby declared to be superseded by the
ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1449, 5-14-92)
Chapter 6-6
OPEN BURNING
Sections:
6-6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or occupant of any property to burn or allow the
burning of rubbish, wastepaper, wood, or other flammable material on any open
premises, or on any public street, alley, or other land adjacent to such premises, subject to
the following exemptions:
(A) Open burning may be allowed, subject to the issuance of permit by the
Montrose Fire Protection District in accordance with Sections 1101, 1102
and 1103 of the 1997 Uniform Fire Code, for the following uses:
(1) agricultural open burning, defined as the open burning of cover
vegetation for the purpose of preparing the soil for crop production
and weed control;
(2) fires for instructional or training purposes.
(B) Open burning may be allowed, without permit by the Montrose Fire
Protection District, for fires used exclusively for the cooking of food for
persons, when the following criteria are all met:
(1) Such burning is limited in scope, intensity and duration to that
minimally necessary to accomplish such purposes;
(2) Such burning is confined to metallic barbeque pits, metallic
barbeque equipment and other metallic food heat-processing
equipment;
(3) Fire-extinguishing equipment must be readily available; and
(4) The burning is constantly attended by a person knowledgeable in the
use of the fire-extinguishing equipment.
(C) Open burning in violation of the requirements set forth herein is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and subject to abatement action by the City in any
lawful manner including the procedures specified in Chapter 4 of this Title.
(Ord. 1873, Add, 12/20/2001)
TITLE VII
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Fire Hydrants
2 Fireworks
(Rep. By Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
3 Explosives
(Rep. By Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
4 Fire Protection Regulations
Chapter 7-1
FIRE HYDRANTS
Sections:
7-1-1 OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS
Chapter 7-1
FIRE HYDRANTS
Sections:
7-1-1 OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS
7-1-1: OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or to allow access to any fire
hydrant to be obstructed by the erection or construction or installation of
any object, pole, shrub, bush or any other thing within a five foot (5') radius
circle from any fire hydrant, excepting grass or paving or other material
located at ground level which does not interfere with access to the hydrant
or the operation of it.
(B) In addition to prosecution in Municipal Court for violation of this
Ordinance, the City may maintain an action for an injunction to remove any
thing or object in violation of this Section in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 901, 9-2-76)
CHAPTER 7-4
FIRE PROTECTION REGULATIONS
Sections:
7-4-1 ADOPTION OF CODE
7-4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-4-3 AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
7-4-4 APPEALS
7-4-5 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
7-4-6 FIREWORKS REGULATIONS
7-4-7 TEMPORARY BANS ON THE SALES AND USE OF FIREWORKS
7-4-1: ADOPTION OF CODE
(A) There is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to
prevent fires, protect persons and property and to promote the public health,
safety and welfare, The International Fire Code, 2003 Edition, published by
the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club
Hills, IL 60478-5795, the subject matter of which is regulations for
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises; and the issuance of permits and fees therefore.
(Ordinance 2069, 07-29-2005)
(B) One copy of each of the above codes are on file in the office of the City
Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours.
(Ord. 1873, Amended, 12/20/2001)
7-4-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) The provisions of this Chapter and the Codes, adopted by reference herein,
may be administered and enforced by the Chief of the Montrose Fire
Protection District. The City Manager is also authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Chapter and the Codes adopted by reference
in the event of the failure, refusal or inability of the Chief to do so, or as
convenient and appropriate in conjunction with the administration and
enforcement of City Building, Zoning, or other Ordinances and regulations.
(B) Whenever the word "jurisdiction" is used in The Uniform Fire Code, it shall
mean the City of Montrose, Colorado.
(C) The following amendments or clarifications to the Uniform Fire Code shall
apply:
(1) A new Section 103.3.5 is added to read as follows:
103.3.5 Inspection Fees.
A schedule of inspection fees shall be established by the Montrose
Fire Protection District and approved by the City, which fee
schedule may be amended from time to time upon prior City
approval. The schedule shall be available at the Montrose Fire
Protection District and the City of Montrose Engineering
Department.
(2) Section 103.4.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 103.4.1.1 Authorization to Issue Corrective Orders and
Notices.
When the Chief and or the City Engineer finds in any building or on
any premises combustible, hazardous or explosive materials or
dangerous accumulations of rubbish; or finds unnecessary
accumulations of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly
flammable materials which are so situated as to endanger life or
property; or finds obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs,
passageways, doors or windows that interfere with the operations of
the Fire Department or the safe and emergent exit of occupants of
such premises; or finds that the effectiveness of any exit door, attic
separation or any fire separation wall is diminished so as to
constitute a violation of this Code; or finds that this Code is being
violated in any way, the Chief is authorized to issue corrective
orders as necessary for the enforcement of these provisions.
(3) Section 103.4.1.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 103.4.1.3 Stopping Uses Evacuation
The Chief is authorized to order an operation or use stopped or the
evacuation of any premises, building or vehicle or portion thereof
which has or is a fire hazard or hazard to life.
(4) Section 105.6 is amended by the addition of the following
paragraph:
The requirements for permits from other agencies or departments
shall not waive the requirements for permits required by this Code.
(5) Section 105.8 is amended by the addition of the following
paragraphs:
g.1. Gates. A Fire Department permit is required to install or alter
a gate or gate operator which obstructs a fire apparatus access
road.
x.1. Fire Extinguishing Systems and Equipment. A Fire
Department permit is required to install, extend, or alter fire
extinguishing systems and equipment; fire alarm systems,
equipment and monitoring; smoke control systems and
equipment
x.2. Spray Booths. A Fire Department permit is required to
install, extend, or alter a spray booth.
x.3. Installation / Removal of aboveground and underground
tanks. A Fire Department permit is required to install, extend,
or alter aboveground or underground tanks used to contain
flammable materials.
(6) Article 2 Definitions is amended by the addition of the following
terms and definitions:
FALSE ALARM is the activation or reporting, whether intentional
or not intentional, of an alarm when no such alarm condition,
fire or emergency actually exists.
FIRE LANES are Fire Apparatus Access Roads as designated by
the Montrose Fire Protection District pursuant to UFC
§901.4.2.
FIREWOOD SALES & STORAGE OF WOOD is any property
used for the commercial sale or storage of firewood or wood
products
KNOX BOX is a key lock box, type specified by the Montrose Fire
Protection District
NUISANCE ALARM is any alarm caused by mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, or lack of proper
maintenance, or any alarm activated by a cause that cannot be
determined.
SMOKE CONTROL, DEDICATED SYSTEMS are intended for
the purpose of smoke control only. They include separate
systems of air moving and distribution equipment that do not
function under normal building operating conditions. Upon
activation, these systems operate specifically to perform the
smoke-control function.
SMOKE CONTROL, NON-DEDICATED SYSTEMS are those
systems that share components with some other system(s)
such as building HVAC systems. Activation causes the
system to change its mode of operation to achieve the smokecontrol
objective.
TUNNEL is any thoroughfare, public way, walk way, or
mechanical / electrical service conduit of dimensions to
permit human occupancy for the purpose of service or repair,
or conveyance of goods and persons, and which is
constructed below grade and cannot be classified as the
basement or first story of a building.
(7) A new Section 901.7 is added to read as follows:
901.7 Access Gates
901.7.1 Permit. A Fire Department Permit is required prior to
installing a gate or gate operator which may serve to obstruct an fire
apparatus access road. All access gates will meet the specifications
of the Montrose Fire Protection District.
(8) Section 1001.3 Plans is amended as follows:
1001.3.1. General. Complete plans and specifications for alarm
systems; fire extinguishing systems, including automatic sprinklers
and wet/dry standpipes; halon systems and other special types of
automatic fire extinguishing systems; basement pipe inlets; and other
fire protection systems and appurtenances thereto shall be submitted
to the Fire Department for review and be approved prior to system
installation.
Approved plans shall be kept readily available on the job site.
All high rise, covered mall and atrium buildings, in additional to
other major facilities as determined by the Chief, shall have a Fire
and Life Safety Package Report submitted to the Fire Prevention
Bureau and be approved prior to construction.
1001.3.2 Plans, Alarm Systems. Complete plans and specifications
for alarm systems shall include, but not be limited to, a floor plan;
location of all alarm-initiating and alarm-signaling devices; alarm
control and trouble-signaling equipment; annunication; power
connection; battery calculations; conductor type and sizes; voltage
drop calculations; and manufacturer, model numbers and listing
information for all equipment, devices and materials.
(9) Section 1001.5.2 Inspection and Testing is amended by adding one
new sub-section as follows:
1001.5.2.1 Fire Protection System. All Fire Protection Systems shall
be maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado
Division of Fire Safety. A copy of said inspection shall be mailed
within 48 hours, to the Fire Prevention Bureau only when any
deficiency of the system or violation of the Fire Code is noted. In
the event a service/maintenance contract is canceled or not renewed,
the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be notified by the service company
within 24 hours.
(10) Section 1001.5.3.1 Problematic Systems and Systems Out of Service
is amended as follows:
In the event of a failure of a fire protection system or recurring false
or nuisance alarm activation's, the Chief is authorized to require the
building owner or occupant to provide firewatch personnel until the
system is repaired.
(11) Section 1003.1.1 Fire Extinguishing Systems is amended as follows:
Main control valves for fire extinguishing systems shall be:
Located in a room with a one-hour occupancy separation and an
exterior door, or equipped with exterior indicator posts (wall control
valves)
(12) Section 1003.1.2 Fire Extinguishing Systems is amended as follows:
1003.1.2 Standards. Fire extinguishing systems shall be in
accordance with the applicable NFPA Standards.
EXCEPTIONS:
1. No change-same as published in 97 UFC
2. Change the word "Building Official" to "City Engineer and or
Fire Chief"
3. Occupancies that are not electrically monitored shall provide
an approved identification sign below each outside horn and
strobe, which reads WHEN ALARM SOUNDS - CALL 9-1-
1. This sign shall be of durable material with permanent
lettering having a 2" minimum height on a contrasting
background.
(13) A new Section 4502.2.11 Location Prohibited is added as follows:
Section 4502.2.11 Location Prohibited. Spray booth(s) designed for
utilizing flammable or combustible liquids, or the application of
combustible powders regulated by Article 45 shall not be located
outside of buildings.
(14) Section 4901.1 Hot Work, Scope is amended by adding a new
second exception as follows:
EXCEPTION 2 Group R-3 and U occupancies
(15) Section 7701.7.2 Explosive Materials, Limits Established by Law is
amended as follows:
Explosive materials shall be stored only in areas zoned and approved
for such use and shall be subject to approval by the Fire Chief.
(16) A new Section 7801.3.3 Fireworks, Permits for Sale and Storage of
Fireworks is added as follows:
The Sale and Storage and Public Display of fireworks within the
City limits shall require a permit by the Montrose Fire Protection
District.
(17) Article 90 Standards is amended by adding a new Section as follows:
Section 9004 - NFPA Standards
The most current editions of The National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Standards referenced in this section are
declared to be part of this code as if set forth in full herein.
NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION STANDARDS
NFPA 10; Portable Fire Extinguishers, 1997 Edition
NFPA 13; Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 1996 Edition
NFPA 13D; Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-
Family Dwellings and Mobile Homes, 1996 Edition
NFPA 13R; Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and
including four Stores in Height, 1996 Edition
NFPA 14; Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems, 1996 Edition
NFPA 17; Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems, 1994 Edition
NFPA 17A; Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems, 1994 Edition
NFPA 20; Installation of Centrifugal Fire Pumps, 1996 Edition
NFPA 22; Water Tanks for Private Fire Protection, 1996 Edition
NFPA 24; Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their
Appurtenances, 1995 Edition
NFPA 25; Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire
Protection Systems, 1995 Edition
NFPA 72; National Fire Alarm Code, 1996 Edition
NFPA 92A, Smoke Control Systems, 1996 Edition
NFPA 92B; Smoke Management Systems in Malls, Atria, Large
Areas, 1995 Edition
NFPA 96; Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial
Cooking Operations; 1994 Edition
NFPA 99C; Standard on Gas and Vacuum Systems, 1996 Edition
NFPA 110; Emergency and Standby Power Systems, 1996 Edition
NFPA 231; General Storage, 1995 Edition
NFPA 231C; Rack Storage of Materials, 1995 Edition
NFPA 231D; Storage of Rubber Tires, 1994 Edition
NFPA 231F; Storage of Rolled Paper, 1995 Edition
NFPA 1123; Outdoor Display of Fireworks, 1995 Edition
NFPA 1126; Use of Pyrotechnics before a Proximate Audience,
1996 Edition
NFPA 2001; Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems, 1996 Edition
(18) Appendix III-B Fire Hydrants and Distributions is amended as
follows:
Section 3 Fire Hydrant Distribution
The number and spacing of fire hydrants shall meet the approval of
the Fire Chief. Fire hydrants shall be located adjacent to and
accessible from fire apparatus access roads. Fire hydrants shall be
spaced along fire apparatus access roads as follows:
1. In developments wherein all lots are at least one acre but less
than three acres in area, and the fire-flow requirement is equal
to 1,750 gpm or less, a minimum of one fire hydrant shall be
placed an average of every one thousand (1,000) feet.
2. In developments where all lots are three acres or more and the
fire-flow requirement is equal to 1,750 gpm or less, a
minimum of one fire hydrant shall be placed an average of
every fifteen hundred (1,500) feet.
3. In developments where any lots are less than one acre and the
fire-flow requirements is equal to 1,750 gpm or less,
Appendix III-B and the accompanying Table A-III-B-1 shall
apply.
4. Any changes in lot sizes of developments shall trigger the
applicable requirements herein.
The following appendices are adopted by reference:
I-C Stairway Identification; II-B Protection of Flammable and
Combustible Liquid Tanks in Locations Subject to Flooding; II-C
Marinas; II-D Rifle Ranges; II-E Hazardous Materials Management
Plans and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statements; II-F Protected
Aboveground Tanks for Motor Vehicle Fuel-Dispensing Stations
Outside Buildings; II-G Secondary Containment for Underground
Tank Systems Containing Flammable or Combustible Liquids; II-H
Site Assessments for Determining Potential Fire and Explosion
Risks from Underground Flammable or Combustible Liquid Tank
Leaks; II-I Ozone Gas- Generating Equipment; II-J Storage of
Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Tanks Located with Below-
Grade Vaults; III-A Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings; III-B
Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution; VI-A Hazardous Materials
Classification; VI-B Hazard Ranking; VI-C Emergency Relief
Venting for Fire Exposure for Aboveground Tanks; and VI-F
Recommended Separation Distances for Explosive Materials.
(D) If there is any conflict of any provisions of this Chapter or any Codes
adopted by reference herein with any other provision of any ordinance of
the City or other applicable State or Federal Regulations, those regulations
providing the more stringent or more strict requirements shall apply.
(Ord. 1873, Amended, 12/20/2001)
7-4-3: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
(ORD. 2069, 07-21-2005)
(A) “Jurisdiction” in Section 101.1 and elsewhere shall mean the City of
Montrose.
(B) Sections 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.4, 104.6, 108, and 109 are deleted.
7-4-4: APPEALS
Appeals may be taken from the decision of the Fire Chief or other
administrative official to the Board of Appeals by filing a written
application with the City within fifteen (15) days from the date of such
decision.
7-4-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter
or of this Codes adopted by reference herein. Any person convicted of such
a violation may be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or a jail sentence of up one (1) year or both such fine and
imprisonment, provided, however, no person under the age of eighteen (18)
years shall be subject to any term of imprisonment except for contempt of
court. Each day a violation continues shall be considered as a separate
offense. (Ord. 1614, 12-19-96)
(B) Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter or the Code adopted by
reference herein is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated in
accordance with law.
(C) In addition to any other remedies the City may have, it may maintain an
action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of, or
compel compliance with, any provision of this Chapter or of the Codes
adopted herein by reference.
(D) The City may refuse to issue any permits or approvals required by City
Ordinances or Regulations if the applicant is in violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter or the Codes adopted herein by reference.
(Ord. 1257, 11-15-84)
7-4-6: FIREWORKS REGULATIONS
(A) The manufacture, sale and use of fireworks within the City shall be subject
to the provisions of State Statutes and Regulations including C.R.S. 12-28-
101 et seq. and the provisions of this Code. Whichever restrictions are the
more stringent shall control in the case of any conflict. "Fireworks" as used
in this Section shall include all items commonly known or sold as
fireworks.
(B) No fireworks display may be conducted without the approval of the Chief
of Montrose Fire District and the City Council. The applicant must submit
a fee as set by Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations Manual.
The applicant must also submit proof of general liability insurance for the
event in a minimum amount equal to the liability limits as set out in the
Colorado Governmental Immunity Act for property damage and bodily
injury. Fireworks and shells to be used in authorized public displays shall
be stored, held, and handled in accordance with the conditions of the
permit. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(C) No fireworks may be manufactured within the City of Montrose.
(D) Except for the fireworks held for an immediate and lawful retail sale, no
fireworks may be stored within the City except within the "I-2", General
Industrial Zoning District. No fireworks may be stored unless a permit for
storage is obtained from the Montrose Fire Department. All storage
facilities shall meet the requirements of the Code for Manufacture,
Transportation and Storage of Firearms, N.F.P.A. 1124-84 as published by
the National Fire Protection Association. In addition, all applicable storage
requirements of State and Federal law shall be met. The permit may be
revoked for failure to comply with applicable requirements.
(E) It shall be unlawful to sell fireworks at retail within the City of Montrose
except for 1) sales allowed by C.R.S. 12-28-106, and 2) except for sales of
those items allowed under State law including toy caps which do not
contain more than twenty-five hundredths (.25) of a grain of explosive
compound per cap, sparklers, trick matches, cigarette loads, trick noise
makers, toy smoke devices and novelty auto alarms, so long as such devices
are not capable of flight, do not travel in excess of ten feet (10') in any
direction and do not produce loud noises.
(F) Any person selling fireworks shall prohibit smoking and open flames
within fifty feet of the location of the fireworks and post "No Smoking"
signs accordingly. Retail sales of fireworks allowed pursuant to paragraph
(E)2) may be made only from June 1 to July 5 of any year.
(G) No fireworks shall be sold from any motor vehicle, travel home, trailer, or
any other vehicle, except for trailers without engines designed for sales
purposes which obtain a permit pursuant to Subsection (H).
(H)
(1) No fireworks may be sold from a temporary stand until a permit for
the stand has been obtained from the City.
(2) Applications for a permit for a temporary stand shall be made on
forms supplied by the City which shall contain information as
convenient to administer the provisions of this Section.
(3) Submitted with the application shall be an application fee as set by
Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations Manual. A
certificate of insurance must be submitted indicating general liability
insurance in an amount not less than one hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($150,000.00) per person, four hundred thousand dollars
($400,000.00) per occurrence for property damage and bodily injury,
which may not be canceled without at least thirty (30) days' notice to
the City. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(4) No permit shall be issued unless the City determines that the
following criteria are met:
(a) The applicant has a City sales and use tax license and none of
the applicant or its agents, employees or principals have
failed to pay or remit City sales or use tax in previous years.
(b) Any applicable provisions of the Transient Merchant
Regulations have been met.
(c) The Building Inspector has approved the plans for the stand
pursuant to Section 104(e) of the Uniform Building Code.
(d) A clear zone of at least fifty feet (50') shall be maintained
around the stand.
(e) The stand shall have at least one exit door a minimum of
twenty inches (20") in width and six feet (6') in height which
swings out in the direction of egress. Stands over twenty five
feet (25') in length shall have at least two (2) such doors.
(f) Each stand shall be provided with one 2A 10BC Multi-
Purpose Dry Chemical Fire Extinguisher with a current
annual inspection. Stands over twenty five feet (25') in length
shall have a fire extinguisher at each end.
(g) Vegetation around the stand shall be no more than two inches
(2") above grade except for trees and shrubs.
(h) No smoking or burning shall be allowed within fifty feet (50')
of the stand. No fireworks shall be discharged within fifty
feet (50') of any stand.
(5) The City Manager may revoke any permit if he determines at a
hearing with reasonable notice that the above criteria are not being
met. Any permit may be temporarily suspended pending said
hearing.
(6) Additional terms and conditions may be included in any permit as
necessary to protect the public safety and welfare and to prevent fire
hazards.
(I) Any violation of this Section is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which
may be abated in any lawful manner. (Ord. 1369, 5-19-88)
7-4-7: TEMPORARY BANS ON THE SALES AND USE OF FIREWORKS
(Ord. 1968, 6-5-2003)
(A) Effective Thursday, June 5, 2003, and continuing until rescinded by the
City Council of the City of Montrose, the sale and use of all fireworks
within the City of Montrose is hereby permitted.
(B) Professional commercial fireworks displays shall be permitted as long as
said displays are specifically authorized by the Chief of the Montrose Fire
Protection District.
(C) Subsequent to June 5, 2003, should the fire danger in Colorado warrant a
ban on the sale and use of all fireworks within the City of Montrose, the
City Council, in consultation with the Chief of the Montrose Fire Protection
District, may enact appropriate temporary measures banning the sale and
use of all fireworks within the City of Montrose by Resolution.
TITLE VIII
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Wood Stoves and Fireplaces
2 Smoking in Public Places
3 Medical Marijuana
CHAPTERS PREVIOUSLY REPEALED:
1 Eating and Drinking Establishments
(Rep. by Ord. 705, 5-20-71)
2 Milk (Rep. by Ord. 899, 8-5-76)
3 Meat Regulations and Sale of (Rep. by Ord. 899, 8-5-76)
4 Garbage Collection (Rep. by Ord. 1081, 6-19-80)
5 Sewer Charges (Rep. by Ord. 930, 5-5-77)
6 Refuse Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
Chapter 8-1
WOOD STOVES AND FIREPLACES
Sections:
8-1-1 WOOD STOVE CERTIFICATION
8-1-2 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED
8-1-3 NONCONFORMING DEVICES
8-1-4 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 8-1
WOOD STOVES AND FIREPLACES
Sections:
8-1-1 WOOD STOVE CERTIFICATION
8-1-2 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED
8-1-3 NONCONFORMING DEVICES
8-1-4 ENFORCEMENT
8-1-1: WOOD STOVE CERTIFICATION
It shall be unlawful to install or operate any wood stove, fireplace insert or similar wood
burning device within the City unless it has been certified pursuant to Section II(A) of
Regulation No. 4 of the Air Quality Control Commission, Department of Health, 5
C.C.R. 1001-6 or is a pellet stove approved pursuant to Section III of said Regulation 4,
as such regulation existed at the time of certification. Provided however this shall not
apply to boilers, furnaces or cook stoves exempted from Section II of such Regulation or
to one fireplace per building not designed, intended or used regularly for space heating
nor shall it apply to electric or natural gas fireplace inserts or devices.
8-1-2: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED
A building permit shall be obtained for the installation or replacement of all wood stoves,
fireplaces and similar wood burning devices. The fee for a separate permit shall be
$25.00. All wood burning stoves, fireplaces and similar devices shall be installed,
operated and maintained in full compliance with applicable state regulations and City
building, mechanical and fire codes.
8-1-3: NONCONFORMING DEVICES
Devices which do not comply with Section 8-1-1, but which on January 1, 1994 or upon
annexation if subsequent thereto, were lawfully installed, may continue to be used, as
existing at such time notwithstanding Section 8-1-1.
8-1-4: ENFORCEMENT
(A) Violations of this Chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance which may
be abated by the City in any lawful manner,
(B) It shall be unlawful to violate any provisions of this Chapter,
(C) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin any violation of this Chapter.
Chapter 8-2
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:
8-2-1 DEFINITIONS
8-2-2 SMOKING PROHIBITED
8-2-3 SMOKING PERMITTED IN CERTAIN PLACES
8-2-4 POSTING OF SIGNS
8-2-5 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS
8-2-6 PENALTY
Chapter 8-2
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:
8-2-1 DEFINITIONS
8-2-2 SMOKING PROHIBITED
8-2-3 SMOKING PERMITTED IN CERTAIN PLACES
8-2-4 POSTING OF SIGNS
8-2-5 SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS
8-2-6 PENALTY
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS
(A) "Public Place" shall mean any enclosed, indoor area used by the general
public including, but not limited to, government buildings, schools,
airports, restaurants, hotels, bed & breakfast inns, mercantile
establishments, theaters, bank lobbies, recreational facilities such as
bowling alleys and bingo parlors, hospitals, nursing homes, health care
institutions, libraries, auditoriums, arenas, public meeting rooms, public
waiting rooms, public conveyances, elevators and restrooms. "Public Place"
shall not include private residences or private places of employment which
are not regularly used by the general public, such as private offices.
(B) "Smoke" or "smoking" means the lighting or burning of any cigarette, cigar
or pipe, or the possession of any lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe, regardless
of the composition of the burning material.
(C) "Ventilation System" is all the equipment required for the purpose of
supplying air to, and removing air from, any room or space by mechanical
means, other than equipment which is a portion of an environmental
heating, cooling, absorption or evaporative system.
(People’s Ord. 2001-2, Repealed and Replaced, 04/04/2001)
8-2-2: SMOKING PROHIBITED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place, except in
such areas in which smoking is permitted as provided in Section 8-2-3
below.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, operator, manager of any
property, or any employee or agent thereof, to allow smoking in violation
of this Chapter.
(C) Any owner, operator, or manager of any establishment or facility, whether
described in this Ordinance or not, may declare the entire establishment or
facility a nonsmoking establishment.
(People’s Ord. 2001-2, Repealed and Replaced, 04/04/2001)
8-2-3: SMOKING PERMITTED IN CERTAIN PLACES
(A) The prohibitions against smoking as set forth in Section 8-2-2 are subject to
the exemptions of this Section 8-2-3.
(B) The following are exempt from the provisions of Section 8-2-2.
(1) Facilities in which malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, or fermented
malt beverages are served at retail for consumption on premises as
the principal business, pursuant to a "Tavern" license as defined by
the Colorado Liquor Code. This exemption shall not include
recreational facilities, hotels, or restaurant facilities where meals are
actually and regularly served and provide at least 25 % of the gross
income of the facility;
(2) Facilities in which malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, or fermented
malt beverages are served only to private members and guests,
pursuant to a "Club" licenses, as defined by the Colorado Liquor
Code.
(3) Designated smoking areas which meet the following:
(a) the designated smoking area shall include a total floor area of
no greater than 50% of the total floor customer area of the
facility, or no greater than 50% of the primary dining area in a
restaurant facility;
(b) the designated smoking area must be entirely enclosed by a
ceiling and four walls, with appropriate door openings for
ingress and egress;
(c) the designated smoking area shall not include areas
commonly used as public lobbies or waiting areas;
(d) the designated smoking area must have an independent
ventilation system, which prevents the mixing of air between
smoking and non-smoking areas;
(e) the designated smoking area shall be properly signed as
provided below;
(People’s Ord. 2001-2, Repealed and Replaced, 04/04/2001)
8-2-4: POSTING OF SIGNS
(A) In every tavern or club facility where smoking is permitted in accordance
the exemptions provided in Section 8-2-3 above, adequate and conspicuous
signage shall be posted on all public entrances into the establishment,
utilizing the words "Smoking Permitted" and/or the international symbol
therefore.
(B) In every facility where a designated smoking area is permitted in
accordance with the exemption provided in Section 8-2-3 above, adequate
and conspicuous signage shall be posted at all entrances to the designated
smoking areas, utilizing the words "Designated Smoking Area" and/or the
international symbol therefore. Additionally, the words "No Smoking
Except in Designated Areas" shall be adequately and conspicuously posted
on all public entrances into the facility.
(C) In every facility where smoking is prohibited in accordance with the
provisions herein, adequate and conspicuous signage shall be posted on all
public entrances into the establishment, utilizing the words "No Smoking”
and/or the international symbol therefore.
(People’s Ord. 2001-2, Repealed and Replaced, 04/04/2001)
8-2-5: SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS
(A) Signs stating "No Smoking," "Designated Smoking Area," or "No Smoking
Except in Designated Areas," shall measure no less than forty (40) square
inches in size with letters of not less than one inch (I") in height. The signs
"No Smoking" and "No Smoking Except in Designated Areas" shall also
contain the words "By City Ordinance." The international "No Smoking"
symbol may be used alone as a "No Smoking" sign if it is no less than five
inches (5") in height. Signs must be posted four (4) to six (6) feet above
floor level at all public entrances of every establishment where smoking is
regulated by this Ordinance. Establishments with designated smoking and
nonsmoking areas shall post "No Smoking" or "Smoking Permitted" signs
that are clearly visible at the entrance of each designated area, except in
restaurants.
(B) "No Smoking" or "Designated Smoking Area" signs shall be posted by the
owner, operator, or manager of an establishment as follows:
(1) In all places where smoking is regulated by this Ordinance.
(2) In theaters, signs shall be posted in the lobby stating that smoking is
prohibited with in the theater or auditorium.
(3) In restaurants, clearly visible signs shall be posted at every entrance
stating the smoking policy.
(4) In grocery stores, supermarkets, convenience stores, or retail food
establishments, clearly visible "No Smoking" signs shall be posted at
all public entrances, and checkout or cashier lines.
(People’s Ord. 2001-2, Repealed and Replaced, 04/04/2001)
8-2-6: PENALTY
This provision was contained in Section 4 of People's Ordinance No. 2001-2.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, or operates any
premises subject to regulation under this Chapter, to fail to comply with
any of its provisions. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any
area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this Chapter.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $300.00.
(C) Every day on which the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation
and a separate offense.
(People’s Ord. 2001-2, Repealed and Replaced, 04/04/2001)
Chapter 8-3
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Sections:
8-3-1 MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Chapter 8-3
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Sections:
8-3-1 MEDICAL MARIJUANA
8-3-1: MEDICAL MARIJUANA
(A) Findings and Legislative Intent.
The City Council makes the following legislative findings:
(1) The City Council finds and determines that the Colorado Medical
Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101, et seq., clarifies Colorado law
regarding the scope and extent of Amendment 20 to the Colorado
Constitution.
(2) The City Council finds and determines that the Colorado Medical
Marijuana Code specifically authorizes in part that the governing body
of a municipality may "vote to prohibit the operation of medical
marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical
marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses."
(3) The City Council finds and determines that the Colorado Medical
Marijuana Code further specifically authorizes a municipality in part "to
prohibit the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises
cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturers' licenses . . . based on local government zoning, health,
safety, and public welfare laws for the distribution of medical
marijuana."
(4) The City Council finds and determines after careful consideration of the
provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article XVIII,
Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, and after evaluating, inter alia,
the potential secondary impacts associated with the retail sale,
distribution, cultivation and dispensing of medical marijuana through
medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and
medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses, that such
land uses have an adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of the
City and the inhabitants thereof.
(5) The City Council therefore finds and determines that as a matter of the
City's local land use and zoning authority, and consistent with the
authorization provided by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, that no
suitable location exists within the corporate limits of the City of Montrose
for the cultivation, manufacture, and sale of medical marijuana by the
operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation
operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers'
licenses.
(6) The City Council recognizes and affirms the protections afforded by Article
XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, and desires to affirm the
ability of patients and primary caregivers to otherwise be afforded the
protections of Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution and
C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106, as the same may be amended from time to time.
(B) Authority.
The City Council hereby finds, determines and declares that it has the
power and authority to adopt this Ordinance pursuant to:
(1) The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 12-43.3-
101, et seq.,
(2) The Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Ordinance
20 of title 29, C.R.S.;
(3) Part 3 of Ordinance 23 of Title 31, C.R.S. (concerning municipal
zoning powers);
(4) Section 31-15-103, C.R.S. (concerning municipal police powers);
(5) Section 31-15-401, C.R.S. (concerning municipal police
powers);
(6) Section 31-15-501, C.R.S. (concerning municipal authority to
regulate businesses).
(C) Definitions.
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
(1) Medical marijuana means marijuana that is grown and sold for a
purpose authorized by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado
Constitution.
(2) Medical marijuana center means a person authorized to be licensed
to operate a business as described in the Colorado Medical
Marijuana Code that sells medical marijuana to registered patients or
primary caregivers as defined in Section 14 of Article XVIII of the
Colorado Constitution, but is not a primary caregiver, and which a
municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law.
(3) Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer means a person
licensed pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code to operate a
business known as a Medical Marijuana-Infused Products
Manufacturing License, and which a municipality is authorized to
prohibit as a matter of law.
(4) Optional premises cultivation operation means a person licensed
pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code to operate a business
known as an optional premises grow facility in order to grow and
cultivate marijuana for a purpose authorized by Section 14 of Article
XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, and which a municipality is
authorized to prohibit as a matter of law.
(5) Person means a natural person, partnership, association, company,
corporation, limited liability company, or organization, or a manager,
agent, owner, director, servant, officer, or employee thereof.
(6) Patient has the meaning provided in Section 14(1)(c) of Article XVIII of
the Colorado Constitution.
(7) Primary caregiver has the meaning provided in Section 14(1)(f) of
Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution.
(D) Medical Marijuana Centers, Optional Premises Cultivation operations, and
Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturers' Licenses Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated, or permit to
be operated a medical marijuana center, optional premises cultivation
operation, or facility for which a medical marijuana-infused products
manufacturers' license could otherwise be obtained within the City, and all
such uses are hereby prohibited in any location within the City, or within
any area hereinafter annexed to the City.
(E) Patients and Primary Caregivers.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prohibit, regulate or otherwise
impair the use of medical marijuana by patients as defined by the Colorado
Constitution, or the provision of medical marijuana by a primary caregiver to a
patient in accordance with the Colorado Constitution, and consistent with C.R.S.
§ 25-1.5-106, and rules promulgated thereunder, as the same statute and rules
may be amended from time to time.
(F) Penalty.
A violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punishable as
follows:
(1) By a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00), or
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one (1) year, or by
both such fine and imprisonment;
(2) Each and every day a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance is
committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate offense;
(3) The City is specifically authorized to seek an injunction, abatement,
restitution or any other remedy necessary to prevent, enjoin, abate,
or remove the violation; and
(4) Continuing violations of this Ordinance are declared to be a nuisance
and the City is authorized to seek to abate such nuisance under Title
VI, Chapter 4 of the Official Municipal Code of the City of
Montrose.
(5) Any remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
law or in equity. (A) "Public Place" shall mean any enclosed, indoor
area used by the general public including, but not limited to,
government buildings, schools, airports, restaurants, hotels, bed &
breakfast inns, mercantile establishments, theaters, bank lobbies,
recreational facilities such as bowling alleys and bingo parlors,
hospitals, nursing homes, health care institutions, libraries,
auditoriums, arenas, public meeting rooms, public waiting rooms,
public conveyances, elevators and restrooms. "Public Place" shall
not include private residences or private places of employment
which are not regularly used by the general public, such as private
offices.
TITLE IX
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Construction and/or Repair of Sidewalks
2 Curb to Curb Width of Streets
3 Trees, Shrubs and Bushes
4 Removal of Snow and/or Ice
5 Cemetery Regulations
6 Weeds (Rep. By Ord. 1449, 5-14-92)
7 Street Excavation
8 Private Use of Public Property
9 Cable Television System Permits
10 Parks
Chapter 9-1
CONSTRUCTION AND/OR REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS
Sections:
9-1-1 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE
9-1-2 COUNCIL MAY ORDER CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR
9-1-3 COPY OF ORDER TO BE SERVED
9-1-4 NEGLECT OR REFUSAL ON PART OF OWNER
9-1-5 CIVIL LIABLITY
9-1-6 SPECIFICATIONS
9-1-7 PARKING AREAS
9-1-8 LOCATION OF SIDEWALKS
9-1-9 NUISANCE
9-1-10 COOPERATIVE REPAIRS
9-1-11 VIOLATION UNLAWFUL
9-1-1: SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
(A) The intent of this Section, inclusive of its subsections, is to foster and
regulate the maintenance, repair, placement, and replacement of existing
sidewalks.
(1) This Section, inclusive of its subsections, shall not apply when the
subdivision or site development chapters of the Official Code of the
City of Montrose are applicable.
(B) The owner, tenant or party in actual possession of property abutting any
City sidewalk shall be jointly and severally responsible to maintain, repair
and replace the abutting sidewalk to keep it in good repair, safe condition
and consistent with City standards and specifications for sidewalks. The
owner, tenant or party in actual possession of property abutting any City
sidewalk shall also be jointly and severally responsible to remove all
accumulations of snow and ice from and to correct any other dangerous
conditions upon or with respect to City sidewalks abutting their property.
Said parties shall further keep alleys and gutters adjoining such property
clean, in good repair and in safe condition.
(C) In the event the owner, tenant or party in actual possession of abutting
property shall fail to remove snow and ice, or correct any dangerous
condition upon any abutting City sidewalk, the City may declare a nuisance
and abate said nuisance in accordance with law.
9-1-2: COUNCIL MAY ORDER CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR
Whenever the City Council shall deem it necessary, it may by resolution order the
construction or repair of a sidewalk along any street or avenue, or any portion of same,
within the City. The order for the construction or repair of any sidewalk shall specify the
kinds and dimensions of material to be used and shall describe the lot or lots along which
said sidewalk is to be constructed or repaired and shall direct the owner of each such lot
so described to make said improvement, in case of new construction within thirty (30)
days, and in case of repair within five (5) days, from the service of a written copy of such
order. Whenever the City Council may deem it necessary that a sidewalk, curb or gutter,
or any portion thereof, be constructed, rebuilt or repaired, it may, by resolution passed
and adopted by a majority vote of the members, declare the necessity and order the
construction, rebuilding or repair of the sidewalk, curb or gutter within thirty (30) days
after notice is served upon the owner of the premises in the manner as herein specified.
(Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
9-1-3: COPY OF ORDER TO BE SERVED
A notice, shall be in writing, signed by the City Clerk, and shall contain a copy of the
resolution ordering such improvement and a description of the premises, lot(s) or
parcel(s) of ground affected, and the name of the owner. The notice shall be served by
the Chief of Police, or its designee, upon the owner(s) or his agent in the same manner as
summons are personally served under the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. In case
personal service cannot be obtained within the City, as herein directed, service may be
obtained by publication for at least once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a public
newspaper of general circulation published in the City. Service shall be complete five (5)
days after the date of the last publication. It is hereby made the duty of the City Clerk to
publish the notice and in case of such publication, the City Clerk shall also deposit a copy
of the notice in the post office addressed to the last known address of the owner named in
the notice. (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
9-1-4: NEGLECT OR REFUSAL ON PART OF OWNER
(Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
(A) If the owner of any lot described in any order made pursuant to Section 9-1-
2, herein, shall neglect or refuse to make the improvements so ordered and
within the time herein provided, and in the manner prescribed by the City,
the City may construct or repair the same, the work to be done in
accordance with the specifications set forth by the city for such work. Upon
the completion of the work, the City Council shall proceed to determine
and assess the amount properly chargeable against the delinquent owner
and against his lot or parcel of land on account of the construction,
rebuilding or repair of the sidewalk, curb, or gutter. The City Manager, as
soon as may be after such assessment, shall provide to the owner(s) of said
lot or lots a notice of the assessment, which notice shall contain a
description of the abutting lot or parcel of land, the name of the owner
thereof, the amount of the assessment and shall designate a time and place
at which the owner may be heard by the council as to the justness and
correctness of the amount so assessed. Or, in case said owner(s) cannot be
conveniently found, then such statement shall be published for one (1) issue
in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City, which
publication shall be a full and sufficient presentation of such assessment.
(B) The costs the City may recover for work caused to be done by the City
under this Chapter shall include all costs of construction, replacement,
maintenance and repair, including costs attributable to the use of City
equipment and personnel, any out-of-pocket costs the City incurs,
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City related to the work or the
collection of the assessment, and any other costs of collecting assessments
or amounts due.
(C) It shall be the duty of the owner(s) to pay the assessment, or to pay the
assessment as modified, as the case may be, within thirty (30) days from
date of presentation, or date of publication, and in case of the failure to do
so, the owner(s) shall be liable personally for the amount of the assessment,
and the same shall become a lien upon the abutting lot(s) or parcel(s) of
land from the time of the assessment, and the City shall have all the
remedies for the collection thereof provided by the statutes of this state,
including the right to certify the assessment to the proper officers of
Montrose County for the purpose of having the same placed upon the tax
list and collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, and
including the right of sale of property for taxes and the redemption of the
same. Prior thereto, the City shall notify the owner(s) of record of the
property and allow an informal hearing, upon said owner’s request, with the
City Manager concerning any amount proposed to be certified to the
County for collection. The City may also authorize collection by suit in a
court of competent jurisdiction as for money expended as authorized by this
Chapter for the construction, repair, or maintenance of sidewalks.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify the assessment to the County
Treasurer or to the officer having the custody of the tax list at the time such
certification is made, to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and
collected as provided by law. The amount of any assessment may be paid
to the City at any time before the tax list is placed in the hands of the
County Treasurer, but thereafter only to the County Treasurer.
9-1-5: CIVIL LIABLITY (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
There is hereby created a “right of action” against the owners of property abutting City
sidewalks on account of their failure to remove snow, ice, debris or obstructions from
abutting sidewalks, or to maintain the abutting sidewalks in a safe condition, or to correct
any dangerous condition of such abutting sidewalks. The owners of the abutting property
shall be civilly liable to anyone injured as a result of the violation of any provisions of
this Chapter, and shall be civilly liable to hold harmless, defend and indemnify the City,
its officers and employees, on account of any claim made or adjudged against the City, its
officers or employees on account of said property owners’ failure to comply with the
provisions of this Chapter.
9-1-6: SPECIFICATIONS (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
(A) All City sidewalks on City property or easements shall be designed in
accordance with standards and specifications approved by the City, and
constructed of concrete according to specifications as shall be required by
the City. Sidewalks shall be located and sized in accordance with City
requirements and standards.
(B) The construction, rebuilding or repair of sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall be
covered by a two (2) year Construction Warranty. The contractor, or other
person causing such construction, repair or replacement to occur shall
warrant the improvements against defects or failures in workmanship or
materials for a period of two (2) calendar years from the date of
completion, and said person shall remain responsible to correct all defects
or failures that appear in any such public improvements during the
Construction Warranty period.
(1) Inspection of any improvement(s) does not constitute a waiver by
the City of any right(s) or remedies that it may have on account of
any defect in or failure of the improvements that are detected. The
Construction Warranty shall continue until the Letter of
Infrastructure Completion and Acceptance is provided in writing to
the subdivider.
9-1-7: PARKING AREAS (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
All parking areas in streets and avenues shall be located and constructed under the
supervision of the City Manager or its designee, and according to City specifications and
standards.
9-1-8: LOCATION OF SIDEWALKS
Public sidewalks shall be located as follows:
(A) Where the City Subdivision Regulations are applicable, the location shall
be determined in accordance with those Regulations.
(Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
(B) Where the Subdivision Regulations are not applicable, the location of
sidewalks shall be determined as follows:
(1) Sidewalks shall normally be aligned with other sidewalks existing on
the same side of a block.
(2) If there are no other existing sidewalks located on the same side of
the block, or if the subject property is located in an area where the
sidewalks were previously detached from the edge of the roadway,
the sidewalk shall be installed four (4) feet from the curb line, or
edge of the roadway, whichever distance is greater. If because of
physical conditions it is impracticable to locate the sidewalk as set
forth above, the City Manager shall specify the location.
(3) As a condition of allowing any sidewalk to be constructed adjacent
to the curb line, the City Manager may require the adjacent property
owners to pay the cost of the installation of the curb if none exists, or
the cost of the replacement or repair of an existing curb if necessary
for the proper construction of the sidewalk as determined by the City
Manager.
(4) As a condition of allowing a sidewalk to be constructed on that
portion of a block between an alley and a street, the City Manager
shall require that the sidewalk be extended across the alleyway to
connect with existing sidewalk adjacent to the other side of the alley
if the proposed sidewalk does not align with the existing sidewalk.
(5) The City may require the removal or relocation of any sidewalk or
any landscaping or improvements located within the public right-ofway
upon thirty (30) days notice to the adjacent property owner.
(Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
(C) It shall be unlawful to construct a sidewalk in any location unless the
location is determined in accordance with this Section. (Ord. 893, 7-1-76)
9-1-9: NUISANCE (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
The failure to maintain and construct sidewalks in accordance with the requirements of
this Chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be abated by the City in
accordance with law.
9-1-10: COOPERATIVE REPAIRS (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9-1-1 through 9-1-9, should the City Council
determine during or through the budgetary process that it has sufficient funds available to
effect needed repairs or replacement of existing curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, the City
Council may order such repairs by appropriating funds in the annual municipal budget.
Such determination shall be made according to the availability of funds and the condition
and priorities of the defects, which shall be set by the City Council.
Any such expenditure shall only be made on a cooperative basis with the abutting
landowner contributing a proportionate share in either cash or material.
9-1-11: VIOLATION UNLAWFUL (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter. Any
person convicted of such a violation may be punished in accordance with Section 1-2-3
of the Official Municipal Code of the City of Montrose.
Chapter 9-2
CURB TO CURB WIDTH OF STREETS
Sections:
9-2-1 Designation of Width
Chapter 9-2
CURB TO CURB WIDTH OF STREETS
Sections:
9-2-1 Designation of Width
9-2-1: DESIGNATION OF WIDTH
The City Manager is hereby authorized, with the approval of the City Council, to
designate the curb-to-curb width of any street in the City and after such designation
entered upon the minutes of the City Council, such designation shall constitute the width
of such streets for vehicular travel and any curbing constructed thereon shall be in
accordance with such designation, until and unless otherwise designated under the
provisions hereof. (Ord. No. 244 5-1-1941)
Chapter 9-3
TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES
Sections:
9-3-1 CARE OF TREES ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY
9-3-2 TREE TRIMMER LICENSES
9-3-3 CITY TREE CARE SPECIFICATIONS
9-3-4 NUISANCES CREATED BY TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES
9-3-5 TREE BOARD
Chapter 9-3
TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES
Sections:
9-3-1 CARE OF TREES ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY
9-3-2 TREE TRIMMER LICENSES
9-3-3 CITY TREE CARE SPECIFICATIONS
9-3-4 NUISANCES CREATED BY TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES
9-3-5 TREE BOARD
9-3-1: CARE OF TREES ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY
(A) It shall be unlawful to remove any tree on City-owned property unless the
City has approved of the proposed removal.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a public utility, the owner or
party in lawful possession of abutting property, a licensed tree trimmer, or
City employees or agents to remove, trim or treat City-owned trees.
(C) All trimming, treatment or removal of City-owned trees shall be done in
compliance with the City's tree care specifications.
(D) The City reserves the right to plant, prune, maintain, remove, treat or trim
all trees, bushes or shrubs and other plantings located upon all City-owned
property, including street rights of way. However, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner of property abutting trees located on street
rights of way to maintain the trees so that they do not become a nuisance as
defined in Section 9-3-4.
9-3-2: TREE TRIMMER LICENSES
(A) It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of tree trimming or treatment
of trees, shrubs or bushes on City-owned property without a license issued
pursuant to this Section.
(B) Licenses shall be issued by the City following submission of an application
on forms provided by the City and appropriate fee paid to the City as set by
Resolution and referred to in the City Regulations Manual and review by all
agents or employees of the licensee who will remove, trim or treat trees, of
the City's tree care specifications and ordinances. No person not listed on a
license may trim, treat or remove City-owned trees.
(Ord. 1974, 08-07-2003)
(C) Any license issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended for a violation
of this Chapter, of the City's tree care specifications, or of other applicable
City ordinances and regulations following reasonable notice and hearing by
the City Council.
(D) No license may be reissued to any applicant for two (2) years after
revocation of his license.
9-3-3: CITY TREE CARE SPECIFICATIONS
(A) The City Manager is hereby directed to adopt tree care specifications and
any other regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this
Chapter.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to top any City-owned tree by severe
cutting back of the limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter
within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy
and disfigure the tree, unless the City specifically authorizes such topping
due to special circumstances such as storm damage or obstruction of utility
lines which make normal trimming impractical.
9-3-4: NUISANCES CREATED BY TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES
(A) The following are hereby declared to be a nuisance:
(1) Any tree, shrub, or bush upon public or private property which
obstructs the proper view of traffic control devices or signs or
unreasonably obstructs the view from vehicles or by pedestrians of
traffic at intersections, or which obstructs vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
(2) Any tree, shrub or bush upon public or private property with dead,
diseased or decaying limbs which creates a safety hazard to persons
or property.
(3) Any dead, diseased or other shrub, bush or tree upon public or
private property which harbors insects or is diseased, which could
cause the infestation or infection of other trees or plantings within
the City.
(B) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or party in lawful possession of
any tree, shrub, or bush, or the owner or party in lawful possession of
property abutting trees, shrubs or bushes in the street rights of way, which
are a nuisance, to remove, trim or treat such tree, shrub or bush to eliminate
the nuisance. If such person fails to appropriately care for such tree, bush
or shrub, the City may abate the nuisance caused by the tree, bush or shrub
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title VI of the Official
Code of the City.
9-3-5: TREE BOARD
The City Council or its designee shall serve as the City's Tree Board.
(Ord. 2055, 4-21-2005)
Chapter 9-4
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE
Sections:
9-4-1 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE
9-4-2 NUISANCE DECLARED
9-4-3 VIOLATION UNLAWFUL
9-4-1: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE
Generally. The owner(s), occupant(s), or agent(s) of the owner of any building, property,
or vacant lot in the city are jointly and severally responsible to maintain the sidewalks,
parking area, and curbs, (or the area from the property line to the gutter or edge of the
public roadway) adjoining the building, property, or vacant lot in a clean condition and
required to remove snow and ice from adjoining sidewalks within a reasonable time after
every snowfall in order to give safe passage to pedestrians.
The obligation to remove snow and ice from the adjoining sidewalk imposed by this
Section shall not extend to the removal of snow and ice deposited upon that property
lying parallel to the sidewalk or the curb of the adjacent roadway, but not physically on
the sidewalk, as a result of snow removal from the adjacent roadways by the City.
However, the owner, occupant, or agent of the owner of any building or property, or
vacant lot, is required to remove snow deposited upon a sidewalk or driveway or parking
area by snow removal operations of the City or the State of Colorado. (Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
9-4-2: NUISANCE DECLARED
Any violation of this Chapter, which continues after the giving of twenty-four (24) hours’
written notice, is declared to be a public nuisance which may be the subject of an
abatement pursuant to Chapter 6-4 of the Official Municipal Code for the City of
Montrose. For purposes of this section, written notice will be deemed sufficient when
personally delivered to the owner, occupant or agent of the owner. If the owner,
occupant, or agent of the owner is not physically present upon the property when delivery
is made, it shall be sufficient to post such written notice in a conspicuous place upon the
property. The municipality shall have the further right to remove such snow and/or ice
and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the sidewalk. Such assessment
to be certified to the County Assessor or other proper County Official having charge of
the making of the assessment roll and such charge shall be placed on the assessment roll
and collected in the same manner as other Municipal taxes are collected.
(Ord. 2178, 01-17-2008)
9-4-3: VIOLATION UNLAWFUL
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter. Any
person convicted of such a violation may be punished in accordance with Section 1-2-3
of the Official Municipal Code of the City of Montrose.
Chapter 9-5
CEMETARY REGULATIONS
Sections:
9-5-1 ADMINISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE
9-5-2 PERPETUAL CARE
9-5-3 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 9-5
CEMETARY REGULATIONS
Sections:
9-5-1 ADMINISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE
9-5-2 PERPETUAL CARE
9-5-3 ENFORCEMENT
9-5-1: ADMINISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE
The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration and maintenance of Cedar
Cemetery, and shall further be responsible for the promulgation of regulations, and any
amendments thereto, concerning the use of the cemetery, fees and charges, and other
matters.
9-5-2: PERPETUAL CARE
(A) Forty percent (40%) of the proceeds from the sale of cemetery lots shall be
placed in a Perpetual Care Trust Fund, which may be invested in
accordance with law. The principal of the Perpetual Care Trust Fund shall
be kept intact. Income from the principal shall be used in the care and
maintenance of the cemetery. The City shall have no responsibility to
maintain individual monuments and markers.
(B) Sixty percent (60%) of the proceeds from the sale of cemetery lots may be
used for the operation and maintenance of the cemetery.
9-5-3: ENFORCEMENT
The City may enforce all rules and regulations adopted for administration and
maintenance of the cemetery in any lawful manner. (Ord. 1075. 4-17-80)
Chapter 9-7
STREET EXCAVATION
Sections:
9-7-1 PURPOSE
9-7-2 OBJECTIVES
9-7-3 DEFINITIONS
9-7-4 POLICE POWERS
9-7-5 PERMIT REQUIRED
9-7-6 PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT CONTENTS
9-7-7 PERMIT AND RENTAL FEES
9-7-8 INSURANCE
9-7-9 PERFORMANCE SECURITY
9-7-10 PURPOSE OF PERFORMANCE SECURITY
9-7-11 PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE
9-7-12 TIME OF COMPLETION
9-7-13 TRAFFIC CONTROL
9-7-14 MINIMIZING THE IMPACTS OF WORK IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
9-7-15 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
9-7-16 CONSTRUCTION AND RESTORATION STANDARDS FOR NEWLY
CONSTRUCTED OR OVERLAYED STREETS
9-7-17 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES
9-7-18 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
9-7-19 REVOCATION OF PERMITS
9-7-20 UNDERGROUNDING REQUIRED
9-7-21 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 9-7
STREET EXCAVATION
Sections:
9-7-1 PURPOSE
9-7-2 OBJECTIVES
9-7-3 DEFINITIONS
9-7-4 POLICE POWERS
9-7-5 PERMIT REQUIRED
9-7-6 PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT CONTENTS
9-7-7 PERMIT AND RENTAL FEES
9-7-8 INSURANCE
9-7-9 PERFORMANCE SECURITY
9-7-10 PURPOSE OF PERFORMANCE SECURITY
9-7-11 PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE
9-7-12 TIME OF COMPLETION
9-7-13 TRAFFIC CONTROL
9-7-14 MINIMIZING THE IMPACTS OF WORK IN THE RIGHTS-OFWAY
9-7-15 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
9-7-16 CONSTRUCTION AND RESTORATION STANDARDS FOR
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED OR OVERLAYED STREETS
9-7-17 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES
9-7-18 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
9-7-19 REVOCATION OF PERMITS
9-7-20 UNDERGROUNDING REQUIRED
9-7-21 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
9-7-1: PURPOSE
This Section provides principles, procedures and associated funding for the placement of
structures and infrastructure, construction, excavation, encroachments and work activities
within or upon any public right-of-way, and is intended to protect the integrity of the
street system. To achieve these purposes, it is necessary to require permits for temporary
or continuing uses of the public rights-of-way, to establish permit procedures and to fix
and collect fees and charges.
9-7-2: OBJECTIVES
Public and private uses of public rights-of-way for location of equipment employed in the
provision of public services should, in the interests of the general welfare, be
accommodated; however, the City must insure that the primary purpose of the right-ofway,
passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, is maintained to the greatest extent
possible. In addition, the value of other public and private installations, roadways,
facilities and properties should be protected, competing uses must be reconciled, and the
public safety preserved. The use of right-of-way corridors by continuing users is
secondary to these public objectives, and the movement of traffic. This Section is
intended to strike a balance between the public need for efficient, safe transportation
routes and the use of rights-of-way for location of equipment by public and private
entities. It thus has several objectives:
(A) To insure that the public safety is maintained and that public inconvenience
is minimized.
(B) To protect the City’ s infrastructure investment by establishing repair
standards for the pavement, facilities, and property in the public rights-ofway,
when work is accomplished.
(C) To facilitate work within the right-of-way through the standardization of
regulations and hardware placements.
(D) To maintain an efficient permit process.
(E) To conserve and fairly apportion the limited physical capacity of the public
rights-of-way held in public trust by the City.
(F) To assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
9-7-3: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Section, the following words shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT: Any person or entity making application to the City for an
excavation permit.
CITY: The City of Montrose, Colorado, and any authorized
officer or employee.
EXCAVATION
WORK or
WORK:
Any labor performed on, or any use or storage of
equipment or materials, including but not limited to,
construction of streets and all related appurtenances,
fixtures, improvements, sidewalks, driveway openings,
bus shelters, bus loading pads, street lights, and traffic
signal devices. It shall also mean construction,
maintenance, and repair of all underground structures
such as pipes, conduit, ducts, tunnels, manholes, vaults,
buried cable, wire, or any other similar structure located
below surface, and installation of overhead poles used for
any purpose.
PERMITTEE: Any person or entity who has been granted and has in full
force and effect an excavation permit issued hereunder.
PUBLIC RIGHTOF-
WAY, RIGHTOF-
WAY, or
PUBLIC WAY:
Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, utility
easement, owned or controlled by the City.
9-7-4: POLICE POWERS
The permittee’s rights hereunder are subject to the police powers of the City, which
include the power to adopt and enforce ordinances, including amendments to this Section,
necessary to the safety, health, and welfare of the public. The permittee shall comply
with all applicable laws and ordinances enacted, or hereafter enacted, by the City or any
other legally constituted government unit having lawful jurisdiction over the subject
matter hereof. The City reserves the right to exercise its police powers, notwithstanding
anything in this Section, any permit issued hereunder, any franchise, or any CATV or
other permit to the contrary. Any conflict between the provisions of this Section, any
franchise or any permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the City’ s
police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter.
9-7-5: PERMIT REQUIRED
(A) No person except the City, or a person exempted by contract with the City,
shall undertake or permit to be undertaken any construction, excavation, or
work in the public right-of-way, or, operate and maintain any utility or
communication facilities except those lawfully installed prior to September
1, 2000 pursuant to a franchise or other permit, without first obtaining a
permit from the City as set forth in this Section. The City may waive this
permit requirement in cases involving minor or emergency repair.
(B) The requirement for excavation permit as set forth herein shall be
applicable to cable television service and infrastructure as permitted in
accordance with Chapter 9-9.
(C) No permittee shall perform construction, excavation, or work in an area
larger, or at a location different, than that specified in the permit or permit
application. But if, or when construction, excavation, or work is
commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform
construction, excavation, or work in a larger or different area than
originally requested under the application, the permittee shall notify the
City immediately and shall promptly file a supplementary application for
the additional construction, excavation, or work.
(D) Permits shall not be transferable or assignable and work shall not be
performed in any place other than that specified in the permit. The
applicant may subcontract the work to be performed under a permit
provided that the holder of the permit shall be and remain responsible for
the performance of the work under the permit and all insurance and
financial security as required.
(E) The physical construction of public improvements in new developments is
the responsibility of the developer of the land. Ownership of those
improvements remains with the developer of the land until acceptance by
the City. Any person performing work on those improvements which are
within a public way or on an area proposed for dedication as a public rightof-
way or utility easement, but prior to acceptance by the City, shall obtain
a permit from the City, and permission from the owner of the
improvements and the proposed public way. The permittee shall be
financially responsible to the owner of the improvements to carry out all
remedial work necessary to receive acceptance by the City of those
improvements. This financial obligation shall apply only to the work in the
public way done by the permittee.
(F) Any work or use of other City property, other than rights of way, may be
allowed by the City only if it is appropriate in the City’ s discretion or
authorized by other City ordinances or regulations. Such use may be
subjected to the provisions of this Section in addition to any other terms
and conditions required by the City.
(G) The installation of utility and communications facilities in rights of way
controlled by the Colorado Department of Transportation shall nonetheless
require the City’ s approval, and compliance with applicable City
ordinances.
9-7-6: PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT CONTENTS
(A) An applicant for a permit to allow construction, excavation, or work in the
public right-of-way under this section shall:
(1) File a written application on forms furnished by the City which will
include information necessary or convenient for the administration
and enforcement of this Section, including but not limited to the
following: the date of application; the name and address of the
applicant; the name and address of the developer, contractor or
subcontractor who will perform work in the public right-of-way; the
exact location of the proposed construction, excavation or work
activity; the type of existing public infrastructure (street, pavement,
curb and gutter, sidewalks or utilities) impacted by the construction,
excavation or work; the purpose of the proposed construction,
excavation or work; the dates for beginning and ending the proposed
construction, excavation, or work; and type of work proposed.
(2) Include evidence that the applicant or its contractor is not delinquent
in payments due the City on prior work.
(3) Attach copies of all permits or licenses (including required
insurance, deposits, bonds, and warranties) required to do the
proposed work, and to work in the public rights-of-way, if licenses
or permits are required under the laws of the United States, the State
of Colorado, or the ordinances or regulations of the City.
(4) Provide a satisfactory plan of work showing protection of the subject
property and adjacent properties when the City determines such
protection is necessary.
(5) Provide a satisfactory plan for the protection of site development
inclusive of landscaping, trees and vegetation.
(6) Include evidence that all orders issued by the City to the applicant,
requiring the applicant to correct deficiencies under previous permits
issue under this Section, have been made.
(7) Include with the application engineering construction drawings or
site plans for the proposed construction, excavation or work. When
more than 100 linear feet of right of way is affected, plans shall be
submitted both in writing and CAD format.
(8) Include with the application a satisfactory traffic control and erosion
protection plan for the proposed construction, excavation, or work.
(9) Pay any applicable fees prescribed by this Section.
(B) The permit shall be issued with terms and conditions as necessary and
appropriate to implement this Section and protect the public health, safety
and welfare, including provisions for insurance, indemnification, a hold
harmless and damage release for the City, warranty and repair periods,
requirements for as built plans in both written and CAD format if
construction deviates from the approved plans, and requirements to
reimburse the City for any costs it incurs as a result of relying on submitted
plans which turn out to be inaccurate.
(C) The City may utilize different permit forms for entities with a City
approved franchise, CATV permit, or comprehensive system permit for a
telecommunications or utility system maintained on a continuing basis, or
in other appropriate circumstances.
9-7-7: PERMIT AND RENTAL FEES
Before a permit is issued pursuant to this Section, the applicant shall pay to the City a
permit fee as set forth below, subject to a maximum fee of $1,000. Annual rental fees in
the same amount, as adjusted for any additional linear footage excavations, shall be paid
annually and due on each anniversary date of the permit issuance, or rental fee as
otherwise established by City Council by resolution as set forth in Section 3-1 of the City
of Montrose Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1999, 04-15-2004)
9-7-8: INSURANCE
(A) Whenever insurance is required of a licensee under this Section, such
licensee shall:
(1) At all times maintain worker’ s compensation insurance, public
liability insurance with minimum limits of one hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($150,000) for any one person and six hundred
thousand dollars ($600,000) for any one accident, and public
property damage insurance with a minimum limit of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) for any one accident.
(2) File with the City a certificate signed by a qualified agent of an
insurance company evidencing the existence of valid and effective
policies of worker’ s compensation and public liability and property
damage insurance naming the City and its officers and employees as
an additional insured on the liability policy at least to the limits
required by Subsection (1) above, the limits of each policy, the
policy number, the name of the insurer, the effective date and
expiration date of each policy, and a copy of an endorsement placed
on each policy requiring ten days’ notice by mail to the City before
the insurer may cancel the policy for any reason. Evidence of
insurance is not required from other government agencies or from a
homeowner performing the work.
9-7-9: PERFORMANCE SECURITY
(A) Each permittee, before being issued a permit, shall provide the City, at the
permittee’ s expense a performance security. This security shall be in the
form of cash or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form and amount
approved by the City.
(B) The security shall be in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the
City’ s estimate of the cost of restoration. The cost of restoration shall
include, without limitation, the removal of defective material, recompaction
of subgrade and base material and construction of surface improvements.
The irrevocable letter of credit shall run for a period of time of at least two
years beyond the anticipated acceptance date of the work identified in the
permit. Such security shall be extended if requested by the City, or, in the
event the projected acceptance date is not met, for two years beyond the
actual acceptance date.
(C) The City may waive security requirements to any owner of a single-family
residence desiring to repair their driveway or sidewalk, provided the owner
performs the work personally and upon satisfactory evidence to the City
that the applicant is competent to perform the work.
(D) In lieu of the performance security arrangement described above, the City
may accept from a telecommunications, utility or water company, or any
governmental agency, blanket security applicable to separate permits and
covering all of such person’ s facilities.
(E) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Section, any
contractor performing work pursuant to a contract directly with the City
shall adhere to the performance requirements set forth in the contract
documents.
9-7-10: PURPOSE OF PERFORMANCE SECURITY
(A) Any security provided hereunder may be used for the performance of work
necessary to repair the public right-of-way if the permittee fails to make the
necessary repairs or to complete the work under the permit, and to
reimburse the City for any costs it incurs as a result of any violations of this
Section or the permit.
(B) The permittee, by acceptance of the permit, agrees to perform the work in a
manner acceptable to the City, and further agrees to maintain upon demand
and to make all necessary repairs (as determined by the City) during a twoyear
period from acceptance of the work by the City. This obligation shall
include all repairs and actions needed as a result of:
(1) Defects in workmanship.
(2) Settling of fills or excavations.
(3) Any unauthorized deviations from the approved plans and
specifications.
(4) Failure to barricade.
(5) Failure to clean up during and after performance of the work.
(6) Any other violation of this Section, the Permit, or the ordinances of
the City.
(C) The two-year repair period shall run from the date of the City’ s acceptance
of the work. If repairs are required during the two-year repair period, those
repairs need only be warranted until the end of the initial two-year period
starting with the date of initial acceptance.
(D) At any time prior to completion of the two-year warranty period, the City
may notify the permittee of any needed repairs. Such repairs shall be
completed within twenty-four hours if the defects are determined by the
City to be an imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare.
Non-emergency repairs shall be completed within 30 days after notice.
9-7-11: PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE
A person who obtains a permit for construction, excavation, or work in the public rightof-
way shall maintain a safe work area, free of safety hazards or nuisance conditions.
The City may make any repair necessary to eliminate any hazards or nuisances or work
not performed as directed. Any such work performed by the City shall be completed and
billed to the permittee at overtime rates. The permittee shall pay all such charges within
30 days of the statement date. If the permittee fails to pay such charges within the
prescribed time period, the City may, in addition to taking other collection remedies, seek
reimbursement through the performance security. Furthermore, the permittee shall be
barred from performing any work in the public right-of-way, and under no circumstances
will the City issue any further permits of any kind to said permittee until all outstanding
charges have been paid in full.
9-7-12: TIME OF COMPLETION
All work covered by the permit shall be completed by the date stated on the application.
Permits shall be void if work has not commenced six months after issuance. Letters of
credit or cash deposited as a performance security for individual permits will be returned
after voiding of the permit, with administrative and any other City costs deducted.
9-7-13: TRAFFIC CONTROL
(A) When it is necessary to obstruct traffic, a detour plan shall be submitted to
the City prior to starting construction. No permit will be issued until the
plan is approved by the City. No permittee shall interrupt access to and
from private property, block emergency vehicles, block access to fire
hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valve, underground vaults, valve
housing structures, or any other vital equipment unless permission is
obtained in writing from the owner of that facility, equipment, or property.
If a street closing is desired, the applicant will request the assistance and
obtain the approval of the City. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to notify and coordinate all work in the public way with police,
fire, ambulance, and transit organizations, and affected property owners at
least 48 hours in advance.
(B) When necessary for public safety, the permittee shall employ flag persons
whose duties shall be to control traffic around or through the construction
site. The use of flag persons may be required by the City.
(C) Unless approved by the City, the permittee shall not impede rush hour
traffic on arterial or collector streets during the morning or evening rush
hours.
(D) Traffic control devices, as defined in Part VI of the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, must be used whenever it is necessary to close a
traffic lane or sidewalk. Traffic control devices are to be supplied by the
permittee. If used at night, they must be reflectorized and must be
illuminated or have barricade warning lights. Oil flares or kerosene
lanterns are not allowed as means of illumination.
(E) Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or any successor
publication thereto shall be used as a guide for all maintenance and
construction signing. The permittee shall illustrate on the permit the
warning and control devices proposed for use. At the direction of the City,
such warning and control devices shall be increased, decreased, or
modified.
9-7-14: MINIMIZING THE IMPACTS OF WORK IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
(A) Before any permittee begins excavation in any public way, the permittee
shall contact the Utility Notification Center of Colorado and make inquiries
of all ditch companies, utility companies, districts, municipal departments,
and all other agencies that might have facilities in the area of work to
determine possible conflicts. The permittee shall contact the Utility
Notification Center of Colorado and request field locations of all facilities
in the area at least 72 hours in advance. Field locations shall be marked
prior to commencing work. The permittee shall support and protect all
pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus, which may be affected by
the work from damage during construction or settlement of trenches
subsequent to construction.
(B) Each permittee shall conduct work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary
inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of
neighboring property. In the performance of the work, the permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce noise, dust, and unsightly debris. No
work shall be done between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. nor at any
time on Sunday, except with the written permission of the City, or in case
of an emergency.
(C) Each permittee shall maintain the work site so that trash and construction
materials are contained; trash is removed from a construction site often
enough so that it does not become a health or safety hazard; and trash
dumpsters and storage or construction trailers are not placed within the
right-of-way without specific approval of the City.
(D) Each permittee shall comply with the requirements to eliminate the tracking
of mud or debris upon any street or sidewalk. Equipment and trucks used
during construction, excavation, or work activity shall be cleaned of mud
and debris prior to leaving the work site.
(E) Each permittee shall protect trees, landscape, and landscape features as
required by the City. All protective measures shall be provided at the
expense of the permittee.
(F) Backhoe equipment outriggers shall be fitted with rubber pads whenever
outriggers are placed on any paved surface. Tracked vehicles with grousers
are not permitted on paved or improved surfaces unless specific precautions
are taken to protect the surface. The permittee will be responsible for any
damage caused to the surface by the operation of such equipment and shall
repair such surfaces. Failure to do so will result in the use of the applicant’s
performance security by the City to repair any damage, and possibly, the
requirement of additional warrantees.
(G) Each permittee shall protect from injury any adjoining property by
providing adequate support and taking other necessary measures. The
permittee shall, at his own expense, shore up and protect all buildings,
walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the work, and
shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property resulting
from failure to properly protect and carry out work in the public way.
(H) As the work progresses, all public rights-of-way and private property shall
be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess dirt, rock, and other debris.
All clean-up operations shall be done at the expense of the permittee.
(I) Each permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or survey hubs and
points found on the line or work unless approval is obtained from the City.
Any monuments, hubs, and points disturbed will be replaced by a Colorado
registered surveyor at the permittee’s expense.
(J) Each permittee shall make provisions for employee and construction
vehicle parking so that neighborhood parking adjacent to a work site is not
impacted.
(K) Each permittee shall maintain an adequate and safe unobstructed walkway
around a construction site or blocked sidewalk in conformance with City
building codes.
(L) Each permittee shall clear all snow and ice hazards from public sidewalks
at the work site by noon following a snowfall.
(M) The permittee shall provide adequate sanitary facilities.
9-7-15: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
The permittee shall be fully responsible for the cost and actual performance of all work in
the public way. The permittee shall do all work, including restoration and repair of
unpermitted disturbances, in conformance with any and all engineering regulations,
construction specifications, and design standards adopted by the City. These standards
shall apply to all work in the public way unless otherwise indicated by the permit.
9-7-16: CONSTRUCTION AND RESTORATION STANDARDS FOR
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED OR OVERLAYED STREETS
(A) No person shall excavate an area in the pavement of any public street or
alley for a period of three years from the completion of construction or
resurfacing except in compliance with the provisions of this subsection.
Any application for a permit to excavate in a public street or alley subject to
the requirements of this subsection shall contain the following information:
(1) A detailed and dimensional engineering plan that identifies and
accurately represents the City rights-of-way or property that will be
impacted by the proposed excavation. The information shall include
the street width or alley width including curb and gutter over the
total length of each City block that will be impacted by the proposed
excavation; the location, width, length, and depth of the proposed
excavation, and the total area of existing street or alley that will be
impacted by the proposed excavation.
(2) A written statement addressing the criteria for approval.
(B) No permit for excavation in the right-of-way of new streets shall be
approved unless the City finds that all of the criteria have been met:
(1) Boring or jacking under the pavement is not practical due to physical
characteristics of the street or alley or other utility conflicts.
(2) Alternative utility alignments that do not involve excavating the
street or alley found to be impractical.
(3) The proposed excavation cannot reasonably be delayed until after
the three-year deferment period has lapsed.
(4) Flowable fill is used to backfill the trench.
(C) Emergency maintenance operations shall be limited to circumstances
involving the preservation of life, property, or the restoration of customer
utility service. Any person commencing emergency operations shall submit
detailed engineering plans and remediation plans no later than five working
days after initiating the emergency maintenance operation.
(D) The streets shall be repaired so as not to reduce the useful life of the
pavement in accordance with design and construction standards adopted by
the City. If the total area of the proposed excavation exceeds fifteen
percent of the total area of pavement within a block or involves a trench in
excess of one hundred fifty feet in length, the applicant shall remedy the
damage caused to the pavement. Remediation will consist of a curb to curb
profile and overlay, a center line to curb profile and overlay, or a lane line
to curb profile and overly, whichever is necessary not to decrease the
average life expectancy of the street or alley surface.
9-7-17: LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES
(A) The location of the permittee’s facilities shall be subject to the prior
approval of the City, shall be located to maximize the potential use of the
right of way, minimize interference with the City’s use and facilities, and
conform to requirements of City standards and specifications.
(B) If at any time the City requests the permittee to relocate its facilities, in
order to allow the City to make any use of rights-of-way, or if at any time
it shall become necessary or convenient, because of a change in the grade
or by reason of the improving, repairing, constructing, or maintaining of
any street or rights-of-way, by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, by
reason of installation of any type of City utility facilities or other
improvement, or by reason of any program for the undergrounding of such
facilities, to move or change the permittee’s facilities within or adjacent to
streets or rights-of-way in any manner, either temporarily or permanently,
the City shall notify the permittee at least 90 days in advance, except in the
case of emergencies, of the City’s intention to perform or have such work
performed. The permittee shall thereupon, at its sole cost and expense,
accomplish the necessary relocation, removal or change within a reasonable
time from the date of the notification, but in no event later than three
working days prior to the date the City has notified the permittee that it
intends to commence its work or immediately in the case of emergencies.
Upon the permittee’s failure to accomplish such work, the City may
perform such work at the permittee’s expense and the permittee shall
reimburse the City within 30 days after receipt of a written invoice.
Following relocation, all affected property shall be restored to, at a
minimum, the condition which existed prior to construction by the
permittee at the permittee’s expense, and as-built plans shall be submitted
to the City.
(C) The City may require the relocation of facilities which are not installed in
the approved location or corridor, following the procedures set out in (B)
above.
9-7-18: EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Any person maintaining facilities in the public way may proceed with repairs upon
existing facilities without a permit when emergency circumstances demand that the work
be done immediately. Emergency work is defined to mean any work necessary to restore
water, sewer, gas, phone, electric, and cable facilities. Repairs on other facilities in the
public way may also be administratively classified as emergency by the City. The person
doing the work shall apply to the City for a permit on the first working day after such
work has commenced. All emergency work will require prior telephone notification to
the City Police Department and the appropriate fire protection agency.
9-7-19: REVOCATION OF PERMITS
(A) Any permit may be revoked or suspended by the City after notice to the
permittee for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
Section.
(2) Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the City or state
law relating to the work.
(3) Existence of any condition or performance of any act which the City
determines does constitute or cause a condition endangering life or
damage to property.
(B) Suspension or revocation by the City and a stop work order shall take effect
immediately upon notice to the person performing the work in the public
way, or to the permittee’ s last known address.
(C) A stop work order may be issued by the City to any person or persons
doing or causing any work to be done in the public way without a permit, or
in violation of any provision of this Section, or any other ordinance of the
City.
(D) Any suspension or revocation or stop work order may be appealed by the
permittee to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal within 10
days of the action.
9-7-20: UNDERGROUNDING REQUIRED
(A) All new electric or communication facilities involving the use of poles or
above ground wires are hereby prohibited within the City, including within
highway rights of way controlled by the Colorado Department of
Transportation, unless otherwise approved by the City. New
telecommunication lines and cables shall not be hung on existing power
poles but shall be placed underground, unless otherwise approved by the
City. All such facilities shall be constructed substantially underground
within the City, whether on public or private property. Underground
construction on City owned or controlled property and rights-of-way shall
require a permit pursuant to this Section. Permittees are encouraged, but not
required, to install conduit with space available for rental to other
permitees, or to rent available conduit space from the City or others rather
than construct new excavations. A permit under this section shall be
required whether existing conduit is used or not. (Ord. 1827, 01-18-2001)
(B) Existing overhead electric and communication facilities may be converted
to underground locations in the following manner:
(1) Pursuant to the procedures of CRS §29-8-101 et seq.
(2) When ordered by the City where the City is willing to pay and
assume the costs of conversion for the applicable utility.
(3) When ordered by the City in connection with incidental and episodic
conversions associated with public improvements, such as street
widening or sewer construction, at the cost of the public utility,
facility owner or cable operator.
(C) The provisions of this section shall be applicable and supersede any
inconsistent requirements in any existing franchise or permit as an exercise
of the City’ s police powers.
9-7-21: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(A) It shall be unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this section, or of a
permit issued hereunder. Any person convicted of such a violation may be
punished by a fine up to $1000, or jail sentence of up to one year, or by
both such fine and imprisonment; provided however, no person under the
age of 18 years shall be subject to imprisonment in excess of ten days,
except for contempt of court. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
(B) Continuing violations of this Section, or of any permit issued pursuant
hereto are hereby declared to be a nuisance, which may be abated in any
lawful manner.
(C) The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin any violation of this Section, or of any permit issued pursuant hereto.
(Ord. 1798, 09-21-2000)
Chapter 9-8
PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections:
9-8-1 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY FOR PRIVATE PURPOSES
9-8-2 OBSTRUCTION OF RIGHTS OF WAY
9-8-3 PERMITS
9-8-4 STREET EVENTS
9-8-1: USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY FOR PRIVATE PURPOSES
It shall be unlawful for any person to use public property or rights of way including, but
not limited to, that portion of any street right of way outside of the road surface, for
private purposes except as permitted by ordinance, regulation, franchise, public right,
lease, permit, or otherwise in accordance with law. (Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
9-8-2: OBSTRUCTION OF RIGHTS OF WAY
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any fence or other
improvement, to place anything upon, or to plant any hedge, shrubs, trees
or other vegetation upon any public property, including any part of a street
right of way outside the road surface, that would impede or obstruct normal
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or would create a traffic hazard by sight
barrier to or from motor vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians, or would
create any other safety hazard. (Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(B) If the limitations of Subsection (A) above are met along with any other
applicable requirements of City ordinances and regulations, the party in
lawful possession of property abutting those street rights of way which are
not being used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or other public use, may
construct fencing improvements and/or landscaping upon such portions of
the street rights of way. All fencing and landscaping improvements shall
be in accordance with City specifications and regulations, and maintained
accordingly. Areas between sidewalks and road surface shall not be fenced.
(Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(C) Any and all other improvements, or temporary use of street rights of way
for construction purposes, shall require issuance of an encroachment permit
by the City, which permit shall be revocable in nature.
(Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(D) No person using public street right of way or other property for any purpose
allowed under this Section shall acquire any vested right or interest in any
part of such public property by virtue of any such use or the installation and
maintenance of improvements or landscaping upon it, and shall, upon the
demand of the City, remove any improvements, landscaping, fencing, or
other property from the public property affected, at his or her own cost.
(Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(E) Any person using or maintaining public property as allowed by this Section
shall do so in a careful and prudent manner and shall be responsible for any
damages caused by their negligent acts or failure to act.
(Ord. 1772, 5-4-2000)
(F) No person shall remove or substantially alter any tree, shrub, lawn or
ground cover on City owned property, streets or rights of way unless
approved by the City by advance written notice. (Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(G) Newspaper and periodical stands shall be allowable on street rights of way
as long as they meet the safety provisions of Subsection (A) above, are not
located within ten feet of fire hydrants and intersection corners, are fastened
or chained in place, and are kept in good and orderly condition. The City
may remove any newspaper and periodical stands that do not comply with
these provisions. (Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(H) The provisions of this Section may be supplemented as necessary by
additional provisions as set forth in Chapter 3-5 of the City Regulations.
(Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
9-8-3: PERMITS
(A) The City Clerk shall have the authority to grant a special permit, subject to
review and approval by the City Manager, for the temporary use or
occupation of a street, alley or other public property for civic events,
parades, special sales, or other events of a public or quasi-public nature.
Any such permit shall be revocable in nature. (Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(B) If the limitations of Subsection (A) above are met along with other
applicable requirements of City ordinances and regulations, parties in
lawful possession of property in “B-1” Central Business District may utilize
that portion of sidewalk right of way closest to and adjoining their property
for display of merchandise or outside dining facilities as long as such usage
only occurs during business hours and does not impede with or obstruct
pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
9-8-4: STREET EVENTS
(A) The City Clerk shall have authority to close parts of streets or State
highways within the City, subject to review and approval by the City
Manager, for purposes of parades, athletic events or special events pursuant
to the requirements of this Section and other applicable City regulations.
(Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(B) An application for a permit to hold a parade, athletic event or special event
on a City street or State highway shall be submitted on a form provided by
the City which may require all information necessary or convenient for the
administration of this Section, and supplementing provisions as set forth in
Chapter 3-5 of the City Regulations. (Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(C) The City Clerk shall not approve any street closure if the City does not have
sufficient resources to properly manage the event in a manner consistent
with the preservation of the public peace, health and safety and to provide
for adequate traffic control, or if an adequate alternate route is not available
if applicable. (Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
(D) Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit by the City Clerk pursuant
to this Section, or seeking variance from any of the applicable provisions
herein or in supplementing regulations, may appeal to the City Council by
filing a written request within five (5) days of denial with the City.
(Ord. 1772, 05-04-2000)
Chapter 9-9
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM PERMITS
Sections:
9-9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-9-2 PERMIT REQUIRED
9-9-3 TERM OF PERMIT
9-9-4 APPLICATION FOR NEW CATV SYSTEM PERMIT
9-9-5 CONSTRUCTION BOND
9-9-6 RENEWAL OF EXISTING PERMIT
9-9-7 PERMIT REVOKED
9-9-8 ACQUISITION OF THE SYSTEM BY THE CITY OR REMOVAL
9-9-9 USE OF STREETS, ALLEYS AND EASEMENTS
9-9-10 RATES (Rep. by Ord. 1201, 9-15-83)
9-9-11 PERMIT FEE
9-9-12 INSURANCE AND LIABILITY
9-9-13 SERVICE AREA AND LINE EXTENSIONS
9-9-14 MINIMUM SERVICE AND OPERATION REQUIREMENTS
9-9-15 LOCAL ACCESS
9-9-16 FINANCIAL REPORTS AND ACCESS TO RECORDS
9-9-17 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS
9-9-18 NOTICES
9-9-19 FREE CONNECTIONS
9-9-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) For the purpose of this Chapter "City" shall mean the City of Montrose,
Colorado, the Montrose City Council, City Manager or any other officer,
employee, agent or body thereof authorized to act on behalf of the City for
purposes of the administration, enforcement or implementation of this
Chapter.
(B) "Company" as used in this Chapter shall mean any person or legal entity
granted a cable television system permit pursuant to this Chapter.
(C) It is the intent of the City Council, with the passage of this chapter and
subsequent amendments, to provide for and specify the means to attain the
best possible cable television service to the City of Montrose. Any permits
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include the City
Council’s findings that, because of the complex and rapidly changing
technology associated with the cable television industry, the public
convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing
certain regulatory powers which govern the provision of cable service.
(D) This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal and state laws. Changes in applicable federal and state laws may
result in corresponding amendments to City ordinances and regulations.
(E) This chapter shall apply to all permits granted or renewed after the effective
date of this chapter. It shall further apply, to the extent permitted by
applicable federal and state law, to all existing permits granted prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
(F) The Company’ s rights are subject to the police power of the City to adopt
and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of the
public. The company shall comply with all general laws and ordinances
enacted by the City pursuant to its police power.
(G) The Company shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance or any permit granted pursuant to this
Ordinance by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt
compliance.
(H) This chapter and any permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the State
of Colorado. (Ord. 1707, 6-17-99)
9-9-2: PERMIT REQUIRED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to use any City owned street, alley, right
of way, easement or other property owned by the City for purposes of the
operation of a cable television (CATV) system or the installation or
location of CATV lines, poles, cables or other facilities without a CATV
system permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter,
except as provided in Subsection F hereinbelow. (Ord 1740, 06-22-2000)
(B) Any CATV system permit issued hereunder shall be nonexclusive and other
CATV system permits may be issued by the City, in its sole discretion,
provided, however, that no permit or any component thereof shall be
granted on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than any
other permit granted hereunder. (Ord. 1707, 6-17-99)
(C) No CATV system permit shall be granted until the City Council determines
that:
(1) The applicant, its proposed system and operation are financially
viable.
(2) The applicant has the technical ability and necessary experience to
successfully operate a CATV system.
(3) The applicant and its principals are of good moral character.
(4) The applicant is proposing to design, construct and maintain its
system so as to have the capability to serve every dwelling unit
within the City limits, including areas annexed for the term of its
permit, subject to any line extension requirements and excavation
requirements by the City in accordance with the provisions herein.
(Ord. 1707, 6-17-99)
(5) All requirements of this Chapter and other applicable requirements
of law have been and will be complied with.
(6) The City Council shall consider the requirements of applicable law
and specific local considerations, including, but not limited to the
following:
(a) The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate
multiple coaxial cables and fiber optics, in addition to the
cables, conduits, and pipes of other utility systems, such as
electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage; and
(b) The disadvantages that may result from Cable System
competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on
residents’ properties, and the disruption arising from
numerous excavations of the rights-of-way. (Ord. 1707, 6-
17-99)
(D) Upon receipt of an application for a permit or renewal thereof, the City
Council may conduct such investigation and hold such hearings as it deems
necessary and proper to determine if the criteria of this Section have been
met. Reasonable notice of any hearings scheduled shall be given to the
applicant. (Ord. 1104, 1980)
(E) No CATV system permit may be assigned except an assignment occurring
as a result of a corporate merger or restructuring may be allowed with the
written consent of the City Council. Such consent shall be granted only
upon a showing satisfactory to the Council that the criteria of subsection 9-
9-2(C) will be met by the assignee. If the permit or the cable TV system is
transferred by bankruptcy, receivership, assignment for the benefit of
creditors or by operation of law, this permit shall terminate one hundred
twenty (120) days thereafter unless an extension is granted by the City
Council to allow time for application for a new license to be filed. (Ord.
1348, 10-1-87)
(F) Limited Permit: In the event the City annexes property served by a
Company which is not permitted by the City at the time of annexation, such
Company shall, within 60 days of the annexation, either obtain a Limited
Permit or a Permit in accordance with other provisions of this Chapter. For
the purposes of this Chapter, a Limited Permit allows a Company to
provide services with infrastructure existing at the time of annexation only
to customers existing at the time of annexation. A Limited Permit prohibits
the expansion of a Company's service area, the addition of customers, and
the expansion of a Company's infrastructure beyond those existing at the
time of annexation. Upon written request by the City, a Company holding
a Limited Permit shall identify its customers existing at the time of
annexation and shall furnish updated copies of strand and trench mapping
of all cable lines existing at the time of annexation, and when available,
provide the same data in digital format acceptable to the City. The term of a
Limited Permit is one (1) year and is subject to the other provisions of this
Chapter to the extent that such provisions are applicable and are not in
conflict. (Ord 1740, 06-22-2000)
9-9-3: TERM OF PERMIT
Any permit granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years,
unless terminated prior to ten (10) years in accordance with other provisions as contained
herein and in the Permit. The initial term shall commence upon City Council approval of
the permit. (Ord 1740, 06-22-2000)
9-9-4: APPLICATION FOR NEW CATV SYSTEM PERMIT
(A) Applications for a new permit shall be made on forms provided by the City.
The burden shall be on the applicant to prove that it meets the criteria for
issuance of the permit as specified in Section 9-9-2 above. The applicant
may submit such information as it desires to meet its burden, but as a
minimum, the application form shall be fully completed and accompanied
by the following:
(1) An application fee as set by Resolution and referred to in the City
Regulations Manual. (Ord. 1944, 04/10/2003)
(2) Complete financial data of the applicant, including two (2) years
audited financial statements and income tax returns.
(3) A complete description of the applicant's organizational structure,
including the names and addresses of the applicant's officers,
principal shareholders or owners and other principals of the
applicant. The same information with respect to any parent
subsidiaries or interlocking companies or entities shall be provided.
(4) The general description of all aspects of the proposed operation,
including services to be provided, programming, office hours and
location, etc.
(5) The proposed rates along with a guarantee that these rates will not be
increased for a period of at least two (2) years following original
initiation of service.
(6) The complete plans for the construction of the proposed system and
proposed system map unless the application is for a change of
ownership of an existing system, in which event the existing system
maps should be submitted.
(7) A ten (10) year projected operations pro forma.
(8) A list of other cable television franchises or permits held by the
applicant, its parent, subsidiaries, or interlocking companies.
(B) The City reserves the right to require any additional information necessary
for its determination of whether or not the applicable criteria for granting
the permit are met.
(C) Accompanying the application shall be a notarized certificate of the
applicant stating that it accepts the authority of the Council to grant the
permit, acknowledges the validity of all requirements of this Chapter, and
certifies that the applicant will comply with all provisions of this Chapter.
9-9-5: CONSTRUCTION BOND
(A) Within thirty (30) days after approval of the permit, the company shall file
with the City a corporate surety bond in a form acceptable to the City
Attorney in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) to
guarantee the timely construction and full activation of the proposed cable
system within three (3) years of the date the Council grants the permit.
(B) The bond shall provide that the City may recover against it, jointly and
severable from the principal and surety, any and all damages, loss or costs
suffered by the City resulting from the failure of the company to fully
install and activate the cable system in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter.
(C) A construction bond is not required for a permit granted as a renewal or
transfer of ownership of an existing activated CATV system.
9-9-6: RENEWAL OF EXISTING PERMIT
(A) Applications for renewal of an existing CATV system permit shall be
submitted on forms provided by the City and at a minimum accompanied
by the following:
(1) A renewal application fee in the amount of two hundred dollars
($200).
(2) The company's existing rate schedule if not previously filed with the
City.
(3) Accompanying the application shall be a notarized certificate of the
applicant stating that it accepts the authority of the Council to grant
the permit, acknowledges the validity of all requirements of this
Chapter, and certifies that the applicant will comply with all
provisions of this Chapter.
(B) The City may require any other additional information it deems necessary
to determine whether or not the applicant for renewal meets the criteria set
out in Section 9-9-2 above.
9-9-7: PERMIT REVOKED
(A) Any permit issued under this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council
if it determines that the Company has failed to comply with any provision
of this Chapter or the permit, or is in violation of any applicable provision
of any Federal, State or local law, rule, regulation, ordinance, Federal
Communications Commission Orders, or Federal technical standards and
the Company fails to remedy the situation as provided in this Section.
(Ord. 1707, 6-17-99)
(B) The City shall provide the company with at least ten (10) days notice of the
hearing on the alleged failure or violation during which time the company
may remedy the situation. If the Council determines following the hearing
that the grounds specified in subsection (A) above exist, it shall set a
reasonable time period in which the company may remedy the situation. If
the company fails to remedy the situation in such period, the Council may
revoke the permit or take such other action as it deems appropriate.
9-9-8: ACQUISITION OF THE SYSTEM BY THE CITY OR REMOVAL
(A) If the Company shall cease operations or abandon its system during the
term of the Permit, or if a renewal or extension of the Company's Permit is
denied or the Permit is revoked, the City may acquire ownership of the
Cable System in accordance with applicable law. If the Company shall
cease operations or abandon its system during the term of the permit, the
City may acquire the system for the net book value thereof to the extent
allowable by law. If the permit is revoked by the City Council, the City
may acquire the system for its fair market value as a going concern as if the
Company's permit had a remaining term of five (5) years. In the event of a
renewal of a franchise is denied and the City acquires ownership of the
cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of the system to another
person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value,
determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but
with no value allocated to the franchise permit itself. (Ord 1740, 06-22-2000)
(B) The City shall not be liable for severance damages on account of portions
of the company's system located outside of the City limits which will be
severed because of the purchase by the City, however, the City will, upon
request of the company, purchase such severed portions of the system
located outside the City on the same terms as it may purchase the system
within the City.
(C) In the event of termination of a permit without renewal, or revocation of the
permit, if the City does not elect to acquire the system in accordance with
the procedures outlined in subsection (A) above, the City may require the
company to remove all of its cables, lines and facilities from City streets,
alleys and easements within a period of six (6) months, repairing and
restoring any damage caused thereby. If the company fails to remove such
components within that period they shall become the property of the City.
(D) The provisions of this Section are alternatives to the City's power of
eminent domain which power is expressly reserved.
9-9-9: USE OF STREETS, ALLEYS AND EASEMENTS
(A) Any permit issued under this Chapter gives the company the right to use
City owned streets and alleys, and those easements owned by the City,
which, by their terms may be used for cable television facilities. Such use
shall allow the installation and maintenance of wires, conduits, cables,
poles and other appurtenant facilities used in the distribution and
transmission of cable television. Such use shall be subject to the conditions
of this Section. Nothing herein shall limit the City's rights to vacate, sell or
encumber any City owned property.
(B) The location of the lines and other facilities shall be designed to minimize
interference with other uses of the City streets, alleys and easements. The
company shall use the poles of the telephone company or power company
whenever possible for its lines subject to the requirements of this Section
for undergrounding. The Company shall not erect poles of its own unless
power or telephone poles are unavailable and the city determines that
undergrounding is technically infeasible or economically too costly.
(C) The Company shall submit to the City prior to construction, plans showing
the location of all proposed lines and facilities to be installed in City streets,
alleys or easements. No such facilities or lines may be installed therein
until the location has been approved by the City.
(D) The City may require that any lines or other facilities be protected,
supported, raised, lowered, temporarily disconnected, modified, relocated
or removed from the rights-of-way or other City property for public
purposes. The Company, at the Company's expense, shall perform such
work; provided, however, if the Company is unable to perform such work
within a reasonable time, the City may perform or may cause the work to
be performed at the Company's expense. The City shall provide reasonable
advance notice to the Company, not to be less than five (5) business days,
except in emergency situations. When public funds are utilized for the
purposes of utility relocation, the City shall utilize said funds for Company
utility relocations in a manner consistent with other utility relocations.
(Ord. 1740, 06-22-2000)
(E) No excavation may be made in any City street, alley or easement without
obtaining a permit from the City in compliance with the provisions of the
City's Excavation Permit Ordinance. The company, at its expense, shall
repair any damages or disturbance to any public streets, alleys or easements
or pavement, sidewalk or improvement thereon caused by the company's
operations.
(F) The Company shall furnish updated copies of strand and trench mapping of
all cable lines to the City, and when available, provide the same data in
digital format acceptable to the City. (Ord. 1740, 06-22-2000)
(G) All cables and lines shall be constructed underground when required by
City subdivision regulations or when located in areas where the power or
telephone lines are underground.
(H) The company shall convert any of its overhead lines to underground lines
upon the request of any person willing to pay for the cost of such
conversion, or if the costs are paid in accordance with provisions of C.R.S.
29-8-101 et. seq., the Colorado Underground Conversion of Utilities Act.
(I) In the event that an overhead cable route is eliminated because of inability
to continue the use of the poles of the telephone or power company, the
company shall underground its lines and facilities if the other utility is
undergrounding its lines and facilities. If such is not the case, then the
company may install its own overhead pole lines if the City determines that
undergrounding is technically infeasible or too expensive. (Ord. 1104,
1980)
(J) The City shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge, within
the underground pipes and conduits of the Company, any wire and fixtures
desired by the City to the extent that such installation and maintenance does
not interfere with existing or future operations of the Company. (Ord.
1707, 6-17-99)
9-9-10: RATES (Rep. by Ord. 1201, 9-15-83)
9-9-11: PERMIT FEE
(A) In consideration of the rights and privileges granted under a permit, the
company shall pay to the City an amount equal to three percent (3%) of its
gross revenues realized from its operations within the City. Such amount
shall not be surcharged or listed separately on any consumers bill. Such -
revenue shall not include sales taxes collected on behalf of the City or State
but shall include all service revenue and standard connection charges from
operations within the City.
(B) Payments shall be made quarterly to the City. Payments are due within
thirty (30) days after each three (3) months quarter of the calendar year,
with the first payment for each year on April 30, 1980. This permit fee is in
addition to any and all taxes, fees or charges imposed by the City or other
governmental entity.
9-9-12: INSURANCE AND LIABILITY
(A) The company shall fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and
its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all
claims, suits, actions, liabilities, and judgment for damages, including but
not limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements and
liabilities assumed by the City in connection therewith, in anyway arising
out of or through the acts or commissions of the company, its agents or
employees, or the company's cable television operations under the CATV
system permit. This shall include any liability with regard to a claim for a
violation of any law, including civil rights or anti-trust claims, and any
litigation contesting the validity of this Chapter or the permit granted hereunder.
(B) The company shall maintain throughout the terms of the permit, liability
insurance insuring the City and the company in amounts equal to or exceeding
the current limits of the liability of the City under the Governmental Immunity
Act. Certificates of the insurance shall be filed with the City for each policy
containing an endorsement that it cannot be cancelled unless thirty (30) days
written notice of cancellation is provided to the City. The company shall also
maintain adequate fire and casualty insurance.
(C) By acceptance of the grant of any permit pursuant to this Chapter, the
company covenants and agrees that it will not at anytime or in any manner or
proceeding set up against the City any claim or proceeding challenging this
Chapter or the grant of the permit pursuant to this Chapter as being invalid for
any reason.
9-9-13: SERVICE AREA AND LINE EXTENSIONS
(A) The company shall be required to provide service to all persons within the
City limits of Montrose desiring service, subject to the exceptions of this
Section.
(B) The company shall not be required initially to serve any customers or area
for which it requested authority not to serve in its initial application if the
City Council as part of the application review finds that service to any such
area or customer was technically infeasible or economically unjustifiable.
(C) Following initial construction and activation of the system, service shall be
extended, at the Company's expense, within ninety (90) days from the date
of a request, to any person within the City limits requesting service,
including persons owning new construction, or subsequently annexed,
provided that the Company is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to
extend service to such person within the ninety (90) day period on
reasonable terms and conditions, if any of the following criteria are met:
(1) The building for which service is requested is within fifty feet (50')
of a building which is receiving CATV service from the company.
(2) Service is requested from ten (10) or more subscribers who are
located in proximity to an existing trunk cable in a density greater
that ten (10) customers per one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320) of cable required to be extended within a public right-of-way
to be able to serve such subscribers. (Ord. 1707, 6-17-99)
(D) Whenever any person is willing to pay the costs of extending the system to
serve such person, the Company shall provide such person with service
within ninety (90) days from the date that such costs are paid to the
Company, provided that the Company is able to secure all rights-of-way
necessary to extend service to such person within such ninety (90) day
period on reasonable terms and conditions. (Ord. 1707, 6-17-99)
9-9-14: MINIMUM SERVICE AND OPERATION REQUIREMENTS
(A) The company shall maintain a local business office within the City open at
least eight (8) hours a day, five (5) days per week. Complaints from
consumers shall be responded to promptly and courteously by the company
and a log listing all complaints, service requests and their disposition shall
be kept by the company available for inspection by the City.
(B) The company shall at all times comply with the regulations and laws of the
State and the United States and any of its agencies.
(C) Construction and the operation of the system shall be consistent with
generally accepted engineering practices and shall comply with the City's
Building and Electrical Codes, all applicable sections of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, all applicable rules and
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, and all other applicable
local, State and Federal law and regulations. (Ord. 1707, 6-17-99).
(D) The system shall be designed to provide subscribers with a uniform high
quality of reception throughout the City and shall be operated continuously.
The system shall have a minimum capability of not fewer than twenty two
(22) video channels and shall have a 2-way communication capability. The
company shall meet the minimum technical standards for operation and
signal quality prescribed pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 544 (e). (Ord. 1707, 6-17-99)
(E) The company shall provide continuous service to all subscribers in return
for the payment of their fee. In the event the company fails to operate the
system for five (5) days, the City shall have the right to operate the system
until such time as a new operator is approved and shall be reimbursed for
any costs or expenses incurred as a result of the company's failure to
operate the system, unless such failure is on account of technical
impossibility, acts of God, disaster, war or other such reasons beyond the
company's control. Financial problems, misfeasance or malfeasance of the
company or its employees shall be no excuse for failure to operate.
(F) The company shall to the extent economically feasible, take advantage of
new technical developments in the field of transmission of television or
radio signals which would afford the company the opportunity to be more
efficient and to provide better service, and shall as far as reasonably
practical, maintain the current state of the art with regard to cable television
systems.
(G) The company shall provide service to customers who have installed their
own cable television wiring as long as such wiring and facilities are
installed in compliance with the specifications and standards of the
company. Connection charges in such event will be adjusted appropriately.
(H) The company shall temporarily move or relocate any of its lines, cables or
other facilities when necessary for construction, moving a building or
otherwise, if the expense of such operation will be paid by the person
requesting it.
9-9-15: LOCAL ACCESS
(A) The City, or other governmental entity which has jurisdiction within the
City and which performs emergency response, shall be authorized to make
emergency use of the Company's system and the Company shall install a
capability for emergency messages to be transmitted on all channels
simultaneously. (Ord. 1707, 6-17-99)
(B) Since the field of cable service is rapidly evolving and many technological
changes are likely to occur during the term of any Permit, a certain degree
of flexibility is appropriate. The Company and the City agree to negotiate
in good faith any changes which may be deemed necessary by either party.
While maintaining flexibility in the provision of services, the services
provided by the Company shall, at all times, be no less advanced than any
other services provided to other Colorado cities of comparable size and
demographics to the City of Montrose, and with reasonably similar
franchise or permit incentives as the Company has with the City; provided,
however, should an upgrade of the Montrose cable system be required
pursuant to the terms of this ordinance or the Permit, the Company shall
have the right to meet, confer, and negotiate with the City concerning the
economic practicality of or other factors related to such an upgrade, giving
due consideration to the term of the Franchise Permit and other reasonable
incentives. The Company shall submit to the City related information upon
the City's request, including, but not limited to a plan for provision of such
services, or a justification indicating the reason(s) such services are not
feasible for the Permit service area. (Ord. 1740, 06-22-2000)
(C) The Company shall provide at least one channel which can be used nonexclusively
as a noncommercial governmental and educational access
channel (“the PEG Channel(s)”). The City shall control the use of such
equipment and transmissions therefrom and shall require any programming
provider, other than the City itself, to execute a hold harmless agreement in
favor of the Company and the City. If such governmental and educational
access channel is not utilized, the Company reserves the right to utilize the
channel for other Company’s purposes, and remove said equipment
accordingly. (Ord. 2255, 09-16-2010)
(D) Capital Contribution for Public, Educational and Government Access
(“PEG Access”)
(1) Access Fee: Unless the City directs a lesser amount, Company shall
provide to the City forty five cents (45¢) per month per customer for
access related expenditures, (the "Access Fee"). The obligation to
begin payment of the Access Fee shall commence on January 1,
2011. Each payment shall be due and payable no later than thirty (30)
days following the end of the quarter from when the Access Fee
takes effect.
(2) The Company shall have no further cost or expense whatsoever
arising from or related to PEG Channel(s) or programming except as
expressly provided for herein.
(3) City understands that pursuant to federal law, Company may collect
the Access Fee from customers as a separate line item on customer
bills, in addition to the price for cable service. Any payments by
Company to City in support of PEG Access shall not be deemed
"Franchise Fees" within the meaning of Section 622 of the Cable Act
(47 U.S.C. § 542).
(Ord. 2255, 09-16-2010)
9-9-16: FINANCIAL REPORTS AND ACCESS TO RECORDS
(A) The company shall file annually, not later than one hundred twenty days
(120) after the end of the company's fiscal year, a copy of a complete
financial report applicable to the company's operations within the City,
including an income statement, balance sheet, and statement of its
investments.
(B) The City shall have access to all business records, financial records of the
company upon request.
(C) The company, within ninety (90) days following request from the City,
shall submit any written report which the City might request concerning its
operations.
9-9-17: RESERVATION OF RIGHTS
The City reserves the right to adopt additional regulations and ordinances governing the
operation of CATV systems in accordance with the lawful exercise of its police power.
9-9-18: NOTICES
Any notices required to be given to the City shall be delivered to the City Manger's office
at City Hall. Notices to the company may be delivered to the local business office
required to be kept by the company.
9-9-19: FREE CONNECTIONS
The company shall provide, free of charge, one cable television connection outlet to each
building owned by the City, each public school located within the City, each public
library within the City, the Montrose Fire District's fire house, the County Courthouse,
the County jail and any youth center or school for the handicapped, upon request. This
shall not require the company to provide channels which are premium pay channels.
(Ord. 1104, 1980)
Chapter 9-10
PARKS
Sections:
9-10-1 PARK HOURS
Chapter 9-10
PARKS
Sections:
9-10-1 PARK HOURS
9-10-1: PARK HOURS
(A) All parks shall be closed between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., unless other hours of closure are posted, in
which case the posted hours shall control. (Ord. 2264, 01-04-2011)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or remain upon any of said
parks or City property during hours which they are closed pursuant to this
Section except for authorized overnight campers at Lions Park, persons on
authorized City business, persons attending events allowed pursuant to a
special permit, or persons traveling the bike paths. (Ord. 1373, 9-1-88)
TITLE X
TRAFFIC
CHAPTER SUBJECT
1 Traffic Code
Chapter 10-1
TRAFFIC CODE
Sections:
10-1-1 ADOPTION OF TRAFFIC CODE
10-1-2 ABSOLUTE SPEED LIMITS
10-1-3 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO FARM TRACTORS AND
MACHINERY
10-1-4 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
10-1-5 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER
10-1-6 PARKING TICKETS
10-1-7 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES
10-1-8 CHANGES TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SCHEDULES
10-1-9 DEPOSIT OF DANGEROUS MATERIALS
10-1-10 PLAYING IN THE STREET
10-1-11 PARKING RESTRICTIONS
10-1-12 RESTRICTIONS ON THE PARKING AND STORAGE OF LARGE
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
10-1-13 OBSTRUCTING A ROADWAY
10-1-14 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
Chapter 10-1
TRAFFIC CODE
Sections:
10-1-1 ADOPTION OF TRAFFIC CODE
10-1-2 ABSOLUTE SPEED LIMITS
10-1-3 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO FARM TRACTORS AND MACHINERY
10-1-4 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
10-1-5 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER
10-1-6 PARKING TICKETS
10-1-7 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES
10-1-8 CHANGES TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SCHEDULES
10-1-9 DEPOSIT OF DANGEROUS MATERIALS
10-1-10 PLAYING IN THE STREET
10-1-11 PARKING RESTRICTIONS
10-1-12 RESTRICTIONS ON THE PARKING AND STORAGE OF LARGE
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
10-1-13 OBSTRUCTING A ROADWAY
10-1-14 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
10-1-1: ADOPTION OF TRAFFIC CODE
(A) Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., as amended,
there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2003
edition of the “Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities,”
(hereinafter referred to as the “Model Traffic Code”) promulgated and
published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Staff
Traffic and Safety Projects Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Ave., Denver, CO
80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to
comprehensive traffic control regulations for the City. The purpose of this
Ordinance and the Model Traffic Code adopted herein is to provide a
system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally
conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. The
adoption of the Model Traffic Code may also be cross-reference in Section
10-1-1 (A) of the Official Code of the City of Montrose.
(Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(B) Three (3) copies of the Model Traffic Code and any secondary code
pertaining thereto certified to be true copies by the Mayor and Clerk shall
be kept filed in the Office of the Clerk available for public inspection. The
Clerk shall maintain a reasonable supply of copies of the Model Traffic
Code adopted herein for purchase by the public at a moderate price.
(Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(C) The Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, 2003 Edition is
hereinafter sometimes referred to and may be cited as the “Model Traffic
Code” or “MTC”. (Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(D) The following provisions of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are
modified as follows (Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004):
Delete the words “by ordinance” in the first line of Subsection 1205(3).
(E) The 2003 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at
length, save and except the following articles and/or sections which are
declared to be inapplicable to this municipality and are therefore expressly
deleted; Subsections 1101(8), 1402 (2), 1701 (1), 1701 (2), 1701(3),
1701(4) and Sections 613, 1406, 1705, 1706, 1707, 1708, 1709, 1710,
1712, 1713, 1714 and 1904. (Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(F) A new subsection (5) is hereby added to Section 1701 of the Model Traffic
Code to read as follows:
(5) If a person receives a penalty assessment notice for a violation under
this Section 1701, and such person pays the fine and surcharge for
the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the points
assessed for the violation are reduced as follows:
(a) For a violation having an assessment of three (3) or more points
under Section 42-2-127 (5) C.R.S., as amended, the total
number of points assessed for said violation are reduced by two
(2) points;
(b) For a violation having an assessment of two (2) points under
Section 42-2-127 (5), C.R.S., as amended, the total number of
points assessed for said violation are reduced by one (1) point.
(Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(G) Subsection 106 (3) of the Model Traffic Code is amended to read as
follows:
106 (3) Restricted use of streets.
(a) The use of certain highways, alleys, streets and roadways by
motordriven cycles, trucks or other commercial vehicles, bicycles
and horse-drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic or vehicles
over a specified weight shall be restricted or prohibited when official
signs giving notice thereof are erected.
(b) When signs are so erected giving notice of restrictions or
prohibitions upon the use of streets, no person shall disobey the
directions or instructions stated on such signs.
(c) The provisions of subsection (a) shall not be construed to prohibit
the drivers of any excluded vehicles from traveling over such
restricted or prohibited streets, other than controlled-access
roadways, for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or
merchandise or reaching their destinations which occur on these
particular streets, provided such excluded vehicles enter such streets
at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceed
thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter.
(Ord. 1656, 12-18-98)
(H) A new Subsection (12) to Section 1412 is hereby added to the Model
Traffic Code adopted herein to read as follows:
(12) Bicycle Prohibited
Whenever official signs are erected giving notice that bicycles are
prohibited, as authorized in this title, no bicyclist shall violate any of the
instructions contained thereon. (Ord. 1988, 12-18-2003)
10-1-2: ABSOLUTE SPEED LIMITS: Pursuant to MTC Subsection 1101(7),
speed limits designated by official traffic control devices shall be absolute
speed limits adopted as the maximum lawful speeds in the City.
10-1-3: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO FARM TRACTORS AND
MACHINERY: Every person operating a farm tractor or any other selfpropelled
farm machinery or implement of husbandry upon the streets or
highways of this Municipality shall be granted all the rights and shall be
subject to all the duties and penalties applicable to the driver of a vehicle as
set forth in the Model Traffic Code adopted by this Chapter, or in any other
provision of this Chapter or other ordinances of the City, except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
(Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
10-1-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS: Every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of this Chapter 1 of Title 10 of the Official Code
of the City of Montrose, Colorado, or of the Model Traffic Code adopted
by reference herein, may be punished by a penalty or penalties set forth in §
1-2-3 of the Official Code of the City of Montrose. (Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
10-1-5: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER: This Chapter and the Model Traffic
Code adopted by reference herein shall apply to every street, alley,
sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public
place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of
this municipality, the use of which this municipality has jurisdiction and
authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 1208, 1211, 1401, 1402,
and 1413 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively, concerning
disabled parking, improper backing, reckless driving, careless driving, and
eluding a police officer shall apply not only to public places and ways but
also throughout this municipality. (Ord. 2018, 08-19-2004)
10-1-6: PARKING TICKETS
(A) Notice on illegally parked vehicle: Whenever any vehicle is found parked
or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by Ordinances of
this Municipality, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration
number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its user and may conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice
of parking violation or provide the same to the owner or driver. Such notice
of parking violation shall contain such information as convenient for the
administration and enforcement of these provisions and the Model Traffic
Code, as adopted by this Chapter 10-1, but shall, at a minimum advise the
driver or owner of the vehicle, generally, of the nature of the violation, the
amount of the fines which can be imposed, the procedure for either paying
the fine or entering a plea to contest the violation, and the time in which the
fine must be paid or other action taken. The fines shall be determined by
the Municipal Judge.
(1) As used in this Section 10-1-6, Section 10-1-7, and Section 10-1-11
of the Official Code of the City of Montrose, the term “vehicle” shall
have the same definition as set forth in this Chapter 10-1, and in the
Model Traffic Code as adopted by this Chapter 10-1, except that the
word “vehicle” shall also include:
(a) All terrain vehicles, including but not limited to “fourwheelers”
and snow mobiles; and
(b) Trailers, carts, wagons and similar devices; and
(c) Boats; and
(c) Recreational vehicles, also known as “travel homes”.
(Ord 2223, 07-02-2009)
(B) Failure to comply with notice of parking violation: If the driver or owner
of a vehicle charged with an apparent violation of the restrictions on
stopping, standing or parking under the Traffic Ordinances of this
Municipality does not respond within the time to pay the fine specified on
the notice of parking violation affixed to such vehicle or provided to such
driver or owner, as provided in Subsection (A), by payment of the penalty
to the Municipal Court, or by appearance and entry of plea, in accordance
with the procedures set out on such notice of parking violation, or by other
disposition of the charges, as provided by law, the City shall cause another
notice to be sent, by mail, to the registered owner of the vehicle concerning
which the original ticket was directed, warning him that, in the event such
notice is disregarded for a period of ten (10) days from the date of mailing,
a complaint will be filed and either a summons or warrant of arrest will be
issued. In the event the applicable penalty is not paid, entry of plea made,
or other disposition of the charge made, as provided by law, within said ten
(10) days, a complaint shall be filed and a summons or warrant of arrest
issued.
(C) Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking: In any prosecution charging a
violation of any provisions of this Chapter or the MTC governing the
stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such regulation,
together with proof that the defendant named in the Complaint was at the
time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute
in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such
vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which, such violations occurred.
(D) The Parking Control Officer of the City shall be deemed a peace officer, as
defined in Rule 203 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure,
for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Section under the
direction of the City Manager. The Parking Control Officer shall exercise
the authority of a peace officer in the enforcement of these provisions,
including the power to issue summons and complaints and initiate
prosecution of violations thereof. (Ord. 1908, 6-13-2002)
10-1-7: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES
(A) The City shall have authority to remove and impound vehicles (1) which
are tended, or unattended, and standing upon any portion of a street or
highway right-of-way within the City in such a manner as to interfere with
the free movement of vehicular traffic or street maintenance, (2) which
have been disabled as a result of an accident, (3) concerning which there
are reasonable grounds to believe have been abandoned on public property,
under circumstances as allowed and provided pursuant to C.R.S.
§ 42-4-1801 et seq., (4) which are left unattended on public property,
including any portion of a street or highway right-of-way for a period of
longer than 24 hours, if in violation of any parking regulations or other
provisions of this Chapter or the Model Traffic Code, as adopted by this
Chapter 10-1, (5) concerning which there are reasonable grounds to believe
have been abandoned on private property, (6) for safekeeping incident to an
arrest, or (7) as otherwise allowed by law. (Ord 2223, 07-02-2009)
(B) The City Manager may enter into contracts for the towing, impoundment
and disposal of vehicles pursuant to this section and C.R.S. 42-4-1801 et
seq.
(C) Vehicles removed and impounded as provided in this Section shall be
disposed of, and towing, storage and other fees collected in accordance with
the provisions of C.R.S. 42-4-1801, et seq.
10-1-8: CHANGES TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SCHEDULES
(A) The City Manager, or his designee, is hereby designated as City Traffic
Engineer and shall carry out duties as such including maintaining traffic
control schedules specified by the Model Traffic Code.
(Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(B) Changes to the Traffic Control Schedules and to the Corresponding Traffic
Regulation, restriction or limitation imposed thereby may be accomplished
as follows:
(1) By action of the Traffic Engineer in accordance with the Model
Traffic Code. (Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(2) By the City Council by motion directing the Traffic Engineer to
change a traffic limitation, restriction, or regulation as specified in
traffic control schedules.
(3) By a request for a change from a citizen of the City of Montrose.
Such request shall be submitted to the City Clerk. He shall place the
matter on the agenda for the City Council meeting not less than two
(2) weeks nor more than one month from the date of the request.
The City Manager shall investigate the requested change and present
the results of his investigation along with any recommendations at
the Council meeting scheduled to consider the matter. The City
Manager may cause parties he determines might be interested or
affected by the proposed change to be given notice of it. At the
scheduled meeting to consider the change, the Council shall by
motion determine whether or not the change requested should be
granted or take other action as the Council deems appropriate. (Ord.
876, 3-4-76)
10-1-9: DEPOSIT OF DANGEROUS MATERIALS
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly
throw or deposit upon any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot or
parking area, any glass bottle, glass, stones, nails, tacks, wires, cans or any
other substance or object likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person who drops or permits to be dropped, or
thrown upon any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, parking lot or parking
area, any destructive or injurious material, or lighted or burning substance,
to fail to immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
(C) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or the owner of a vehicle,
if present in the vehicle, to fail to immediately remove any glass bottle,
glass, stones, nails, tacks, wires, cans or other substance or object likely to
injure any person, animal or vehicle if such material was dropped or
deposited in such place from the operator or owner's vehicle, if the owner
or operator knew or should have known that such substance was dropped or
deposited upon such place from his vehicle.
(D) Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Section shall,
upon the first conviction, be subject to a minimum fine of fifty dollars
($50.00). Upon the second or subsequent conviction, any person convicted
of a violation of any provision of this Section shall be subject to a minimum
fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person convicted of a violation
of any provision in this Section may be subject to a maximum fine of up to
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and a maximum term of imprisonment of
up one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord.1614, 12-19-96)
10-1-10: PLAYING IN THE STREET: It shall be unlawful to play in any street.
(Ord. 1086, 7-17-80)
10-1-11: PARKING RESTRICTIONS
(A) Marked Spaces: When parking spaces are marked on any roadway, street or
alley right-of-way, or City owned parking lots by official markings, any
vehicle shall be parked entirely within the marked boundary of a single
marked space.
(B) Parking in Alleys:
(1) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except during the
necessary and expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise or
freight or within parking spaces marked by official markings.
(2) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such
position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(C) Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited:
No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway within any street or alley
right-of-way, or in City-owned parking lots for -
(1) The principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale;
(2) A purpose of washing, greasing, painting, or repairing such vehicle
except repairs necessitated by an emergency; or
(3) The principal purpose of displaying advertising.
(D) Clearance Between Vehicles: No person shall stand or park a vehicle in
such a manner as to leave available less than 2 feet clearance between
vehicles when parked.
(E) It shall be unlawful to park next to curbs painted yellow under authority of
the City.
(F) No vehicle, as defined by this Chapter 10-1, or by the Model Traffic Code,
as adopted by this Chapter 10-1, may be parked for more than thirty (30)
consecutive days on a street or highway right-of-way within the City limits
of the City of Montrose. (Ord 2223, 07-02-2009)
10-1-12: RESTRICTIONS ON THE PARKING AND STORAGE OF LARGE
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
(A) It shall be unlawful to park commercial vehicles with a GVWT of over
18,000 lbs. on any City street overnight. Provided however, this
Subsection shall not apply to State highways.
(B) It shall be unlawful to park commercial vehicles overnight with a GVWT
over 12,000 lbs. any place in the RL, R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-
4, R-5, R-6, MHR, MR or OR Zoning Districts except on the property
appurtenant to government buildings or facilities or appurtenant to a lawful
non-conforming, nonresidential use in such zones which use involved the
parking of such vehicles on the appurtenant premises prior to January 1,
1993, or except for parking a construction contractor's trailer on private
property during construction. (Ord. 1705, 5-20-99)
(C) This Section shall not apply to reasonable parking of a moving van during
loading and unloading operations.
10-1-13: OBSTRUCTING A ROADWAY
(A) It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, sit or loiter upon the area of any
street or alley used for travel by, or parking of vehicles, or between the
curbs of any street with curbs. Provided, however, it shall be an affirmative
defense to a violation of this Section that a pedestrian was lawfully crossing
or moving along a street or alley in accordance with Part 8 of the Model
Traffic Code. (Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(B) (Reserved for future use, Ord. 2018, 08-19-2004)
(C) Loiter, as used in this Section, shall mean remaining idle in essentially one
location, to be dilatory, to tarry, to dawdle and, shall include but not be
limited to, standing around, hanging out, sitting, kneeling, sauntering or
prowling. (Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
10-1-14: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
(A) No permit is or shall be required for any funeral procession to occupy or
proceed along the streets or highways of the City.
(B) All funeral processions traveling on the streets or highways of the City shall
be identified by a display upon the outside of each vehicle in the procession
with a pennant or other identifying insignia.
(C) All vehicles in a funeral procession shall maintain lighted headlamps from
the church, funeral parlor, mortuary, private residence or other place where
the last services are held, to the place of interment.
(D) Each vehicle in a procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of
the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as
practicable and safe.
(E) All funeral processions traveling within the City limits shall be
accompanied by an escort vehicle, authorized as such by the Division of
Motor Vehicles. Escort vehicles shall be identified by red lights and shall
constitute a part of the funeral procession. Escort vehicles shall be required
as follows:
(1) Not less than one (1) vehicle, which vehicle may be a motorcycle
with a uniformed driver, where the total number of vehicles in the
procession, including mortuary vehicles, is nineteen (19) in number,
or less;
(2) Not less than two (2) vehicles which vehicles may be motorcycles
with uniformed drivers, where the total number of vehicles in the
procession, including the mortuary vehicles, is more than nineteen
(19) and less than thirty (30) in number;
(3) Not less than three (3) vehicles, which vehicles may be motorcycles
with uniformed drivers, where the total number of vehicles,
including mortuary vehicles, exceed twenty-nine (29) in number.
(F) When a funeral procession is escorted by vehicle escorts, authorized as set
forth herein, such procession shall have the right-of-way, but subject to and
upon strict compliance with the conditions set forth in this Section.
(G) Whenever traffic at an intersection is controlled by a signal light, stop or
yield sign, no funeral procession shall initially enter any such intersection,
or make any turn therein, contrary to the Model Traffic Code adopted
pursuant to this Chapter. However, after a procession has lawfully entered
such intersection or commenced a turn therein, the procession may, in its
entirety, proceed through the same, provided there is an authorized escort,
as set forth herein, stopped in the intersection. Such escort vehicle shall be
marked by flashing or rotating red lights which can be plainly seen from a
distance of five hundred feet in all directions during daylight hours. Such
authorized escort shall remain in the intersection until the last car in the
procession has proceeded through the same. (Ord. 2018, 8-19-2004)
(H) A funeral procession shall not proceed against traffic on one-way streets or
on one-way highways except at the direction of a police officer, and such
procession shall drive as close to the right-hand edge of the roadway as is
practicable.
(I) The operator of any such other vehicle on the highway or street shall yield
the right-of-way to a funeral procession, regardless of directions indicated
on official traffic-control devices. Other than in the case of an emergency
vehicle, it shall be unlawful for any other vehicle which is not a party to the
procession, to enter that portion of any lane of traffic occupied by a funeral
procession or to cross an intersection between vehicles in a procession that
has lawfully taken the right-of-way in an intersection.
(J) Processions in all instances shall yield the right-of-way to other authorized
emergency vehicles.
(K) At no time shall a procession proceed through a red light, stop sign, or yield
sign, or operate contrary to any traffic-control device unless by the
direction of an authorized escort officer as set forth herein.
(L) Every procession shall proceed at speeds within the existing speed limits
governing and presently in force, consistent with traffic conditions. Where
an authorized escort vehicle is involved, the escort officer may, if in the
officer’s best judgment, reduce this speed.
(M) All funeral processions shall obey all traffic laws and ordinances, subject
only to the exceptions set forth herein, and only under the circumstances
where such exception is specifically permitted.
(N) Nothing herein shall relieve any authorized escort or driver of any vehicle
within a funeral procession from the duty to proceed with due regard for the
safety of all persons nor shall any of the provisions hereof be a legal
defense for any such escort or any such driver from the consequences of a
careless or reckless disregard for the safety of others.
Montrose Municipal Code
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF MONTROSE AND
DELTA-MONTROSE ELECTRIC ASSOCIATION
ARTICLE 1
TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
1.1 This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Delta-Montrose
Association Franchise Chapter”.
1.2 For the purpose of this Franchise agreement, the following words and phrases
shall have the meaning given in this article. When not inconsistent with context,
words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
Words not defined in this article shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
1.3 “City” refers to and is the municipal corporation designated as the City of
Montrose, Montrose County, Colorado, and is the grantor of rights under this
Franchise.
1.4 “Company” refers to and is Delta-Montrose Electric Association, and is the
grantee of rights under this Franchise.
1.5 “City Council” refers to and is the legislative body of the City.
1.6 “Facilities” refer to and are all facilities reasonably necessary to provide electric
service into, within and through the City, including but not limited to substations,
transmission and distribution structures, lines, wires, electrical equipment,
transformers, underground lines, meters, meter reading devices, control
equipment, street lights, wires, cables and poles.
1.7 “Public Utilities Commission” or “PUC” or “Commission” refers to and is the
Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado or other state agency
succeeding to the regulatory powers of the Public Utilities Commission.
1.8 “Residents” refer to and include all persons, businesses, industry, governmental
agencies, and any other entity whatsoever, presently located or to be located, in
whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the City.
1.9 “Revenues” refer to and mean those amounts which the Company receives from
sale of electricity to residents
Page 1 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
1.10 “Streets” refer to and are streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes, public
utility easements, and other public rights-of-way in the City, excluding any
easement the terms of which do not permit the use thereof by the Company.
“Within the streets” shall mean upon, above, under, across, along and within said
streets.
1.11 “Industrial Customers” refer to those City customers which meet the criteria
under applicable “Industrial – Distribution voltage” rate tariff for the Company.
ARTICLE 2
GRANT OF FRANCHISE
2.1 Grant of Franchise.
(A) The City hereby grants to the Company, for the period specified in and
subject to the conditions, terms, and provisions contained in this
Franchise, a non-exclusive right, and the Company hereby assumes the
obligation to furnish, sell, and distribute electricity to the City and to all
residents of the City. Subject to the conditions, terms, and provisions
contained in this Franchise, the City also hereby grants to the Company a
non-exclusive right, and the Company hereby assumes the obligation, to
acquire, construct, install, locate, maintain, operate, and extend into,
within and through the City all facilities reasonably necessary to furnish,
sell, and distribute electricity within and through the City. The City also
hereby grants to the Company a non-exclusive right, and the Company
hereby assumes the obligation, to make reasonable use of the streets as
may be necessary to carry out the terms of this Franchise subject to the
City's prior right of usage for municipal purposes and subject to applicable
laws, ordinances, and regulations. These rights and obligations shall
extend to all areas of the City as it is now or hereafter constituted.
(B) The rights granted by this Franchise are not, and shall not be deemed to be
granted exclusively to the Company, and the City reserves the right to
make or grant a similar franchise to any other person, firm, or corporation
as allowed by law.
(C) Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the City retains the right
to use, control, and regulate, through the exercise of its police power, the
use of the streets, and the space above and beneath said streets; and the
City retains the right to impose such other regulations as may be
determined by the City to be necessary in the exercise of the police power
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
Page 2 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
(D) Neither the City nor the Company waives any rights under the statutes and
constitution of the State of Colorado or of the United States except as
otherwise specifically set forth herein.
(E) This Franchise constitutes a valid and binding contract between the
Company and the City. In the event that the franchise fee specified herein
is declared illegal, unconstitutional, or void for any reason by any court or
other proper authority, the Company shall be contractually bound to
collect and pay monthly rental fees to the City in an aggregate amount that
would be, as nearly as practical, equivalent to the amount which would
have been paid by the Company as a franchise fee hereunder as
consideration for use of the City's streets.
(F) The rights and obligations provided for in this Franchise encompass street
lighting service to the City, and the provisions of this Franchise apply with
full and equal force to the street lighting service provided by the
Company.
ARTICLE 3
TERM OF FRANCHISE
3.1 Term of Franchise. This Franchise shall take effect upon its adoption and shall
supersede any prior Franchise grants to the Company by the City. Unless
terminated prior to twenty (20) years in accordance with other provisions as
contained herein, the term of this franchise shall be for twenty (20) years.
ARTICLE 4
FRANCHISE FEE
4.1 Franchise Fee.
(A) In consideration for the Franchise rights granted herein, which provide,
among other things, for the Company’s use of the streets, which are
valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the City at great
expense to its residents, and in recognition that the grant to the Company
of the use of those streets, and of the right to provide service to the City’s
residents, are valuable rights, the Company shall collect and pay the City
the sums provided in this Section. Except as specified in this Franchise,
payment of the franchise fee shall not exempt the Company from any
other lawful taxes or fees; however, the franchise fee provided for herein
shall constitute the exclusive monetary payment by the Company to the
City for the Company’s use and occupancy of the streets except as
specifically provided herein.
Page 3 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
(B) The Company shall collect and pay to the City a sum of three percent (3%)
of its annual gross revenue derived from the sale of electricity to residents,
excluding industrial customers, within the corporate limits of the City.
(C) A transaction or arrangement between the Company and any third party
which has the effect of circumventing payment of required franchise fees
or evasion of payment of franchise fees by non-collection, non-reporting,
or any other means which evade the actual collection of revenues by the
Company for services delivered over the system or businesses the
Company pursues derived from the operation of the system is prohibited.
(D) No acceptance of payment by the City from the Company shall be
construed as an agreement that the amount paid is the correct amount, nor
shall acceptance be construed as a release of any claim of which the City
may have for additional sums due and payable under this Franchise.
4.2 Remittance Schedule. The Company shall remit franchise fee revenues to the City
in monthly installments not more than thirty (30) days following the close of each
month. All payments shall be made to the City. In the event that either the City
or the Company discovers that there has been an error in the calculation of the
franchise fee payment to the City, the error shall be corrected in the next monthly
payment; except that, in the event an error by the Company results in an
overpayment of the franchise fee to the City, and said overpayment is in excess of
Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000), credit for the overpayment shall be spread over
the same period the error was undiscovered. If the overpayment is less than Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000), credit shall be taken against the next payment. In no
event shall the City be required to refund any overpayment made as a result of a
Company error which occurred more than three (3) years prior to the discovery of
the Company error. Underpayments shall be subject to 1 ½% interest per month
until paid in full.
4.3 Franchise Fee Payment not in Lieu of Permit or Other Fees. Payment of the
franchise fee by the Company is accepted by the City in lieu of any utility
occupation tax or any rental fee, for the Company's use or occupation of City
streets, or for the installation, operation and maintenance of Company facilities.
Payment of the franchise fee does not exempt the Company from any other lawful
tax or fee, including any fee for an excavation permit, street cut permit, or similar
requirement.
ARTICLE 5
MODIFICATION OF FRANCHISE FEE
5.1 Change of Franchise Fee and Other Terms. In recognition of the length of the term
of the present franchise, and in further recognition of the possibility of legislative
regulatory amendments which may allow for the wheeling of electricity through
Page 4 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
facilities owned by the Company and located within the City, the parties agree
that in the event of such regulatory amendments, or in any unexpected event
which would result in a significant decrease in fees collected on behalf of the
City, the Company and the City agree to modify the computation of the franchise
fee as set forth herein. Said modified computation may be based upon volume of
electricity delivered rather than the percentage of revenue, at the City’s discretion.
The parties agree, to the extent permitted by law, to cooperate in modifying
section 4.1(B) of this Franchise to assure that the Company collects and the City
receives an amount in franchise fees or some other form that is at least the same
amount collected in franchise fees by the Company as of the effective date of this
franchise, and for any increases in usage, and in no case less than three (3%) of
the gross revenues of the Company derived from sales to City customers, after
adjustment for net write-off of uncollectible amounts and corrections of bills
theretofore rendered, regardless of what entity in the future is involved in
supplying electricity to the City and its residents.
In the event that the computation of the franchise fee is modified and based upon
volume of electricity delivered in accordance with the provisions herein, both
parties agree that, to the extent allowable by law, the Company shall be
responsible for the collection of such franchise fee as measured against the total
amount of kilowatt-hour consumption of electricity in each month by each
resident, business or industry within the City, from all electric providers and / or
distributors. Both parties further agree that such volumetric computation shall be
subject to annual adjustment to reflect inflation in accordance with a mutually
acceptable price index.
Modification of the franchise fee as provided herein is an express term of this
Agreement and shall not require submittal to the vote of City electors accordingly.
ARTICLE 6
DISCLOSURE OF RECORDS
6.1 City Information Rights.
(A) The City or its designated representative or agent, shall have access to the
books and records of the Company during normal business hours upon
reasonable notice for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the
terms of this Franchise. The City may use such information for the
purposes of enforcing its laws, ordinances, and regulations. Nothing
herein shall exempt the Company from any other requirements regarding
the production of information as provided in the laws, ordinances and
regulations of the City.
(B) To the extent allowable by law, the Company shall supply the City with all
of the following information annually without cost to the City:
Page 5 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
(1) Annual reports, including but not limited to, its annual report to its
consumers; and
(2) Annual Financial summaries of the revenues collected within the
City during the previous year; and
(C) To the extent allowable by law, the Company shall supply the City with
all of the following information upon request:
(1) Copies of the official minutes of Board of Directors meetings for
the previous year; and
(2) A summary of conversions and replacements within the City
which have been accomplished or are underway by the Company,
if applicable; and
(3) The Company’s plans for additional conversions and replacements
within the City, if applicable; and
(4) Copies of tariffs including but not limited to all tariffs, rules,
regulations, and policies relating to service by the Company to the
City and its residents; and
(5) Copies of supporting documentation for the calculation of the
franchise fee; and
(6) An inventory of the Company’s property within the City; and
(7) Annual and long-term reports for capital improvements planned
within the City.
6.2 Enforcement of City Ordinances. The City may use the metered information
obtained from audits for the purposes of enforcing its laws, ordinances, and
regulations.
ARTICLE 7
RATES
7.1 General Provisions. Rates charged by the Company for service hereunder shall be
fair and reasonable. The Company agrees that it shall be subject to all authority
now or hereafter possessed by any regulatory body having jurisdiction to fix just,
reasonable, and compensatory electric rates. The Company further agrees that the
system shall be so designed, constructed, and sources of electricity utilized as to
provide the most economic development and favorable rate structure possible,
taking into account deliverability of electricity and other pertinent conditions.
Page 6 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
7.2 Comparable rates. For each rate category within the Company’s service area,
rates charged to customers within the City shall be no higher than the lowest rates
charged to the Company’s customers in the same rate category, excluding
franchise fees and other taxes, if applicable.
7.3 Rates applicable to City Street Lighting and City-owned facilities. Rates charged
to the City by the Company for street lighting and City-owned facilities shall be
no higher than the lowest rates charged to the Company’s customers for the same
rate category, excluding franchise fees and other taxes, if applicable.
ARTICLE 8
SUPPLY, CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN
8.1 Supply; Reliability.
(A) The Company shall at all times take all reasonable and necessary steps to
assure the adequate supply, transmission, and distribution of electricity to
the City and its residents at the lowest reasonable cost consistent with the
term of this agreement. In addition, the Company shall operate its
facilities pursuant to the highest practicable level of service quality and
reliability in providing electricity to the City and its residents. The
Company recognizes that maintaining service reliability is a substantial
obligation under this Franchise agreement. Upon the City's request, the
Company will provide the City copies of service reliability reports.
(B) If the supply, transmission, or distribution of electricity to the City or any
resident of the City is interrupted, the Company shall take all necessary
and reasonable actions to restore such supply in the shortest practicable
time. If the supply of electricity is to be interrupted due to a planned
outage, except in cases of emergency outage repair, the Company shall
take adequate reasonable efforts to notify its customers and the City in
advance. The Company shall maintain a local office located in Montrose,
Colorado. The Company shall keep on file in its local office copies of its
Rate Schedules, Standards for Service, Rules and Regulations, and
Service Connection and Extension Policies concurrently in effect or filed
with the PUC or other competent authority having jurisdiction in the
premises, which copies shall be made available to the City and its
residents.
(C) The Company shall provide to the City telephone numbers of the
Company's dispatch center that will permit the City to obtain status reports
from the Company on a twenty-four hour basis concerning interruptions of
the supply of electricity in any portion of the City.
Page 7 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
8.2 Obligations Regarding Company Facilities.
(A) All work by the Company shall be done:
(1) in a high-quality manner;
(2) in a timely and expeditious manner;
(3) in a manner which minimizes inconvenience to the public and
individuals;
(4) in a cost-effective manner, which may include the use of qualified
private contractors; and
(5) in accordance with Company policies and procedures but all times
subject to applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations.
(B) The installation, repair, or maintenance of Company facilities shall not
interfere with water facilities, sanitary or storm sewer facilities,
communication facilities, or other uses of the streets. Interference with
private property, landscaping and other natural features shall be
minimized.
(C) The Company shall promptly repair all damage caused by Company
activities or facilities. If such damage poses a threat to the health, safety,
or welfare of the public or individuals, the City may cause repairs to be
made, and the Company shall promptly reimburse the City for the cost of
such repairs.
(D) All non-electrical work is subject to inspection by the City and a
determination by the City that said work has been performed in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the
City. The Company shall promptly perform reasonable remedial action
required by the City pursuant to any such inspection. It shall be a
condition of the City's approval that, for any facility installed, renovated,
or replaced after the effective date of this Franchise, the Company shall
provide the City with as-built drawings of each such facility in such
formats and providing such details as reasonably requested by the City.
Qualified City personnel may inspect electrical work. Suggested remedial
action shall be made only by Registered Professional Engineers with
appropriate licensing to make said recommendations.
(E) The installation, renovation, and replacement of any facilities in the streets
by or on behalf of the Company shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the City as to location. Such inspection and approval may
include, but not be limited to, the following matters: location of facilities
Page 8 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
in streets; cutting and trimming of trees and shrubs; disturbance of
pavements, sidewalks, and surfaces of streets.
(F) The Company and all of its contractors shall comply with all applicable
City laws, ordinances, and regulations. The Company shall require its
contractors working in the streets to hold the necessary licenses and
permits required by the City and other entities having jurisdiction.
(G) The Company shall provide, when available, as-built drawings in digital
formats and providing such details as reasonably requested by the City, of
each Company facility that exists within the City.
8.3 Excavation and Construction. The Company shall be responsible for obtaining all
applicable permits, including any excavation and/or street cut permits, in the
manner required by the laws, ordinances, and regulations of the City. All public
and private property whose use conforms to restrictions in public easements
disturbed by Company construction or excavation activities shall be restored by
the Company at its expense to substantially its former condition according to then
existing City laws, ordinances, and regulations.
8.4 Relocation of Company Facilities.
(A) Except as provided in 8.4(B) below, relocation of electric facilities
installed or maintained in the streets or City property pursuant to this
Franchise or any previous franchises shall be made by the Company at its
expense, if at any time the City requests the Company to relocate the same
in order to permit the City:
(1) to construct any public improvement; or
(2) to build any public project.
(B) The provisions of 8.4(A) above are intended to be applied to public
projects and improvements only. The provisions shall not apply, and the
Company shall not be responsible for payment of costs associated with
relocation of facilities, when the following apply:
(1) relocation of the facilities is primarily for aesthetic purposes,
beautification or view protection; or
(2) relocation involves facilities owned by the Company in privately
held easements; or
(3) relocation involves existing underground utilities properly located
within public easements according to City specifications, if such
Page 9 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
relocation is not necessary to the public improvement or public
project.
(C) The Company shall complete such relocations as soon as practicable from
the date when the City makes its request, but in any event within 90 days
after such request; except that the Company may be granted an extension
of time for completion equivalent to any delay caused by conditions not
under its control.
(D) When requested by the City or the Company, representatives of the City
and the Company shall meet to share information regarding anticipated
City projects that will require relocation of Company facilities. Such
meetings shall be for the purpose of providing both parties the opportunity
to, in good faith, evaluate reasonable alternatives and/or cost saving
measures in an attempt to minimize the fiscal impact upon the Company
from the proposed relocation, and establish timetables with anticipated
commencement and completion dates.
(E) Following relocation, all property shall be restored to substantially its
former condition by the Company at its expense in accordance with then
existing City laws, ordinances, and regulations.
(F) The City shall use its best efforts to obtain funding for utility relocations
in connection with public projects receiving federal or state funds. When
public funds are utilized for the purposes of utility relocation, the City
shall utilize said funds for Company utility relocations in a manner
consistent with other utility relocations. Relocated facilities shall be
underground, unless the City determines otherwise.
(G) No expenses pursuant to this article paid or reimbursed shall be
surcharged specifically against residents of the City.
8.5 Service to New Areas. If the boundaries of the City are expanded during the term
of this Franchise, the Company shall extend service to residents in the expanded
area at the earliest practicable time and in accordance with the Company's
extension policy. Service to the expanded area shall be in accordance with the
terms of this Franchise, including payment of franchise fees.
8.6 City Not Required to Advance Funds. Upon receipt of the City's authorization for
billing and construction, the Company shall extend its facilities to provide electric
service to the City for municipal uses within the City limits or for any major
municipal facility outside the City limits, and within the Company certificated
service area, without requiring the City to advance funds prior to construction.
Upon completion, the City shall pay invoice within 30 days of receipt.
8.7 Technological Improvements.
Page 10 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
(A) The Company shall generally introduce and install, as soon as practicable,
technological advances in its equipment and service within the City when
such advances are technically and economically feasible and are safe and
beneficial to the City and its residents.
(B) While maintaining flexibility in the provision of services, the Company’s
system shall, at all times, be no less advanced than any other system
operated by the Company within the Company’s service area; provided,
however, should an upgrade of the utility services provided to customers
within the City be requested by the City Council, the Company shall have
the right to meet, confer, and negotiate with the City concerning the
economic practicality of such an upgrade, giving due consideration to the
remaining term of the Franchise and other reasonable incentives. The
Company shall submit to the City related information upon the City
Council’s request, including, but not limited to: a plan for provision of
such services, or a justification indicating the reason(s) such services are
not feasible for the Company’s customers within the City. Company
retains the right to make the final decision as to the technological
improvements and/or upgrades made by the Company.
(C) Scope of Activities Authorized By Franchise. The provisions of this
franchise apply specifically to electric services. Nothing in this agreement
precludes the Company from engaging in any other lawful activities that
are not subject to franchise agreements.
ARTICLE 9
COMPLIANCE
9.1 City Regulation. The City expressly reserves, and the Company expressly
recognizes, the City's right and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the
provisions herein contained, such laws, ordinances, and regulations deemed
necessary by the City in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the
health, safety, and welfare of its citizens. The Company shall comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the City, including but not limited
to all City building and zoning codes, and requirements regarding curb and
pavement cuts, excavating, digging, and other construction activities.
9.2 City Review of Plans. Prior to construction of any significant electric facilities
such as transmission lines and substations within the City, or of a building or
other structure within the City, the Company shall furnish to the City the plans
and a description of the proposed location of such facilities, building, or structure.
In addition, upon request by the City, the Company shall assess and report on the
impact of its proposed construction on the City environment. Such plans and
reports may be reviewed by the City to ensure that all applicable laws, including
Page 11 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
building and zoning codes and air and water pollution requirements, are met, that
aesthetic and good planning principles have been given due consideration, and
that adverse impact on the environment has been minimized. The Company shall
comply with all regulatory requirements of the City and shall incorporate all other
reasonable changes requested by the City.
9.3 Inspection. The City shall have the right to inspect, at all reasonable times, any
portion of the Company's electric system used to serve the City and its residents.
The Company agrees to cooperate with the City in conducting the inspection to
correct any discrepancies affecting the City's interest in a prompt and efficient
manner. Said inspection shall be performed only by qualified inspectors working
under a professional engineer’s license.
ARTICLE 10
USE OF COMPANY FACILITIES
10.1 City Use. The City shall be permitted to make all reasonable use of the
Company's distribution poles and street lighting poles for any City purpose so
long as such use complies with appropriate safety codes including the Company’s
safety regulations. Said use shall be without cost to the City so long as such use
does not unreasonably interfere with the Company's use of its facilities for
distribution of electricity or create a hazard. The City shall be responsible for all
costs, including maintenance costs, associated with any modifications to the
Company's facilities to accommodate the City's use of such facilities.
10.2 Non-Competitor’s Use. The Company shall allow telecommunications
companies and/or cable companies who hold a franchise or encroachment permit
from the City to utilize the Company’s distribution poles and other suitable
overhead structures for the placement of their facilities based upon the
Company’s joint use pole attachment agreement, so long as such terms and
conditions are not inconsistent with the Company’s obligations under this
Franchise. The Company shall not be required to assume any liability nor to be
put to any additional expense in connection with any such use; nor be required to
permit any such use for the distribution of electricity. No such use shall be
required if it would constitute a safety hazard or would unreasonably interfere
with the company’s use of the same.
10.3 Competitor’s Use. If the Company chooses, or is required by law, to transport
electricity supplied by other entities over the Company’s facilities to City
residents, such transportation shall not be prohibited under this Franchise. The
Company shall periodically report to the City a list of all entities for which the
Company is providing such transport services, and to the extent allowable by law
the names and addresses of each such entity and each City resident to whom
electricity is transported, and the amount of electricity transported by the
Company for each such entity. Nothing in this Franchise shall preclude the City
Page 12 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
from collecting from such entities or residents all applicable taxes and fees
required by the City’s laws, ordinances, and regulations.
10.4 Emergency Use. In the case of any emergency or disaster, the Company shall,
upon reasonable request of the City, make available its facilities for emergency
use during the emergency or the disaster period. Such use of Company facilities
shall be of a limited duration and will only be allowed if the use does not interfere
with the Company's own use of its facilities occasioned by such emergency or
disaster.
10.5 Trenches Available for City Use. The City and Company agree that it is in the
best interest to the community to share and combine facilities in common
trenches, ductways, etc. The Company and City hereby agree to work together to
see that facilities are combined to minimize impacts to the community.
ARTICLE 11
INDEMNIFICATION OF THE CITY
11.1 City Held Harmless.
(A) The Company shall construct, maintain, and operate its facilities in a
manner which provides reasonable protection against injury or damage to
persons or property; provided, however, said obligation of the Company
shall not increase or decrease its liability on third party claims.
(B) The Company shall save the City harmless and indemnify the City from
and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever
in nature, and reimburse the City for all its reasonable expenses, including
attorneys' fees, arising out of the operations of the Company within the
City and the securing of and the exercise by the Company of the rights
granted in this Franchise, including any third party claims, administrative
hearings and litigation.
(C) The indemnification hereby extended shall include delay damages as that
term is used in C.R.S. § 24-91-103.5 et seq., as amended from time to
time, or any successor law thereto, awarded against the City in favor of
contractors for damages incurred by contractors for delays experienced in
the performance of public works contracts entered into with the City;
provided, however, that said indemnification shall extend only to those
delays in performance of public works contracts for which the Company
either agrees it is responsible or which were caused as the result, in whole
or in part, of the acts or omissions of the Company in the performance of
its obligations under this Franchise. Unless the Company otherwise agrees
in writing, in no event shall the Company be required to indemnify the
City for any delay damages awarded against the City unless and until a
Page 13 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
final determination has been made by a court of competent jurisdiction
that the delay damages suffered by a contractor were the result of the acts
or omissions of the Company acting on behalf of or within the City's
control. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as an
acknowledgment by the parties that the Company, in exercising its rights
and obligations under this Franchise, is an entity controlled by, subject to
the control of or acting on behalf of the City for the purposes of C.R.S. §
24-91-103.5, et seq.
(D) In the event of litigation for a breach of this Franchise or for an
interpretation of this Franchise, the prevailing party shall be reimbursed
for all costs related thereto, including reasonable attorney's fees by the
non-prevailing party.
(E) Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, the Company shall
not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the City harmless in any
manner inconsistent with the doctrine of comparative negligence in
Colorado.
11.2 Notice to Company. The City will provide prompt written notice to the Company
of the pendency of any claim or action against the City arising out of the exercise
by the Company of its Franchise rights. The Company will be permitted, at its
own expense, to appear and defend or to assist in defense of such claim.
11.3 Financial Responsibility. At the time of approval of this Franchise by the City,
and from time to time at the City's request, but not more frequently than annually,
the Company shall submit to the City, as a confidential document, proof of its
ability to meet its obligations under this Franchise, including its ability to
indemnify the City as required by this article. This proof may take the form of
insurance coverage, adequate funding of self-insurance, or the provision of a
bond. The Company shall supply the City with a list of its insurance companies
with the types of coverage, but not levels of insurance. Said list shall be kept
current by annual revisions as of January 1 during the term of Franchise. The City
may require, from time to time, and the Company agrees to provide, additional
reasonable funding of the Company's indemnification obligations as a
self-insured, if the Company is acting as a self-insurer. The City, its officers, and
its employees, shall be included as additional insureds as respects this Franchise
on each liability or excess liability policy maintained by the Company.
11.4 Payment of Ordinance Expenses. At the City's option, the Company shall
reimburse the City for reasonable expenses incurred in publication of ordinances,
photocopying of documents, and other related expenses arising from the
negotiations and implementation of this Franchise agreement. No such expenses
paid or reimbursed shall be surcharged specifically against residents of the City.
Page 14 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
ARTICLE 12
UNDERGROUNDING OF OVERHEAD FACILITIES
12.1 Undergrounding of Facilities at Expense of City. Upon request by the City, the
Company agrees to underground existing overhead facilities at the City’s expense,
except when relocation is otherwise required in accordance with the provisions of
§8.4.
12.2 Cooperation with Other Utilities. When undertaking a project of
undergrounding, the City and the Company shall coordinate with other utilities or
companies which have their facilities above ground to attempt to have all
facilities undergrounded as part of the same project. When other utilities or
companies are placing their facilities underground, the Company shall cooperate
with these utilities and companies and undertake to underground Company
facilities as part of the same project where feasible.
12.3 Review and Planning for Undergrounding Projects. The City and the Company
shall mutually plan in advance the scheduling of approved undergrounding
projects to be undertaken according to this Article as a part of the review and
planning for other Company construction projects. The City and the Company
agree to meet, as required, to review the progress of the current undergrounding
projects and to review planned future undergrounding projects. The Company
agrees to use due diligence to see that approved undergrounding projects are, to
the extent reasonably practicable, completed prior to the expiration of this
Franchise. The Company need not approve an undergrounding project if it would
create a significant risk to safety or operational integrity, but it shall provide to the
City written notification of any such non-approval and the grounds therefore.
ARTICLE 13
TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE
13.1 Consent of City Required. The Company shall not sell, re-sell, transfer, assign or
convey any rights under this Franchise, or the assets held by the Company for use
under this Franchise which are in the public rights-of-way, to any third party,
including any merger with such third party, nor undergo any corporate
reorganization or other change which would result in any modification of the
Company's obligations under this Franchise, without first obtaining written
approval of the City; provided, however, that this condition shall not be construed
to restrict or prevent the issuance of bonds, debentures, or other evidence of
indebtedness, or the issuance of additional stock, needed or useful for the purpose
of financing the system or any portion thereof. Should the Company sell, assign,
transfer, convey, or otherwise dispose of its rights or interests under this
Franchise, including the Company’s system or capacity on its system, or attempt
to do so, without the proper approval, the City may revoke this Franchise. Upon
revocation, all rights and interests of the Company under this Franchise shall
Page 15 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
cease. In addition, any sale, re-sale, transfer, assignment, or conveyance in
violation of this Section shall be null and void and unenforceable. For the
purposes of this Section, a change of control of the Company is a transfer.
ARTICLE 14
MUNICIPALIZATION
14.1 City's Right To Purchase Or Condemn.
(A) The right of the City to construct, purchase, or condemn any public utility
works or ways, and the facilities and rights of the Company in connection
therewith, as provided by the Colorado Constitution and statutes, is hereby
expressly reserved, and may be exercised by the City in accordance with
such statutes.
(B) The Company understands and agrees that the right of the City to
construct, purchase, or condemn any public utility works or ways, and the
facilities and rights of the Company in connection therewith, as provided
by the Colorado Constitution and the City's home rule charter, are hereby
expressly reserved, and that such right may be exercised at any time by the
City.
(C) In the event the City exercises its option to purchase or condemn, the
Company agrees that it will continue to maintain its facilities and to
supply any service it supplies under this Franchise, in whole or in part, at
the City's request, for up to a twenty-four month period after the City has
either purchased or condemned the Company's facilities or alternative
arrangements have been made. Both parties will exercise due diligence to
wind up the affairs as soon as practical.
(D) The Company shall cooperate with the City by making available such
records as will enable the City to evaluate the feasibility of acquisition of
Company facilities. The Company shall not be required to conduct
studies or accrue data without reimbursement by the City, but shall make
such studies if reimbursed its costs for the same. The Company shall take
no action, which could inhibit the City’s ability to effectively or efficiently
use the acquired facilities.
14.2 Negotiated Purchase Price or Condemnation Award. If the City desires to
purchase Company facilities and if the Company desires to sell such facilities, the
parties shall negotiate in good faith to determine a mutually acceptable purchase
price for up to ninety (90) days; said purchase price shall exclude the value of
this Franchise. If agreement is not reached, the City and the Company reserve all
rights to assert their respective positions with respect to the steps the City would
Page 16 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
need to take to condemn Company facilities; however, no award shall be made for
the value of the Franchise.
14.3 City-Produced Electricity. The Company understands and agrees that the City
expressly reserves the right to obtain or produce electricity for its own purposes
and wholesale transactions, and the City may exercise that such right at any time.
The Company shall not curtail wholesale purchases of City-generated electricity.
14.4 Purchase of Real Property of Company by City. If at any time during the term of
this Franchise, the Company proposes to sell or dispose of any of its real property
located in whole or in part in the City, it shall grant to the City the right of first
refusal to purchase the same. Nothing in this provision shall preclude the
Company from disposing of its real property in a timely fashion.
14.5 Purchase or Condemnation of Street Lighting System. The provisions of this
Article apply with full and equal force to the purchase or condemnation by the
City of all or a portion of the street lighting service provided by the Company,
including all or a portion of any Company owned street lighting facilities,
equipment, system, and plant. The Company understands and agrees that the City
may choose to so purchase or condemn such street lighting service at any time.
ARTICLE 15
BREACH
15.1 Breach
(A) If the Company fails to perform any of the terms and conditions of this
Franchise and such failure is within the Company's control, the City may
require the Company to show cause, at a hearing before the City council,
the reasons its rights and privileges under this Franchise should not be
forfeited, or other penalties imposed as provided by this Franchise or by
law. No such hearing shall be held unless the Company has first been
given notice of its failure and reasonable time, not to exceed ninety days,
in which to remedy the failures. If the Company does not remedy the
failures, the City council may determine, at such a hearing, whether such
failure to perform and the Company's failure to remedy the same occurred,
and if so, whether such failure to perform is substantial. The City council
may impose one or more of the following remedies or penalties for a
substantial failure to perform:
(1) A civil penalty of Five Hundred Dollars ($500) for each day or
portion thereof in which the council has determined that the failure
was committed or continued. The Company understands and
agrees that such liquidated damages are intended to compensate
the City for the additional efforts of the City in administering and
Page 17 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
enforcing the Franchise, for inconvenience to City operations and
to the residents, and loss of confidence in government and morale
of the City and its residents when Franchise obligations are not
met. Such damages are uncertain in amount and difficult to
measure and prove accurately. By this Franchise, the Company
agrees that the liquidated damages specified herein are reasonable
in amount and are not disproportionate to actual anticipated
damages;
(2) Forfeiture of all rights under this Franchise; or
(3) Any other remedies available to the City by law.
(B) The City may take action to correct the failure, and the Company shall
promptly reimburse the City for the cost of such action.
(C) In the event of judicial action taken by either party to enforce any of the
terms or conditions of this Franchise, each party shall be responsible for
its own attorney fees and costs associated with such action.
15.2 Judicial Review. Any declaration of forfeiture by the City Council shall be
subject to de novo judicial review.).
15.3 Other Legal Remedies. Nothing herein shall limit or restrict any legal rights or
remedies that the City may possess arising from any alleged violation of this
Franchise.
15.4 Continued Obligations. Upon forfeiture, the Company shall continue to provide
service to the City and its residents until the City makes alternative arrangements
for such service.
ARTICLE 16
APPROVAL; AMENDMENTS
16.1 Approval of Franchise. The Company shall promptly file, in writing, its
acceptance of this Franchise. The Franchise, upon approval and execution by
both parties, shall be subject to final approval by the voters of the City in
accordance with the City Charter, and shall become effective only upon such
voter approval.
16.2 Terms Impacted by Legislative and Regulatory Changes. The City and the
Company recognize that the electric utility industry is the subject of numerous
restructuring initiatives by legislative and regulatory authorities. Some of the
initiatives and changes may have an effect upon the terms that would be adverse
to the customers within the City and/or the Company. In the event of such
Page 18 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
regulatory changes, the City and the Company may need to amend various
provisions of this Franchise, and agree to negotiate in good faith in reaching such
amendments.
ARTICLE 17
MISCELLANEOUS
17.1 No Waiver. Neither the City nor the Company shall be excused from complying
with any of the terms and conditions of this Franchise by any failure of the other,
or any of its officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more occasions, to
insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions.
17.2 Successors And Assigns. The rights, privileges, and obligations, in whole or in
part, granted and contained in this Franchise shall inure to the benefit of and be
binding upon the Company, its successors and assigns, to the extent that such
successors or assigns have succeeded to or been assigned the rights of the
Company pursuant to Article 13.
17.3 Third Parties. Nothing contained in this Franchise shall be construed to provide
rights to third parties.
17.4 Representatives. The Company and the City shall designate the persons to whom
notices shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this Franchise. All
Notice shall be in writing and forwarded by mail or hand delivery to the persons
and addresses as stated below, unless changed by written notice given to the
other. Until change is made, notices shall be sent as follows:
To the City:
City Manager
To the Company:
General Manager
17.5 Severability. Should any one or more provisions of this Franchise be determined
to be illegal or unenforceable, all other provisions nevertheless shall remain
effective; provided, however, the parties shall enter into good faith negotiations
and proceed with due diligence to draft a substitute term which will achieve the
original intent of the parties.
17.6 Entire Agreement. This Franchise constitutes the entire agreement of the parties
with respect to the matters contained herein and supersedes any and all prior
written or oral agreements, negotiations, correspondence, understandings and
communications with respect to this Franchise.
17.7 Construction and Enforcement. Colorado law shall apply to the construction and
Page 19 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
enforcement of this Franchise. The parties agree that any litigation arising out of this
Franchise shall be decided by the district court of Montrose County.
(Ord. 1836, Amended, 03/23/2001)
Page 20 of 20
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 1 of 14
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF MONTROSE
AND KN ENERGY
THIS AGREEMENT IS EXECUTED BETWEEN THE CITY OF MONTROSE, COLORADO
AND KN ENERGY, A DIVISION OF KINDER MORGAN, INC.
Whereas, by People' s Ordinance No. 1999-1, the people of the City of Montrose approved a
franchise agreement ("Franchise Agreement") between the City of Montrose and KN Energy,
Inc., said approval being effective on November 2, 1999, and
Whereas, by Ordinance No. 1739, said Franchise Agreement was amended by the City of
Montrose, providing inter alia the change of the name "KN Energy, Inc." to "KN Energy, a
Division of Kinder Morgan, Inc.", said amendments becoming effective on December 16, 1999,
and
Whereas, both the original Franchise Agreement as provided by People's Ordinance 1999-1 and
the subsequent amendments as provided by Ordinance 1739 have been approved and executed
by KN Energy, a Division of Kinder Morgan, Inc.;
NOW THEREFORE, the Franchise Agreement between the City of Montrose and KN Energy,
a Division of Kinder Morgan, Inc., as amended and in its entirety, is provided as follows:
ARTICLE 1
TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
1.1 SHORT TITLE. This Ordinance shall be known and may be referred to as the "KN
Energy Franchise Ordinance".
1.2 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with context, words used in the present
tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number,
and words in the singular number may include the plural number. The word "shall" is
mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this Article shall be
given their common and ordinary meaning.
1.3 "City" is the City of Montrose located in Montrose County, Colorado, the grantor of
rights under this franchise.
1.4 "Company" is KN Energy, a Division of Kinder Morgan, Inc., the grantee of the rights
under this franchise.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 2 of 14
1.5 "Council" is the City Council of the City of Montrose, Colorado.
1.6 "Facilities" refer to and are all facilities reasonably necessary to provide gas service into,
within and through the City, including but not limited to plants, works, systems,
substations, transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment, pipes, mains,
underground lines, gas compressors, meters, meter reading devices, communication and
data transfer equipment, control equipment and gas regulator stations. "Facilities within
the streets" shall refer to all facilities located upon, above, under, across, along and
within said streets.
1.7 "PUC" refers to the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado or other state
agencies succeeding to the regulatory powers of the Public Utilities Commission.
1.8 "Residents" refer to and include all persons, businesses, industries, governmental
agencies, and any other entity whatsoever, presently located or to be hereinafter located,
in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the City.
1.9 "Streets" refer to streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes, utility easements and
other public rights-of-way in the City, excluding any easement the terms of which do not
permit the use thereof by the Company. "Within the streets" shall mean upon, above,
under, across, along and within said streets.
ARTICLE 2
GRANT OF FRANCHISE
2.1 The City hereby grants to the Company, for the period specified herein and subject to the
conditions, terms, and provisions contained herein, a non-exclusive right to furnish, sell
and distribute gas to the City and to all residents of the City. The City also hereby grants
to the Company a non-exclusive right to acquire, construct, install, locate, maintain,
operate, and extend into, within and through the City, all facilities reasonably necessary
to furnish, sell and distribute gas within and through the City and a non-exclusive right to
make reasonable use of the streets as may be necessary to carry-out the terms of this
franchise, provided however, that the Company shall so locate its facilities within said
City in a manner to meet with the approval of City, and in locating said facilities, shall do
so in such manner as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, and to
cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property
owners whose property adjoins any of said streets.
2.2 The rights and authority granted by this franchise are not exclusive and shall not be
deemed to be granted exclusively to the Company, and City reserves the right to make or
grant a similar franchise to any other person, firm or corporation.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 3 of 14
2.3 Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the City retains the right to use, control,
and regulate through the exercise of its police power, the use of the streets, and other
public places, and the City retains the right to impose such other regulations as may be
determined by the City to be necessary in the exercise of the police power to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
2.4 Neither the City nor the Company waives any rights under the statutes and Constitution
of the State of Colorado or the United States except as otherwise specifically set forth
herein. This franchise constitutes a valid and binding contract between the Company and
the City. In the event that the franchise fees specified herein are declared illegal,
unconstitutional, or void for any reason by any court or other proper authority, the
Company shall be contractually bound to pay monthly rental fees to the City in an
aggregate amount that would be, as nearly as practical, equivalent to the amount which
would have been paid by the Company as a franchise fee hereunder as consideration for
use of the City’s streets.
ARTICLE 3
TERM OF FRANCHISE
3.1 This franchise shall take effect upon its adoption and shall supersede any prior franchise
grants to the Company by the City. The term of this franchise shall be for twenty years,
subject however to the provisions of Article 5 below.
ARTICLE 4
FRANCHISE FEE
4.1 In consideration for franchise rights granted herein, and in lieu of all occupation and
license taxes, other special taxes, assessments, excises or rentals upon the facilities of the
Company, the Company shall pay to the City the franchise fee to be computed as follows
for all gas sold or delivered within the City:
$0. 0166 / ccf x Volume of Gas Delivered within the City
4.2 The franchise factor of $0.0166 / ccf shall be adjusted each year based upon the
percentage in average natural gas prices from the prior calendar year to the current
calendar year. The average natural gas price for a calendar year will be calculated as the
twelve-month simple average of the Inside FERC First of the Month "Index" for the
Northwest Pipeline Corp. - Rocky Mountains. The adjustment factor shall be calculated
by dividing current calendar year average natural gas price by the prior calendar year
average natural gas price. In the event that the average natural gas price, as described
herein, decreases from one calendar year to the next, the factor will be reduced so long as
it is not less than $0.0166 / ccf.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 4 of 14
4.3 Franchise fees shall be remitted by the Company to the City on a quarterly basis, within
30 days of the end of each calendar quarter.
4.4 In the event that either the City or the Company discovers that there has been an error in
the calculation of the franchise fee payment to the City, the error shall be corrected in the
next quarterly payment, except that, in the event of overpayment of the franchise fee by
the Company in excess of $1,000, such overpayment shall be credited to the Company in
successive quarterly credits, so as to not exceed $1,000 credit in any quarter. In no event
shall the City be required to refund any overpayment made as a result of Company error
which occurred more than three years prior to the discovery of the error.
4.5 Payment of the franchise fee shall not excuse the Company from payment of either sales
and use taxes or property taxes, as such taxes are levied from time to time, or from
obtaining excavation permits, which permits shall be at no charge to the Company, if
required by City regulations.
ARTICLE 5
MODIFICATION OF FRANCHISE FEE
5.1 In recognition of the length of the term of this franchise, and in further recognition of the
changed computation of the franchise fee as set forth herein, being based upon volume of
gas delivered rather than percentage of revenue, the Company agrees, to the extent
permitted by law, to cooperate with and assist with the City in modifying this franchise to
assure that the Company collects and the City receives an amount in franchise fees that is
at least the same amount collected in franchise fees prior to the effective date of this
franchise agreement, as adjusted for increases in usage and inflation, and regardless of
what entity in the future is involved in furnishing gas service to the City and its residents.
5.2 The negotiation for such modification, should it occur, shall be commenced, by advance
written notice by the City to the Company, prior to the end of the first five-year period
from the effective date of this franchise agreement. If, upon such notice, the parties are
unable to diligently negotiate, in good faith, the modification of the franchise fee to the
mutual satisfaction of both parties, then the City may declare forfeiture of this franchise,
and the provisions of §12.3 shall apply. If no notice to renegotiate the franchise fee is
provided within the first five-year period of this franchise agreement, than the franchise
agreement shall remain in full force and effect for the remainder of the twenty-year term.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 5 of 14
ARTICLE 6
DISCLOSURE OF RECORDS
6.1 The City, or its designated agent, shall have access to the books and records of the
Company during normal business hours upon advance notice of not less than 30 days, for
the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the terms of this franchise, and compliance
with City sales and use taxes. The City may use such information for the purposes of
enforcing its laws, ordinances, and regulations. Nothing herein shall exempt the
Company from any other requirements regarding the production of information as
provided in the ordinances and regulations of the City.
6.2 Upon request by the City, the Company shall, to the extent it can lawfully do so, supply
the City with a list, in such formats as reasonably requested by the City, of all resident
customers of the Company, all suppliers of gas that utilize the Company's facilities, the
names and addresses of each such supplier and resident, and the volume of gas sold by
each such supplier to each such resident. All information obtained by the City or its
designated agent, in accordance with the provisions herein, shall be kept confidential and
shall be utilized for the sole purpose of enforcing City laws, ordinances, and regulations.
ARTICLE 7
SUPPLY, FACLITIES AND CONSTRUCTION
PROVISION OF GAS SERVICE
7.1 The Company shall at all times take all reasonable and necessary steps to the extent
possible under applicable laws and regulations to assure the adequate provision of gas
service to the City and its residents at the lowest reasonable cost consistent with reliable
short term and long-term service. In addition, the Company shall operate its facilities
pursuant to the highest practicable level of service quality and reliability in providing gas
service to the City and its residents. This Franchise Agreement shall be subject to
forfeiture under Section 12.3 herein, for any material failure by the Company to provide
or extend gas service to its customers in accordance with the provisions of this Article 7.
This Franchise Agreement is not a gas service agreement and shall not serve as a basis
for any cause of action or damages against the Company by a third party with respect to
any failure in providing or extending gas service. The Company shall be excused from
meeting gas service reliability standards only to the extent that such service interruptions
are caused by circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the Company. Upon the
City’s request, the Company will provide the City copies of service reliability reports
filed by the Company with the PUC.
7.2 If the provision of gas service to the City or any resident of the City is interrupted, the
Company shall immediately take all necessary and reasonable actions to restore such
service at the shortest practicable time. If gas service is to be interrupted due to a
planned outage, except in cases of emergency, the Company shall notify its customers
and the City in advance.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 6 of 14
7.3 In the event that the Company’s gas system, or any part thereof, is partially or wholly
destroyed or incapacitated, the Company shall use due diligence to restore its system to
satisfactory service within the shortest practicable time. If the Company, within a
reasonable period of time after failure of gas service, fails to cure said problem or is
unable to provide the residents with alternate gas service, the franchise rights granted
herein shall be subject to forfeiture.
7.4 The Company shall furnish gas service within the corporate limits of the City and any
addition thereto, to the City and to the residents thereof, and at the rates and under the
terms and conditions set forth in the tariffs, rules, regulations and orders filed with or
issued by the PUC. The Company shall not, as to rates, charges, services, facilities, rules,
regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any
resident or subject any resident to any prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in
this franchise shall be taken to prohibit discounts authorized by the Company or by the
PUC, or the establishment from time to time of a graduated scale of charges and
classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within an established
classification would so be entitled. The rates to be charged by said Company for
industrial gas used within the City corporate limits may be lower and different from those
rates charged for gas consumed for other purposes, as long as service to non-industrial
customers shall continue to be provided in accordance with the Company’s rates,
regulations and orders of the PUC.
7.5 The Company from time to time may promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions governing the conduct of its business, including the utilization of gas and
payment therefor, and the interference with, or alteration of any of the Company’s
property upon the premises of its customers, as shall be necessary to ensure continuous
and uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers and the proper measurement
thereof and payment therefor, provided that the Company shall keep on file in the office
of City Clerk of the City, and available to the public, copies of its Rate Schedules,
Standards for Service, Rules and Regulations and Service Connection and Extension
Policies, concurrently in effect and as filed with the PUC.
FACILITIES
7.6 The Company shall from time to time during the term of this franchise make such
enlargements and extensions of its facilities as the business of the Company and growth
of the City so justify, in accordance with the tariffs, rules, regulations and orders
currently in effect and on file with the PUC.
7.7 The Company shall comply with all applicable City, State and Federal laws and
regulations in the location, construction and operation of its facilities within the City.
The Company shall maintain its facilities in good condition and repair at all times.
Company facilities shall not interfere with water facilities, sanitary sewer facilities, storm
water facilities or other uses of the City streets. Company facilities shall be installed and
maintained so as to minimize interference with other property, trees and landscaping, and
other improvements and natural features.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 7 of 14
7.8 The Company shall promptly repair all damage caused by Company activities or
facilities. If such damage poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public or
individuals, the City may cause repairs to be made and require the Company to promptly
reimburse the City for the costs of such repairs, unless the Company makes such repairs
promptly upon the City's request.
CONSTRUCTION
7.9 All construction and repair of facilities within the City is subject to inspection by the City
and a determination by the City that said construction and repair has been performed in
accordance with all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City. It shall be a
condition of the City's approval that, for any facility installed, renovated, or replaced
after the effective date of this franchise, the Company shall provide the City with as-built
drawings of each such facility in such formats as reasonable requested by the City. The
Company shall furnish such information in both hard copy and in digital format,
compatible with City's information system, referencing state plane coordinates.
7.10 The Company must obtain an excavation permit prior to any excavation, except for
emergency work, or minor work which does not disturb actual street surfaces or other
public or private improvements or other utilities. Should it become necessary for the
Company, in exercising its rights and performing its duties hereunder, to interfere with
any street or other public or private improvement, the Company shall repair at its own
expense, and in a workmanlike manner subject to the approval by the City, such
improvement.
7.11 The Company shall use due care not to interfere with or damage any water facilities,
sanitary sewer facilities, storm water facilities, or other structures now in place or which
may hereafter be placed in said streets, and Company shall, at its own expense, repair in a
workmanlike manner, and subject to the approval of the City, any such water facilities,
sanitary sewer facilities, storm water facilities, or other structures which are damages
through the action of the Company, provided, however, that the City may make such
repairs and charge the reasonable cost thereof to the Company. This grant of authority
shall apply to all streets presently platted or otherwise of record, all gas easements
presently owned by or dedicated to the City or the public within the City limits, and to all
future streets and gas easements later acquired by or dedicated to the City and located
within the City limits.
The Company shall be responsible to remedy any defects and repair work performed by
the Company for a period of two years after completion. The City shall have the right to
inspect and supervise any work on City property and improvements.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 8 of 14
RELOCATION OF FACILITIES
7.12 If at any time the City requests the Company to relocate any facility installed or
maintained in the streets pursuant to this franchise or any previous franchise, in order to
permit the City to make any public use of the streets, to construct any public
improvement, to build any public project, or to pursue any municipal purpose in which
the City has a financial or ownership interest, such relocation shall be made by the
Company at its expense, provided however that the City shall confer with the Company
and seek the Company's input during the initial planning and engineering phase of any
such improvement project, in order to explore means of minimizing such relocation costs
at no detriment to the City. The Company shall complete such relocations as soon as
practicable from the date when the City makes its request, except that the Company may
be granted an extension of time for completion equivalent to any delay caused by
conditions not under its control. Following relocation, all property shall be restored
substantially to its former condition by the Company at its expense.
ARTICLE 8
INSURANCE
8.1 The Company agrees to procure and maintain, at its own cost, a policy or policies of
insurance sufficient to insure against all liability, claims, demands, and other obligations
assumed by the Company pursuant to Article 9. Such insurance shall be in addition to
any other insurance requirements imposed by this agreement or by law. The Company
shall not be relieved of any liability, claims, demands, or other obligations assumed
pursuant to Article 9 by reason of its failure to procure or maintain insurance, or by reason
of its failure to procure or maintain insurance in sufficient amounts, duration, or types.
8.2 Company shall procure and maintain the minimum insurance coverages listed below.
Such coverages shall be procured and maintained with forms and insurers acceptable to
the City. All coverages shall be continuously maintained to cover all liability, claims,
demands, and other obligations assumed by the Company pursuant to Article 9. In the
case of any claims-made policy, the necessary retroactive dates and extended reporting
periods shall be procured to maintain such continuous coverage:
A. Worker's Compensation insurance to cover obligations imposed by applicable
laws for any employee engaged in the performance of work under this franchise,
and Employers' liability coverage with minimum limits of FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS ($500,000) each accident, FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS ($500,000) disease - policy limit, and FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS ($500,000) disease - each employee.
Evidence of qualified self-insured status may be substituted for the Worker's
Compensation requirements stated herein.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 9 of 14
B. Commercial General Liability insurance with minimum combined single limits of
ONE MILLION DOLLARS ($1,000,000) each occurrence and ONE MILLION
DOLLARS ($1,000,000) aggregate. The policy shall be applicable to all
premises and operations. The policy shall include coverage for bodily injury,
broad form property damage (including completed operations), personal injury
(including coverage for contractual and employee acts), blanket contractual,
independent contractors, products, and completed operations. The policy shall
include a coverage for explosion, collapse, and underground hazards. The policy
shall contain a severability of interests provision.
C. Comprehensive Automobile Liability insurance with minimum combined single
limits for bodily injury and property damage of not less than ONE MILLION
DOLLARS ($1,000,000) each occurrence and ONE MILLION DOLLARS
($1,000,000) aggregate with respect to each of Company's owned, hired and
non-owned vehicles assigned to or used in performance of the services provided
in accordance with this franchise. The policy shall contain a severability of
interests provision. If the Company has no owned automobiles, the requirements
as set forth herein shall be met by each employee of the Company providing
services to the City under this franchise.
8.3 The policies required above shall be endorsed to include the City and City's officers and
employees as additional insureds. Every policy required above shall be primary
insurance and any insurance carried by the City, its officers, or its employees, or carried
by or provided through any insurance pool of the City, shall be excess and not
contributory insurance to that provided by Company. No additional insured endorsement
to any policy shall contain any exclusion for bodily injury or property damage arising
from completed operations. The Company shall be solely responsible for any deductible
losses under any policy required above.
8.4 The certificate of insurance provided by the City shall be completed by the Company's
insurance agent as evidence that policies providing the required coverages, conditions,
and minimum limits are in full force and effect, and shall be reviewed and approved by
the City prior to any commencement of the franchise. No other form of certificate shall
be used. The certificate shall identify this franchise and shall provide that the coverages
afforded under the policies shall not be cancelled, terminated or materially changed until
at least 30 days prior written notice has been given to the City.
8.5 Failure on the part of the Company to procure or maintain policies providing the required
coverages, conditions, and minimum limits shall constitute a material breach of the
franchise after the City has provided Company written notice of the failure, and upon
sixty days thereafter, to cure any failure as so noticed. Thereafter, if Company has failed
to cure, the City may terminate this franchise, or at its discretion, the City may procure or
renew any such policy or any extended reporting period thereto and may pay any and all
premiums in connection therewith, and all monies so paid by the City shall be repaid by
the Company to the City upon demand, or the City may offset the cost of the premiums
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 10 of 14
against any monies due to Company from the City. The City reserves the right to request
and receive a certified copy of any policy and any endorsement thereto.
8.6 The parties hereto understand and agree that the City is relying on, and does not waive or
intend to waive by any provision of this franchise, the monetary limitations (presently
$150,000 per person and $600,000 per occurrence) or any other rights, immunities, and
protections provided by the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act, § 24-10-101 et seq.,
as from time to time amended.
ARTICLE 9
INDEMNIFICATION
9.1 The Company agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees,
insurers, and self-insurance pool, from and against all liability, claims, and demands, on
account of injury, loss, or damage, including without limitation claims arising from
bodily injury, personal injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage, or any
other loss of any kind whatsoever, which arise out of or are in any manner connected
with this franchise, to the extent such injury, loss, or damage is caused in whole or in part
by, or is claimed to be caused in whole or in part by, the act, omission, error, professional
error, mistake, negligence, or other fault of the Company, any subcontractor of the
Company, or any officer, employee, representative, or agent of the Company or of any
subcontractor of the Company, or which arise out of any worker's compensation claim of
any employee of the Company or of any employee of any subcontractor of the Company.
9.2 The Company agrees to investigate, handle, respond to, and to provide defense for and
defend against, any such liability, claims or demands at the sole expense of the Company.
The Company shall have the right and responsibility to make all decisions, in its sole
discretion, regarding the conduct of such defense and the settlement or other resolution
of such liability, claims, or demands with respect to which it has indemnification,
reimbursement, or payment responsibility. If requested by the City, the Company agrees
to pay the City or reimburse the City for the reasonable and necessary defense costs
incurred by the City in connection with, any such liability, claims, or demands. The
Company also agrees to bear all other costs and expenses related thereto, including court
costs and attorney fees, whether or not any such liability, claims, or demands alleged are
groundless, false, or fraudulent.
9.3 The obligation as stated herein shall not extend to any injury, loss, or damage, to the
extent that it is caused by the act, omission, or other fault of the City, its officers, or its
employees.
9.4 The Company hereby waives any claim for damages to its property within City streets,
against the City, its officers and employees, except for damages caused by the gross
negligence, recklessness, or the specific intent of the City, its officers or employees.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 11 of 14
ARTICLE 10
ASSIGNMENT
10.1 The Company shall not assign this franchise, or the rights granted herein, without first
obtaining approval of the voters of the City. Unless otherwise required by Colorado
Statutes or Constitution, this requirement shall not apply to any merger, reorganization,
sale, transfer or other disposition, of the Company, or of the Company's real property
located within the City, if the same is part of a merger, reorganization, sale, transfer or
other disposition involving other gas utility assets of the Company located in other towns,
as long as such merger, reorganization, sale, transfer, or other disposition does not impair
the ability of the Company or its successor to operate under this franchise in full
accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein. This provision shall not be
construed to restrict or prevent the issuance of bonds, debenture or other evidence of
indebtedness, or the issue of additional stock, needed or useful for the purpose of
financing the facilities.
ARTICLE 11
MUNICIPALIZATION
11.1 The Company understands and acknowledges the right of the City to construct, purchase,
or condemn any public utility works or ways, and the rights of the Company in
connection therewith, as provided by the Colorado Constitution and Statutes, and such
right is hereby expressly reserved, and that such right may be exercised by the City in
accordance with the Colorado Constitution and Statutes.
11.2 Should this right be exercised, the City shall pay to the Company the fair market value
for the facilities, and further compensate the Company for any "stranded" contract or
facility costs. If the parties are unable to agree to the fair market value, such value shall
be determined through binding arbitration. In case of such arbitration, each party shall
choose one arbitrator, and the two arbitrators so chosen shall choose a third arbitrator,
who shall serve as chairman of the three-member arbitration panel. The costs of such
arbitration shall be divided equally between the parties, including attorney fees.
11.3 The Company shall provide upon request a listing of the property within the corporate
limits, including original cost, depreciation rates, and current book value, along with
contracts and facilities that the Company considers to be "stranded" and the dollar value
claimed by the Company therefor.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 12 of 14
11.4 The purchase price of the facilities set forth in 11.2 above represents an agreed upon
method of valuing the acquisition ofthe facilities by the City, which is an alternative to
any other lawful valuation method for acquiring title to said facilities by the City. The
City Council may authorize the acquisition of such facilities by ordinance to the extent
permitted by the Colorado Constitution and Statutes, and the City retains the right to
acquire property outside the City limits by condemnation or otherwise, as granted by the
Colorado Constitution. In the event the City proceeds with an acquisition of the
Company's facilities, the Company shall continue to provide service until the effective
date of the transfer of such facilities. The Company and the City agree to work together
to coordinate the timing of any such acquisition to prevent disruption in service to
customers within the City.
11.5 If at any time during the term of this franchise, the Company proposes to sell or dispose
of any of its real property located in whole or in part within the City, it shall grant to the
City the right of first refusal to purchase the same. This right of first refusal shall not
apply or be given effect to any sale or disposition involving such property if it is part of a
sale or disposition involving other gas utility property of the Company located in
communities other than Montrose.
ARTICLE 12
MISCELLANEOUS
12.1 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES. Upon the execution of this franchise, if the Company
shall not have acquired an extension or renewal thereof and accepted the same, it may
have, and it is hereby granted the right to enter upon the streets of the City, for the
purpose of removing therefrom any and all of its facilities, at any time after the City has
had ample time and opportunity to purchase, condemn, or replace them. In so removing
said facilities, the Company shall, at its own expense, and in a workmanlike manner,
restore all effective properties to their preceding condition.
12.2 SURETY. Within 15 days after the PUC of the State of Colorado has granted to the
Company a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity and after appeal rights have
expired, the Company shall deposit with the City a bond in the penal sum of $10,000
executed by the Company with surety to be approved by the City, conditioned upon
compliance with the terms and conditions of this franchise and further condition that the
Company and its surety shall pay to the City all costs, expenses and damages resulting to
the City from the failure of the Company to comply with the terms and conditions of this
franchise, and further conditioned that the City shall recover all costs and expenses
incurred in enforcing collection of said bond. Such bond shall be maintained in full force
and effect during the period of this franchise, and additional security may be required
from time to time by the City.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 13 of 14
12.3 FORFEITURE. The City reserves the right to declare a forfeiture of this franchise for the
breach of a substantial and material provision thereof. No forfeiture shall be declared
until the Company shall have had an opportunity to be heard before the City Council, and
show cause why its rights and privileges under this franchise should not be forfeited, or
other penalties imposed by this franchise or by law. Any such hearings shall first require
written notice, providing the Company reasonable time within which to cure said breach.
The City Council may elect to implement its remedy of forfeiture in accordance with this
provision. Any declaration of forfeiture shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to
C.R.S. §106(a)(4). Unless expressly stated in this Franchise Agreement, nothing herein
shall limit or restrict any legal rights or remedies that the City or the Company may
possess arising from any alleged violation of this franchise. Upon forfeiture, the
Company shall continue to provide service to the City and its residents until the City
makes alternative arrangements for such service.
12.4 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
franchise is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision,
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion hereof.
12.5 RESERVED RIGHTS. The right is hereby reserved to the City to adopt, from time to
time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, such ordinances as may be deemed
necessary in the exercise of its police power, provided that such regulations shall be
reasonable and not destructive of the rights herein granted, and not in conflict with the
laws of the State of Colorado.
12.6 AMENDMENTS. At any time during the term of this franchise, the City, through its
City Council, or the Company may propose amendments to this franchise by giving 30
days written notice to the other party of the proposed amendments desired. Both parties
thereafter will negotiate within a reasonable time, in good faith, in an effort to agree on
mutually satisfactory amendments.
12.7 NO WAIVER. Neither the City nor the Company shall be excused from complying with
any of the terms and conditions of this franchise by any failure of the other, or any of its
officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek
compliance with any such terms and conditions.
12.8 THIRD PARTIES. Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to provide
rights to third parties.
Montrose Municipal Code
Page 14 of 14
12.9 REPRESENTATIVES. Both parties shall designate from time to time in writing
representatives for the Company and the City who will be the persons to whom notices
shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this franchise. All notices shall be in
writing and forwarded by certified mail or hand delivery to the persons and addresses as
hereinafter stated, unless the persons and addresses are changed at the written request of
either party, delivered in person, or by certified mail. Until any such change shall
hereafter be made, notices shall be sent as follows:
City of Montrose
Attn: City Manager
P.O. Box 790
Montrose, CO 81402
KN Energy, a Division of Kinder Morgan, Inc.
P.O. Box 281304
Lakewood, CO 80228-8304
12.10 This franchise constitutes the entire agreement of the parties with respect to the matters
contained herein and supersedes any and all prior written or oral agreements,
negotiations, correspondence, understandings and communications with respect to this
franchise.
12.11 This Agreement is effective November 2, 1999.