HOME RULE CHARTER AND CODE 
OF THE 
TOWN OF WINDSOR, COLORADO 
2006 
Beginning with Supp. 11,
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF WINDSOR 
Mayor 
Kristie Melendez 
Mayor Pro Tem 
Ken Bennett 
Town Board 
Kristie Melendez 
Ken Bennett 
Myles Baker 
Barry Wilson 
Paul Rennemeyer 
Thomas Jones 
David Sislowski 
Town Clerk 
Krystal Eucker 
Town Manager 
Shane Hale 
Town Attorneys 
Ian McCargar 
Kim Emil 
SUPPLEMENTATION 
The Windsor, Colorado Municipal Code, originally published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, will be kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
Supplements to this Code provide periodic updating through the removal and replacement of pages. This inter-leaf supplementation system requires that each page which is to be removed and replaced is identified so that the updating may be accurately accomplished and historically maintained. 
Instructions for supplementation are provided for each supplement, identified by Supplement number, date and inclusive ordinance numbers. The Instructions for posting the removal and replacement of pages must be followed and accomplished in sequence, with the most recent supplementation posted last . 
When supplementation is completed and the removal and replacement of all pages are accomplished, the Instructions should be placed under the Supplementation tab, behind this page, with the most recent Instruction sheet on top. Previous Instructions should not be removed, so that the user may refer to this tab section to verify whether the code book is fully updated with all supplements included. 
The maintenance of a Municipal Code with all supplementation is an important activity which deserves close attention so that the value of the code is maintained as a fully comprehensive compilation of the legislative ordinances of the municipality. 
AMENDMENTS 
Amendments may be made to the Code by additions, revisions or deletions therefrom. Those changes may be made as follows: 
Additions: Additions may be made by ordinance to the Code as follows: 
The "Windsor Municipal Code" is amended by the addition thereto of a new Section 2-7-10, which is to read as follows: 
(Set out full section number, title and contents) 
or if the location of the new section number or numbers is undetermined, the Code may be amended as follows: 
The "Windsor Municipal Code" is amended by the addition of the following: 
(Set out section title and contents) 
Revisions: A revision of the Code may be accomplished as follows: 
Section 2-7-10 of the "Windsor Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the readopted code section) 
or as follows: Section 2-7-10 of the "Windsor Municipal Code" is amended to read as follows: (Set out section number, title and entire contents of the amended code section) 
Repeal: Sections, articles and chapters may be repealed as follows: 
Section 2-7-10 of the "Windsor Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supplement No. 11 2014-1477  8- 8-2014 Omitted 2014-1478  8- 8-2014 Omitted 2014-1479  8- 8-2014 Omitted 2014-1480  8- 8-2014 Omitted 2014-1481 10-13-2014 Included 2014-1483 10-27-2014 Omitted 2014-1484 11-10-2014 Omitted 2014-1485 11-10-2014 Included 2014-1487 11-24-2014 Included 2014-1488 11-24-2014 Included 2015-1494  3-23-2015 Included 2015-1496  5-11-2015 Included 2015-1497  5-11-2015 Omitted 2015-1498  6- 8-2015 Included 2015-1499  6- 8-2015 Omitted 2015-1501  8-10-2015 Included 2015-1502  8-10-2015 Included 2015-1503  8-10-2015 Included Supplement No. 12 2015-1504  8-24-2015 Included 2015-1506  9-28-2015 Included 2015-1507 10-26-2015 Included 2015-1508 10-26-2015 Included 2015-1509 10-26-2015 Included 2015-1510 11- 9-2015 Included 2015-1512 11-23-2015 Included 2015-1514 12-14-2015 Omitted 2015-1515  1-11-2016 Included 2016-1516  1-25-2016 Omitted 2016-1517  1-25-2016 Included 2016-1518  1-25-2016 Included 2014-37 (Res.)  7-14-2014 Included Supplement No. 13 2016-1524  9-12-2016 Included 2016-1525  9-12-2016 Included 2016-1526 10-24-2016 Included 2016-1527 12-12-2016 Included 2016-93(Res.) 12-12-2016 Included 2017-1529  1-23-2017 Omitted 2017-1532  4-10-2017 Included 2017-1533  3-27-2017 Included 2017-1534  4-10-2017 Included 2017-1538  6-12-2017 Included 2017-1539  6-12-2017 Included Supplement No. 14 2017-1540  7-10-2017 Included 2017-1541  9-25-2017 Included 2017-1542  9-25-2017 Included 2017-1543  9-25-2017 Included 2017-1544 10- 9-2017 Omitted 2017-1546 10-23-2017 Omitted 2017-1547 11-13-2017 Omitted 2017-1548  1- 8-2018 Omitted 2017-1549 11-27-2017 Omitted 2017-1550 11-27-2017 Omitted 2017-1551 12-11-2017 Omitted 2017-1552 12- 4-2017 Omitted 2017-1553  1- 8-2018 Included 2018-1554  1-22-2018 Omitted 2018-1555  2-26-2018 Included 2018-1556  2-26-2018 Omitted 2018-1557  3-12-2018 Omitted 2018-1558  4-23-2018 Omitted 2018-1559  5-14-2018 Omitted Supplement No. 15 2018-1560  6-11-2018 Omitted 2018-1561  6-25-2018 Included 2018-1562  7- 9-2018 Included 2018-1563  7- 9-2018 Included 2018-1564 11-26-2018 Omitted 2018-1565  8-13-2018 Included 2018-1566  8-13-2018 Omitted 2018-1567  8-13-2018 Omitted 2018-1568 10- 8-2018 Included 2018-1569  8-13-2018 Included 2018-1570  9-24-2018 Omitted 2018-1571  9-24-2018 Omitted 2018-89 10- 8-2018 Included 2018-1572 10- 8-2018 Included 2018-1573 12-10-2018 Omitted 2018-1574 11-26-2018 Included 2018-1575 11-26-2018 Included 2018-1576 11-26-2018 Included 2018-108 12-10-2018 Omitted 2018-1577 12-10-2018 Omitted 2018-1578 12-10-2018 Omitted 2018-1579 12-10-2018 Included 2018-1580 12-10-2018 Included 2019-09  1-28-2019 Omitted 2019-1582  1-28-2019 Omitted 2019-1586  4- 8-2019 Included 2019-1587  5-13-2019 Included 2019-1588  6-10-2019 Included  
TOWN OF WINDSOR HOME RULE CHARTER 
2003 
Beginning with Supp. 11,
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 

> 
PREFATORY SYNOPSIS 
    We, the fifteen Charter Commission Members elected by the citizens of the Town of Windsor, have drafted this Home Rule Charter in accordance with the Constitution of the State of Colorado and the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1971 and hereby respectfully submit this Charter to the electors of the Town of Windsor for their approval. 
    The members of the Charter Commission have worked diligently and earnestly to draft a broad and general Home Rule Charter, which provides a basic framework for our local government, requires fiscal responsibility and accountability, while creating a Charter that addresses the issues and challenges facing the Town of Windsor. Recognizing the importance of citizen participation in Town government and being mindful of the dynamic environment, and the opportunities for the Town, the members of the Commission held public meetings, conducted public hearings, encouraged citizen involvement, and received valuable input and opinion from the Windsor citizens. 
    The Charter provisions grant its citizens full rights to participate in Town government through powers of initiative, referendum, and recall as protected by the Constitution of the State of Colorado. This philosophy of citizen participation is reinforced by the continued application of the Taxpayers Bill of Rights (TABOR). 
    Special mention should be made as to the relationship of the Charter to other applicable laws. The Bill of Rights and other protections afforded citizens by the United States Constitution are, of course, primary. The Constitution of the State of Colorado also contains specific limitations on the Town's home rule powers. The Commission recognizes that the Charter is subordinate to, and must keep faith with, those federal and state enactments that limit the Town's home rule powers. The Commission also recognizes that certain State Statutes should continue to apply to the Town. Variations were made from the statutes only where home rule powers permitted and sound reasons existed. Transition provisions were included to insure an orderly implementation of the Town Charter. 
    It is the intent of this Charter to uphold, promote and demand the highest standards of ethics and conduct for all the employees and officials, whether elected, appointed, or hired for the Town of Windsor. The Town Board, all Town employees and all members of boards, commissions, committees and task forces shall maintain the highest standards of personal integrity, truthfulness, honesty, and accountability in discharging their public duties, and shall never abuse their positions or powers for improper or personal gain. 
PREAMBLE 
    With the foregoing principles in mind, this Charter serves as the framework for a Town government that best serves the entire Windsor community of the people, by the people and for the people. 
SPECIAL RECOGNITION 
    One of the original Charter Commission members, Mary Lee, served as recording secretary and provided exceptional support in the process of writing this Charter. Her expertise and dedication were invaluable and was greatly appreciated by all members. 
ARTICLE I - Definitions 
    The following definitions shall apply as used in this Charter except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. 

1.1 - Abuse of Public Office. 
Any violation of State Statutes relating to public trust or public funds classified as a felony or a misdemeanor. 
1.2 - Ad Valorem Tax. 
The general property tax levied annually on taxable real or personal property listed with the assessors of Weld and Larimer Counties, Colorado. 
1.3 - Appropriation. 
The authorized amount of monetary funds designated for an expenditure during a specified time for a specified purpose, usually as an appropriation of funds in the Town budget or amendment thereto. 
1.4 - Board or Commission. 
The boards or commissions established by this Charter or ordinances. 
1.5 - Board Member. 
Each member of the Town Board except the Mayor. 
1.6 - Business Entity. 
  
A.  Any corporation whether for profit or nonprofit, governmental entity, business, trust, limited liability company, partnership, association, or other legal entity; and 
B.  Any other form of business, sole proprietorship, firm or venture, carried on for profit. 
1.7 - Clerk. 
The Town Clerk of the Town of Windsor or such office designation as may be used in place of the office of Town Clerk. 
1.8 - Conflict Of Interest. 
A situation, circumstance, or financial interest that has the potential to cause a private or public interest to interfere with the proper exercise of a public duty. 
1.9 - Contract. 
Any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any material, service, or other thing of value is to be furnished for a valuable consideration or is to be sold or transferred. 
1.10 - Director Of Finance. 
The Director of Finance for the Town of Windsor or such office designation as may be used in place of the office of Director of Finance. 
1.11 - Domestic Partnership. 
An exclusive committed relationship between two (2) unmarried adult persons who are unrelated by blood, maintain a mutual residence, and share basic living expenses. 
1.12 - Elected Official. 
The Mayor and each Board member, whether elected or appointed. 
1.13 - Emergency. 
A matter which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen, and on which immediate action is genuinely and urgently necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare. 
1.14 - Employee, Town Employee, or Employee of the Town. 
Each compensated person in the service of the Town who is designated as an employee in the personnel rules and regulations of the Town. 
1.15 - Family. 
Any person who is related to the official, public body member, or employee in one of the following ways: spouse, parent, grandparent, child, stepchild, grandchild, sibling, or other similar relation to the individual or individual's spouse. This includes all persons who are members of the same household as the official, public body member or employee in question, regardless of whether they are related by blood or marriage. 
1.16 - Franchise. 
A right conferred by the Town (such as a public utility) to use public property for the public use but for private profit. 
1.17 - General Statewide Election. 
The statewide election held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year. 
1.18 - Initiative. 
The power of the registered electors of the Town of Windsor to propose to the Town Board, in accordance with the provisions of this Charter, certain ordinances for adoption by the Town Board which, if not adopted by the Town Board, shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the Town for acceptance or rejection, in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
1.19 - Interest. 
A pecuniary, property, or commercial benefit, or any other benefit the primary significance of which is economic gain or the avoidance of economic loss, but does not include any matter in which a similar benefit is conferred to all persons or property similarly situated nor does it include the ownership or control of shares of stock. 
1.20 - Lease-Purchase Agreement. 
  
A.  Any installment purchase agreement for the purchase of real or personal property which requires or permits payments during more than one (1) fiscal year, regardless of any right of the Town to terminate the agreement; or 
B.  Any agreement for the lease or rental of real or personal property which requires or permits payments during more than one (1) fiscal year, regardless of any right of the Town to terminate the agreement, and under which title to the real property is transferred at the end of the term for nominal or no additional consideration. 
1.21 - Manager. 
The Town Manager of the Town of Windsor. 
1.22 - Mayor. 
The Mayor of the Town of Windsor. 
1.23 - Member of the Town Board. 
The Mayor and each Board Member. 
1.24 - Newspaper. 
A newspaper of general circulation in the Town that meets the requirements for a legal newspaper as established in the State Statutes. 
1.25 - Officer. 
The Mayor and each Board Member. 
1.26 - Official. 
Any elected or appointed officer, public body member, or agent of the Town of Windsor. 
1.27 - Official Action. 
Any legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial act of any officer, public body member, or employee, or of the Town Board or any public body of the Town. 
1.28 - Ordinance. 
A permanent law or regulation adopted by legislative action of the Town Board pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Charter or by ordinances. 
1.29 - Principals. 
Those people who are the subject of the action or application that is before the board. 
1.30 - Publication or Posting. 
  
A.  Publication in a newspaper of general circulation; or 
B.  Publication by electronic means and methods; or 
C.  In the event of an emergency, or when no such newspaper is available, posting. Anything published by such posting because of an emergency shall subsequently be published in a newspaper of general circulation or published electronically; or 
D.  Posting shall be effected by providing written or printed notice in various locations throughout the Town as provided by ordinance. 
1.31 - Public Body. 
Any board or commission, or any task force or committee, except any task force or committee for which the Town Board determines, in the resolution establishing it, that Article V, or such portions thereof as selected by the Town Board, shall not apply because the public interest would be served by the participation of persons who would otherwise have an interest in the matters to be addressed by the task force or committee. 
1.32 - Public Records. 
The term "Public Records" shall refer to those records as defined in the Colorado Revised Statutes at Section 24-72-202, et seq. as amended from time to time. 
1.33 - Public Servant. 
A person who serves the Town of Windsor in an official capacity, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, as a Town official, public body member or employee. 
1.34 - Quasi-Judicial Action. 
Any action where the board or committee has a duty to notify the potential parties, hear the parties, and can only decide after weighing and considering such evidence and arguments as the parties choose to lay before them. 
1.35 - Recuse. 
Officials, public body members or employees who have been recused from a matter, shall remove themselves completely from all further participation in the matter in question. Official, public body members or employees who have been recused shall immediately leave the room or shall seat themselves with the other members of the public who are present. The recused person shall not participate in further discussions, unless they clearly state for the record that they are doing so only as a general member of the public. Recused persons shall not deliberate or vote on the matter in question. 
1.36 - Referendum. 
The power of the registered electors of the Town of Windsor to request that the Town Board reconsider certain ordinances adopted by the Board as provided in this Charter; and, if the Board fails to repeal such ordinances, to require that the Board submit the referred ordinances to a vote of the registered electors of the Town for approval or rejection in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
1.37 - Registered Elector. 
An elector who has registered in compliance with the provisions for registration to vote as provided in the State Statutes. 
1.38 - Regular Election or Regular Municipal Election. 
A Town election held pursuant to Article 6.2. 
1.39 - Relative. 
Any person related to an officer, public body member, or employee by blood, marriage, or domestic partnership, in any of the following degrees; parents, spouse, children, step-children, brothers, sisters, parents-in-law, nephews, nieces, aunts, uncles, first cousins, grandparents, grandchildren, and children-in-law. A separation between spouses shall not be deemed to terminate relationships described herein. 
1.40 - Resident. 
A resident of the Town of Windsor. 
1.41 - Resolution. 
An expression of an administrative or a ministerial act of the Board without any required form or procedure, as distinguished from legislative acts embodied in Town ordinances. 
1.42 - Special Election or Special Town Election. 
A Town election held at a time other than a regular election. 
1.43 - State Constitution or Colorado Constitution. 
The Constitution of the State of Colorado, as amended from time to time. 
1.44 - State Statutes. 
The statutes of the State of Colorado, as amended or repealed from time to time and also referred to as the Colorado Revised Statutes or C.R.S. 
1.45 - Town. 
The Town of Windsor, Colorado. 
1.46 - Town Board. 
The governing body constituting the Board Members and the Mayor. 
1.47 - Town Prosecutor. 
An attorney at law admitted to practice in the State of Colorado who is appointed by the Town Board to (1) appear on behalf of the Town before the Municipal Court of the Town; (2) to enforce violation of the Code of Ethics; and (3) to perform such other duties as prescribed by the Town Board. 
1.48 - United States Constitution. 
The Constitution of the United States of America, as amended from time to time. 
ARTICLE II - General Provisions 

2.1 - Names and Boundaries 
    The Colorado municipal corporation now existing as the Town of Windsor shall remain and continue under the same name and with the same boundaries unless changed in a manner authorized by law. 
2.2 - Purpose of Charter 
    It is the purpose of this Charter to establish a basic governmental structure that will provide for the effective and efficient conduct of the business of the Town. Full participation in the affairs of the Town, by every member of the community, shall be encouraged and permitted in the manner provided for throughout this Charter. 
2.3 - Form of Government 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as a Board-Manager government. 
2.4 - Powers of the Town 
A.  The Town shall have all the power of local self-government and of home rule, and shall have all power possible for a municipality under the State Constitution. All such powers shall be exercised in a manner consistent with the United States Constitution, the State Constitution, and this Charter, or, if not provided for in this Charter, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Town shall also have all powers granted to municipalities by the State Statutes. 
C.  The enumeration of specific powers in this Charter shall not be considered as limiting or excluding any other power under Article XX of the State Constitution. 
2.5 - Amendments to the Charter 
    This Charter may be amended in the manner provided in the State Constitution and the State Statutes pertaining to home rule charter amendments. Proceedings to amend the Charter may be initiated by the filing of a petition meeting the requirements of the State Statutes, or by the adoption of an ordinance by the Town Board submitting the proposed amendment to a vote of the registered electors of the Town. 
2.6 - Charter Amendments Only by Measures Expressing a Single Subject 
A.  No measure proposing an amendment to this Charter shall be submitted to the registered electors of the Town if the measure contains more than one subject. 
B.  The Town Clerk shall approve for petition circulation measures proposing Charter amendments only when such measures contain a single subject. 
C.  As used in this Section, the single subject requirement means, that the matters in the measure submitted for voter approval are necessarily or properly connected and are not disconnected or incongruous. 
ARTICLE III - Town Board 

3.1 - Town Board 
A.  The Town Board shall be the governing body of the Town, and shall have such powers as are possessed by the Town and not conferred by this Charter on others. All such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter or, if not provided for herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance. 
B.  The Town Board shall consist of six (6) board members nominated and elected by the qualified voters of six (6) geographic districts, and a Mayor nominated and elected from the Town at large. 
C.  Districting. The town shall be divided into six (6) geographical districts numbered one (1) through six (6), inclusively, each district shall be represented by one (1) Town Board member. The Districts shall be contiguous, compact, and have approximately the same number of registered electors. The boundaries of the districts shall not be changed more often than once in six (6) years, unless such change is necessary to conform to constitutional apportionment requirements. Territory added to the Town shall become part of such district or districts as may be determined by ordinance, consistent with constitutional requirements. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, no change in district boundaries shall create a vacancy during the term of any Town Board member in office at the time of the change. 
D.  Formula for redistricting. No later than one hundred and eighty days (180) before each regular biennial election, the Town Clerk shall determine if the number of registered electors in the district containing the lowest number of registered electors is less than eighty-five (85) percent of the number of registered electors in the District containing the highest number. 
E.  Transition to districts. A Districting Commission shall be formed. The Districting Commission shall consist of five (5) members. Members of the Districting Commission must be registered electors of the Town. No member of the Town Board or employee of the Town shall be a member of the Districting Commission. 
    Districts shall be created and in effect for the next municipal election (April, 2008). 
    The following entities will each have one representative appointed by the former Mayor W. Wayne Miller, the former Mayor pro tem Kristy Duffy, and the Town Clerk to the Districting Commission for determining the six (6) geographical districts: 
1.  Windsor Residents residing in Larimer County. 
2.  Windsor Residents residing east of CR 13 and north of HWY 392. 
3.  Windsor Residents residing in central Windsor (east of CR 13). 
4.  Windsor Residents residing in Water Valley. 
5.  Windsor Planning Commission. 
F.  To transition to districts, the first municipal election following the creation of districts (April, 2008) shall be held to elect three (3) Town Board members for four (4) year terms and such Town Board Members shall be from three (3) of the six (6) geographic districts defined by the District Commission, the choice of such three (3) districts to be made by the District Commission after giving due regard to those districts that are presently unrepresented on the Town Board. Town Board members for the three (3) remaining districts shall be chosen at the 2010 municipal election, such elections also being for four (4) year terms. 
    During the transition period, any appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the geographic or at-large position held by the vacating Town Board member. 
    No Town Board member presently serving on the Town Board shall have his term shortened as a result of this Section 3.1. (Amended by voters on November 7, 2007; amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
3.2 - Mayor; Mayor Pro Tem 
A.  The Mayor shall be a member of the Town Board and shall have the same voting powers as any Board Member. 
B.  The Mayor shall preside over meetings of the Town Board, and shall be recognized as the head of the Town government for all ceremonial purposes. 
C.  By a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of all members of the Town Board in office at the time, a Board Member shall be appointed as Mayor pro tem, for a term of two years, to perform the responsibilities of the Mayor when the Mayor is absent or is otherwise unable to perform the responsibilities of the Mayor. 
3.3 - Qualifications 
A.  Except during the during the transition period set forth in Section 3.1, (F) no person shall be eligible to be elected or appointed to the office of Mayor or Board Member unless he or she is: 
1.  A citizen of the United States of America; and 
2.  A registered elector of the Town; and 
3.  A resident of the Town for twelve (12) consecutive months immediately preceding the election, and in the case of a District Town Board member, has continuously resided in the District from which he or she is to be elected for twelve (12) consecutive months immediately preceding the election. At all times during their terms Town Board members shall reside in the Districts from which elected. In the case of annexation, residence within the annexed territory for the prescribed period shall satisfy the residency requirements of this Article. 
B.  No person who has been convicted of a felony shall be eligible to be elected or appointed to the office of Mayor or Board Member. 
C.  No person who is an employee of the Town may serve as Mayor or Board Member. Any Town employee elected or appointed as Mayor or a Board Member shall be deemed to have resigned as an employee on the date of taking office. 
D.  No person may be a candidate for both Mayor and Board Member at the same election. 
E.  The Mayor and each Board Member shall continue to meet the requirements of this Article throughout their term of office. 
F.  The Town Board shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, subject to judicial review. (Amended by voters on November 7, 2007; amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
3.4 - Term Limits 
    The term of office for an elected official either as a Board Member, Mayor or a combination of Board Member and Mayor shall be limited to two consecutive elected terms but not more than ten consecutive years in office whether elected or appointed, which shall include terms served prior to the effective date of this Charter. No elected official whose term expires pursuant to these term limits shall be eligible for appointment or election as a Board Member or Mayor prior to four years following the expiration of that person's prior term in office. 
3.5 - Term of Office; Time of Taking Office; Oath 
A.  Each Board Member shall be elected for a four-year term. 
B.  The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term. 
C.  The Mayor and each Board Member shall take office at the conclusion of all Official Action during the first regular or special meeting of the Town Board following their election or appointment, and shall continue in office until their successors have been elected and take office, or a vacancy is earlier established. 
D.  Before taking office, the Mayor and each Board Member shall take and file with the Town Clerk an oath or affirmation to support the United States Constitution, the State Constitution, and the Charter and ordinances of the Town, and to faithfully perform the duties of the office. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
3.6 - Compensation 
    The Mayor and each Board Member shall receive such salary and benefits as may be prescribed by ordinance. The salary of the Mayor, or of any Board Member, shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which the Mayor or Board Member has been elected. Subject to the Board's approval, the Mayor and Board Members may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the duties of office. 
3.7 - Vacancies 
A.  A vacancy in the office of Mayor or Board Member shall exist if during the term of office the Mayor or a Board Member: 
1.  Is convicted of a felony; 
2.  Is no longer a resident of the Town; 
3.  Dies, is judicially declared incompetent, resigns, or is recalled without the election of a successor; 
4.  Has had more than three (3) unexcused absences from regular Town Board meetings during any period of twelve (12) consecutive calendar months. The date of the fourth unexcused absence shall be determined to be the date on which the office was vacated. Any absence from a regular meeting shall be considered unexcused only if the Town Board so determines by a motion, setting forth the reasons for the determination. 
5.  Ceases residing within the election district from which that Board Member was elected. 
B.  Should the position of Mayor be vacated for any reason, the Town Board shall select, by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of all members of the Town Board in office at the time, from its members a Mayor, who shall perform all duties and have all powers of the Mayor until the next regular municipal election. Upon taking the oath of office, the Appointed Mayor shall no longer serve as a Board Member, and a vacancy shall exist on the board. Such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Article 3.7.D of this Charter. 
C.  Should the position of Mayor Pro Tem be vacated for any reason, the Town Board shall select, by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of all members of the Town Board in office at the time, from its members a Mayor Pro Tem to serve out the term. 
D.  Should the position of a Board Member be vacated for any reason, the Board shall fill the vacancy by one of the following options: 
1.  The position may remain vacant if it is less than one year until the next regular municipal election; or 
2.  The Town Board may select a person to fill the position until the next regular municipal election. 
3.  The Town Board may call for a special election to fill the vacated seat. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
ARTICLE IV - Town Board Procedures 

4.1 - Meetings 
A.  The activities of Town government will be conducted in public to the greatest extent feasible in order to assure public participation and enhance public accountability. 
B.  The Town Board shall meet regularly each month. The Town Board shall determine the day and hour of its regular meetings and the rules of procedure governing meetings. The first meeting following each regular municipal election shall be the organizational meeting. 
C.  The Town Board shall cause written minutes of its regular and special meetings to be taken and retained in the records of the Town. 
4.2 - Special Meetings and Business at Special Meetings 
A.  Special meetings shall be called by the Town Clerk on the written request of the Town Manager, or any two (2) members of the Town Board. 
B.  A special meeting shall be held on at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice communicated to each member of the Town Board. A special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Town Board are present or if those members not present have waived notice thereof in writing. Advance notice of such meeting shall be posted in one public place. 
C.  At any special meeting of the Town Board, no action shall be taken by the members of Town Board on any item of business that has not been stated in the notice of the meeting. 
4.3 - Quorum 
    A majority of the members of the Town Board holding office at the time shall be a quorum, and a quorum shall be required for the transaction of business at all Town Board meetings. 
4.4 - Work Sessions 
A.  Each work session of the Town Board shall be held on at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to each member of the Board. All work sessions shall be publicly posted in advance and open to the public. 
B.  No final policy decision, rule, regulation, resolution, ordinance, action approving a contract or calling for the payment of money, or other formal action, shall be taken at any work session. 
C.  The Town Board shall cause a summary or copy of the agenda of each work session to be made and to be retained in the records of the Town. 
4.5 - Meeting to be Public; Executive Sessions 
A.  All regular and special meetings of the Town Board shall be open to the public, and persons shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at each meeting under such rules as the Town Board may prescribe. 
B.  Notice of each regular and special meeting shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. The notice shall include specific agenda information to the extent available. 
C.  Any meeting may be recessed into an executive session by a majority vote of the members of the Town Board present and may be closed to the public for the following purposes only: 
1.  To determine a position relative to issues subject to negotiation, to receive reports on negotiation progress and status, to develop strategy, and to instruct negotiators; 
2.  To consider the acquisition or disposal of property if, in the judgment of the Town Board, premature disclosure of information might give any person an unfair competitive or bargaining advantage; 
3.  For matters of attorney-client privilege, to receive legal advice from an attorney representing the Town, and for matters required by law to be kept confidential; 
4.  For matters critical to the personal safety of elected officials and for matters involving the protection and security of Town property; 
5.  For personnel matters; 
6.  To deliberate on evidence presented to the Town Board while acting in a quasi-judicial capacity; or 
7.  To consider additional matters for which an executive session is permitted under the State Statutes concerning the meetings of local public bodies. 
D.  The general subject matter of any executive session shall be stated in the motion calling for the session. No formal action, no final policy decision, no rule, regulation, resolution or ordinance, and no action approving a contract or calling for the payment of money shall be adopted or approved at any session closed to the public. 
1.  The Town attorney will provide guidelines for discussing topics in executive session. 
E.  Except as authorized by the Town Board, as required or permitted by judicial order, or as otherwise required or permitted by law, no participant in any executive session shall reveal any information gained as a result of the session. 
4.6 - Town Board Acts 
    The Town Board shall act only by ordinance, resolution, or motion. All legislative enactments shall be in the form of ordinances. All other actions, except as herein provided, may be in the form of resolutions or motions. A true copy of every ordinance and resolution as hereafter adopted shall be numbered and recorded in the official records of the Town. 
4.7 - Voting 
A.  Each member's vote on an ordinance or resolution shall be recorded in the minutes. 
B.  Except where a greater number is required in this Charter, the final adoption of any ordinance shall require a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of all members of the Town Board in office at the time, and resolutions and motions shall require the majority vote of the members of the Town Board present. 
C.  No member of the Town Board shall vote on any matter concerning the member's own conduct. 
D.  No member of the Town Board shall vote on any matter in which the member has a conflict of interest, as defined in the State Statutes or contained in Article V of this Charter. On such matter, the official shall disclose to the Town Board the nature of the conflict of interest prior to recusal from participation. 
E.  Except as provided in Subsections C. and D. of this Article, each member of the Town Board who is present shall vote on each matter. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
4.8 - Action By Ordinance Required 
    In addition to such acts of the Town Board as are required by the State Constitution or this Charter to be by ordinance, and except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the following acts of the Town Board shall be by ordinance: 
A.  Authorizing the borrowing of money, creating indebtedness, a voter-approved new tax and/or tax rate increase, or approving a lease-purchase agreement; 
B.  Approving any transfer of fee ownership in real property owned by the Town; 
C.  Approving any transfer of water rights owned by the Town; 
D.  Establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed; or 
E.  Placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property. 
4.9 - Form of Ordinance 
A.  Every ordinance shall be introduced in printed form. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF WINDSOR, COLORADO. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all ordinances shall take effect ten (10) days after publication following final adoption. Unless otherwise specifically provided in the ordinance, every ordinance shall be deemed to contain a severability clause whether stated therein or not. 
4.10 - Ordinances - Adoption Procedure 
A.  Each ordinance shall be presented to Town Board at least twice, and the following procedure shall be followed in adopting any ordinance except an emergency ordinance: 
1.  The ordinance shall be introduced by motion at a regular or special meeting of the Town Board. 
2.  The ordinance shall be read in full or by title if copies of the ordinance are available to the public. 
3.  At the first reading, the Town Board shall vote to amend, adopt or reject the ordinance, or take other action, as it deems appropriate. Approval of any ordinance at first reading shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Town Board participating in the vote. 
4.  If the ordinance is adopted by Town Board upon its initial introduction, either as presented or as amended, it shall be published in full as it was adopted. 
5.  The ordinance shall then be introduced by motion a second time at a regular or special meeting of the Town Board held not earlier than four (4) days after the first publication. 
6.  Prior to taking final action on the ordinance, the Town Board shall permit public comments on the ordinance, then shall vote to amend, finally adopt, or reject the ordinance, or take other action, as it deems appropriate. 
7.  Upon final adoption, the ordinance shall be published either in full or by title only, as the Town Board may direct; however, if the ordinance is amended prior to final adoption and is published by title only, the amendment shall be published in full along with the ordinance title. 
8.  The ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk, and affidavits of publication shall be retained with the ordinance in the Town's records. 
B.  Every ordinance published by title shall contain a notice that copies of the ordinance are available at the office of the Town Clerk. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
4.11 - Emergency Ordinances 
A.  An emergency ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation of public property, health, welfare, peace, or safety shall require a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the members of the Town Board in office at the time. The facts determining the emergency shall be specifically stated in the ordinance. Determination by Town Board as to the existence of an emergency shall be final and conclusive. 
B.  No ordinance granting, renewing, or amending any franchise, fixing rates charged by any municipal utility system, fixing an impact fee, valuation for assessment ratio increase for a property class, extension of an expiring tax, or tax policy change directly causing a net tax revenue gain to the Town shall be adopted as an emergency ordinance. 
C.  An emergency ordinance may be introduced and finally adopted at any regular or special meeting, shall require only one (1) reading, and shall not require publication prior to final adoption. An emergency ordinance shall take effect upon final adoption or on such later date as specified in the ordinance. Following final adoption, an emergency ordinance shall be published in full. 
4.12 - Codification 
    The Town Board shall cause the ordinances to be codified and thereafter maintained in current form. Revisions to the codes may be accomplished by reference as provided in Article 4.13 of this Charter. 
4.13 - Adoption of Codes by Reference 
    The Town Board may adopt, by ordinance, any code by reference. The procedure of adoption of a code by reference shall be as provided in the State Statutes applicable to the adoption of codes by reference or such other procedure as the Town Board may provide by ordinance. Every ordinance adopting a code by reference shall contain a notice that copies of the code are available at the office of the Town Clerk. Any penalty clause in such a code may be adopted only if set forth in full in the adopting ordinance. 
4.14 - Public Records 
    All public records of the Town of Windsor shall be open for inspection by any person at reasonable times in accordance with applicable law. Copies of records may be obtained at a reasonable cost or be made available in alternative formats when practicable. 
4.15 - Fines and Penalties for Ordinance Violations 
    Penalties for the violation of Town ordinances shall be established by ordinance. No fine or sentence for such a violation shall exceed the maximums established by the State Statutes for municipal ordinance violations. 
ARTICLE V - Code of Ethics 

5.1 - Purpose 
    The purpose of this code is to establish guidelines for the ethical standards of conduct for Town officials, public body members and employees. Public servants and volunteers are expected to act in the best interest of the Town. Town officials, public body members and employees are expected to disclose any personal, financial or other interests in matters affecting the Town that come before them for action. Town officials, public body members and employees are expected to recuse themselves from decision making if they have a conflict of interest or even the appearance of one. Town officials, public body members and employees are expected to be independent, impartial, and responsible to their fellow townspeople in their actions. Official decisions and policies will be made following proper channels of town government. Public offices or volunteer positions in our Town will not be used for personal gain. It is important that the public has confidence in the integrity of its government and that town officials, public body members, volunteers and employees have an opportunity to protect their personal reputation. This code establishes a process by which one may obtain guidance regarding potential ethical issues and it establishes a course of action for resolving disputes in a manner that is fair to all of the parties involved. 
5.2 - Standards 
A.  The following requirements shall constitute reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of elected or appointed officials, public body members, and employees. 
B.  No elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee who has the power or duty to perform, or has any influence over, an official action related to a contract, shall: 
1.  Have or acquire an interest in a contract between a business entity and the Town, unless the Town's procedures applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of such contract are followed and unless the elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee has complied with the provisions of Article 5.3; 
2.  Have an interest in any business entity, which is a party to the contract with the Town, unless the elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee has complied with the provisions of Article 5.3; 
3.  Represent or appear before the Town Board, any public body, or any other elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee, on behalf of any business entity which is a party to the contract with the Town; 
4.  Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with any business entity which is a party to a contract with the Town, if the offer or acceptance of such employment is related to or results from any official action performed by the elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee with regard to the contract; or 
5.  Solicit, accept, or be granted a present or future gift, favor, discount, items of perishable or nonpermanent value, service or thing of value from or for any person involved in the contract. Nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit any elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee from accepting an occasional non-pecuniary gift of an amount to be determined by ordinance, or from accepting an award, publicly presented, in recognition of public service. However, no elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee shall accept a non-pecuniary gift of any value if the gift is or may be in any way associated with a contract that is or may be one for which the elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee has the power or duty to perform an official action. 
C.  No elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee shall influence or attempt to influence the compensation, benefits, or other terms and conditions of Town office or Town employment applicable to a relative of the elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee. 
D.  No relative of an elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee shall be hired as a full time, permanent employee unless the Town's personnel procedures applicable to such employment have been followed. 
E.  No elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee shall use for personal or private gain, or for any other personal or private purposes, any information which is not available to the public and which is obtained by reason of his or her position with the Town, or disclose any such information except as required by law or for Town purposes. 
F.  No employee shall engage in or accept any employment or service, other than employment by the Town, if such employment or service reasonably would tend to impair the employee's independence of judgment in the performance of the employee's duties. This restriction shall not be construed to prohibit any other restrictions or prohibitions on outside employment applicable to an employee. 
G.  Neither the Town Manager, nor any employee who is the head of a Town department, shall be appointed to serve as a voting member of a public body, but this does not preclude town staff from serving in an advisory capacity. 
H.  No elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee shall request or direct the use of any Town resources for personal or private gain, including work time, except in the same manner and under the same circumstances applicable to any other person. No special consideration, treatment, or advantage beyond that which is available to every other person in similar circumstances or need shall be granted unless such use will substantially benefit the Town. 
I.  No elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee shall, at any time within two (2) years after termination from the Town: 
1.  Appear on behalf of the elected or appointed official's, public body member's, or employee's interest, or on behalf of the interest of any other person, before the Town Board, any public body, or department of the Town, in relation to any matter concerning which the elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee performed an official act; or 
2.  Represent the interest of the elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee, or of any other person, in any other matter before the Town Board, any public body, or department of the Town, without disclosing to the Town the elected or appointed official's, public body member's, or employee's prior relationship to the Town and present relationship to the interest. 
J.  Except as provided in Subsection K, no elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee shall appear before the Town Board or any public body on behalf of any business entity. 
K.  A member of a public body may appear on behalf of a business entity before the Town Board or before a public body other than the public body of which he or she is a member, so long as the appearance does not concern any matter that has or may come before the public body of which he or she is a member. 
L.  Nothing in the Code of Ethics shall preclude an elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee from appearing before the Town Board, any public body, or any other elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee on behalf of any person which is not a business entity, so long as the appearance does not concern the elected or appointed official's, public body member's, or employee's interest. 
M.  No elected or appointed official or public body member shall offer or promise to give his or her vote or influence in favor of or against any proposed official action in consideration or upon condition that any other elected or appointed official, public body member, will promise or assent to give his or her vote or influence in favor of or against any other proposed official action. 
N.  No elected or appointed official shall become a full-time employee of the Town at any time during the term of office, or for two (2) years after leaving office. 
O.  No elected or appointed official shall acquire or seek to acquire any real estate or interest therein if the elected or appointed official knows, or reasonably should know, that the Town Board is evaluating, proposing, or pursuing the acquisition of such real estate or interest therein. The elected or appointed official's knowledge shall be presumed. The prohibitions of this subsection shall continue to apply until after the Town Board has abandoned any effort to acquire such real estate or interest therein, and such abandonment has been reflected in the minutes or other record of a Town Board meeting. 
5.3 - A Duty to Disclose 
    An official, public body member or employee of the Town of Windsor shall not participate in the conduct of business on behalf of the Town or enter into discussion or deliberation of any matter without first, publicly and on the record, stating all possible conflicts of interest that may exist between themselves and their family members, and the principals or the issue under consideration. 
5.4 - No Misuse of Confidential Information 
    No official, public body member or employee of the Town of Windsor shall use any confidential information acquired by virtue of that individual's official position for personal benefit, or for the benefit of any other person or business. This does not apply to information, which is readily available to the general public. In addition, no official, public body member or employee of the Town of Windsor shall violate the privacy of others by discussing information confidentially acquired in the course of official duties. 
5.5 - Exclusions 
    The provisions of this Code of Ethics shall not be interpreted so as to bar: 
A.  Any official, public body member or employee who is a resident of the Town of Windsor from fully participating in any Town Meeting; 
B.  Acceptance of donations for the expressed purpose of financing a political campaign, provided such contributions are reported in accordance with all local, state and federal laws that pertain to such donations; 
C.  Participation in a matter that relates to a person or business from which an official, public body member or employee has merely purchased goods or services, if the individual in question has no other conflict of interest relating to that person or business; 
D.  Police officers, fire fighters, and other emergency personnel from acting in the course of their official capacities when responding to emergencies in accordance with the rules and regulations of their departments. 
5.6 - Enforcement 
A.  The provisions of Articles 5.2 through 5.5 shall be enforced as follows: 
1.  The Town Attorney shall have the primary responsibility for administration of said provisions. 
2.  Any person who believes that an elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee has violated any of said provisions and wishes to initiate proceedings on such alleged violations shall file a written complaint with the Town Attorney. The complaint shall state in detail the facts of the alleged violation, shall specify the section or sections of the Code of Ethics alleged to have been violated, and shall contain a sworn or verified statement signed by the complainant and stating under penalty of perjury that the information in the complaint is true and accurate, and that the complaint is filed in good faith and not out of malice or any other improper motive or purpose. Any complaint that does not contain such a signed statement shall be returned forthwith to the complainant without action. 
3.  If the complaint is made against an officer or public body member, within ten (10) days after receipt of the complaint the Town Attorney shall forward a copy of the complaint to the elected or appointed official or public body member against whom the complaint is made, and to an advisory judge referred to in Article 5.7. The Town Attorney shall request the advisory judge to appoint a qualified disinterested attorney to serve as special prosecutor. If, within ten (10) days after the request, the advisory judge has not appointed a special prosecutor, the Town's Municipal Judge shall appoint a qualified disinterested attorney to serve as special prosecutor. The reasonable expenses and fees of an advisory judge making such an appointment and of the attorney serving as special prosecutor shall be paid by the Town. The attorney recommended or appointed pursuant to this paragraph shall serve as special prosecutor for purposes of investigation and action on the complaint, and shall take such actions concerning the complaint as are consistent with the Code of Ethics, the Colorado municipal court rules of procedure, and the prosecutor's ethical responsibilities. Before completing the investigation, the special prosecutor shall provide the elected or appointed official or public body member against whom the complaint is made an opportunity to provide information concerning the complaint. 
4.  If the complaint is against an employee, the Town Attorney shall investigate the complaint and shall take such actions concerning the complaint as are consistent with the Code of Ethics, the Colorado municipal court rules of procedure, and the prosecutor's ethical responsibilities. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the complaint the Town Attorney shall forward a copy of the complaint to the employee against whom the complaint is made and, before completing the investigation, shall provide the employee an opportunity to provide information concerning the complaint. 
B.  A person commits false reporting of a complaint under this Article if: 
1.  The person makes a complaint of a violation under Articles 5.2 through 5.5 or knowingly causes the transmission of a complaint to the Town Attorney of such a violation when the person knows that the violation did not occur; or 
2.  The person makes a complaint or knowingly causes the transmission of a complaint to the Town Attorney pretending to furnish information relating to a violation of Articles 5.2 through 5.5 when the person knows that he or she has no such information or knows that the information is false. 
C.  A person who is convicted of false reporting of a complaint under this article shall be punished as provided in Article 16.5 of this Charter. 
5.7 - Advisory Opinions 
A.  The Municipal Judge shall maintain the consent of one (1) or more judges of municipalities other than the Town, to provide advisory opinions with respect to the applicability of Articles 5.2 through 5.6. The names of such advisory judges shall be provided to the Town Board, the Town Manager, and the Town Attorney. The reasonable expenses and fees of an advisory judge providing such an opinion shall be paid by the Town. 
B.  If any officer, public body member, or employee is uncertain as to the applicability of Articles 5.2 through 5.6 to a particular situation, or as to the definition of terms used in said Articles, the officer, public body member, or employee may apply in writing to the Town Board, Mayor, or Town Manager for an opinion from an advisory judge pursuant to these Articles, and the Town Board, Mayor, or Town Manager may submit an application to the advisory judge for procurement of an opinion. Any officer or public body member may apply directly to an advisory judge for an opinion. The application shall state in detail the applicable facts and the Article or Articles of the Code of Ethics concerning which the opinion is requested. 
C.  Any person who requests and acts in accordance with an advisory opinion issued pursuant to this Article shall not be subject to any penalties for such action under the Code of Ethics, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion. 
D.  An opinion rendered by an advisory judge pursuant to these Articles shall be disclosed to the public by posting, unless the advisory judge who issued the opinion determines it in the best interest of the Town to delay such posting, in which case the opinion shall be posted as soon as the judge determines that the best interest of the Town will no longer be harmed by public disclosure of the opinion. 
5.8 - Violations - Injunction 
    The Town Prosecutor shall have the power and the duty, where a violation of the provisions of the Code of Ethics is threatened or has occurred, to bring a civil action or proceeding at law or in equity for a judgment enjoining any violation of the provisions of the Code of Ethics. Any member of the community shall have the opportunity to submit, in good faith, a sworn statement of any suspected violation of the Charter to the Town Attorney. 
5.9 - Violations - Voiding of Contract 
    Any contract that was the subject of any official action of the Town in which there was or is an interest prohibited by the Code of Ethics shall be voidable at the option of the Town, if legally permitted. Where the Town Attorney determines that the public interest may best be served by not voiding such contract, it may be enforced and an action or proceeding may be brought against any elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee in violation of the provisions of the Code of Ethics for damages in an amount not to exceed twice the damages suffered by the Town or twice the profit or gain realized by the elected or appointed official, public body member, or employee, whichever is greater. 
5.10 - Distribution 
    The Town Clerk shall cause any forms required for compliance with the Code of Ethics, to be distributed to each elected or appointed official, public body member, and employee of the Town within twenty (20) days after such person assumes Town office, position or employment, and to each elected or appointed official, public body member, and employee elected, appointed, or hired thereafter, before entering into any duties with the Town, and to each candidate for elective office at the time the candidate obtains a nomination petition. In addition, the Town Clerk shall cause a copy of any amendment to the Code of Ethics to be distributed to each elected or appointed official, public body member, and employee of the Town within twenty (20) days after the enactment of the amendment. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
ARTICLE VI - Elections 

6.1 - Colorado Municipal Election Laws Adopted 
    Town elections shall be governed by the State Statutes contained in the Colorado Municipal Election Code, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance. All regular and special elections shall be nonpartisan. 
6.2 - Regular Elections 
    A regular municipal election shall be held in April of each even-numbered year on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday of April. 
6.3 - Special Elections 
    A special election shall be called by a resolution adopted at least sixty (60) days prior to the election. The resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of the election. 
6.4 - Conduct of Elections 
A.  The Town Clerk shall have charge of all activities and duties required pursuant to this Charter relating to the conduct of Town elections. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Town Clerk shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. 
B.  The Town Clerk shall provide that a background check be made on any individual who is, or will be, running for an elected office in the Town of Windsor to ascertain that individual's qualifications for office as required under Section 3.3 B of this Charter. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
ARTICLE VII - Initiative, Referendum and Recall 

7.1 - Initiative 
A.  The initiative power, reserved by Article V, Section 1(9) of the Colorado Constitution, is hereby extended to the registered electors of the Town as to that Town legislation which is subject to the initiative power reserved in said Constitution. Any initiated measure shall be in the form of an ordinance. The measure shall be initiated pursuant to the State Statutes, which establish procedures for a municipal initiative, except as otherwise provided in this Charter and in ordinances not inconsistent with this Charter. 
B.  The initiative petition shall be signed by registered electors of the Town equal in number to at least five (5) percent of the total number of electors of the Town registered to vote at the last regular municipal election. 
C.  The Town Clerk shall not count as valid any signature on an initiative petition if the date of the signature is prior to the date the form of the petition was approved by the Town Clerk. 
D.  The Town Clerk shall not count as valid any signature on an initiative petition if more than ninety (90) days have elapsed between the date the form of the petition was approved by the Town Clerk and the date of the signature. 
7.2 - Referendum 
A.  The referendum power, reserved by Article V, Section 1(9) of the Colorado Constitution, is hereby extended to the registered electors of the Town as to those ordinances that are subject to the referendum power reserved in said Constitution. Such ordinances shall be referred pursuant to the State Statutes that establish procedures for a municipal referendum, except as otherwise provided in this Charter and in ordinances not inconsistent with this Charter. The referendum power shall not apply to an emergency ordinance. 
B.  A referendum petition shall be signed by registered electors of the Town equal in number to at least five (5) percent of the total number of electors of the Town registered to vote at the last regular municipal election. 
C.  The Town Clerk shall not count as valid any signature on a referendum petition if the date of the signature is prior to the date the form of the petition was approved by the Town Clerk. 
7.3 - Recall 
A.  Any elected official may be recalled at any time after six (6) months in office, pursuant to the State Statutes that establish procedures for the recall of municipal elected officers, except as otherwise provided in this Charter and in ordinances not inconsistent with this Charter. 
B.  A petition to recall a Town Board Member or Mayor will be signed by at least twenty-five (25) percent of the entire vote cast for all the candidates for that particular office at the last preceding election in which the person sought to be recalled was elected to office. 
C.  For the recall of a person appointed to fill a vacancy, signers shall number at least twenty-five (25) percent of the entire vote cast for all candidates for the vacated office at the last preceding regular municipal election at which a person was elected to that office. 
D.  If a regular municipal or statewide general election is scheduled to be held within ninety (90) days after submission of a recall petition, even though that election is not the one at which the office held by the person sought to be recalled would otherwise be filled, the recall election shall be held at the same time as that regular municipal or statewide general election. 
E.  After one (1) recall petition and election, no further petition shall be filed against the same person during the term for which such person was elected or appointed, unless the signers number at least fifty (50) percent of the registered electors at the last preceding regular municipal election. 
F.  Except as to requirements contained in this Charter, in the State Statutes which are applicable to the recall of municipal elected officers, and in the ordinances of the Town, the form, content, approval, and other petition requirements in the State Statutes applicable to municipal initiatives shall apply as nearly as practicable to recall petitions. 
7.4 - Board Referral 
    The Board shall have the power to submit to a vote of the registered electors of the Town, without receipt of any petition, any proposed or adopted ordinance or any question. 
7.5 - Prohibited Action by Board 
A.  No initiated ordinance adopted by the registered electors of the Town may be substantively amended or repealed by the Board during a period of one (1) year after the date of the election on the initiated ordinance, unless the amendment or repeal is approved by a majority vote of the registered electors of the Town. 
B.  No referred ordinance repealed by the registered electors of the Town may be readopted by the Board during a period of one (1) year after the date of the election on the referred ordinance, unless the re-adoption is approved by a majority vote of the registered electors of the Town. 
7.6 - Withdrawal of Petition 
A.  An initiative, referendum, or recall petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to thirty (30) days preceding the day scheduled for a vote by filing with the Town Clerk a written request for withdrawal. 
B.  The written request for withdrawal shall be signed by a majority of persons who are designated in the petition as representing the signers on matters affecting the petition. 
C.  Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect, and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
7.7 - Petition Forms to be Provided 
    The Town Clerk shall provide upon request sample forms of initiative, referendum and recall petitions that conform to the requirements of this Charter. 
ARTICLE VIII - Administration 

8.1 - Town Manager 
A.  The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Town. The Town Board, by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of all members of the Town Board in office at the time, shall appoint a Town Manager who shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Board and at a salary as determined by the Town Board. 
B.  The Town Manager shall become a resident of the Town within the time established by the Town Board, and shall remain a resident throughout the Manager's appointment. 
C.  The job performance of the Town Manager shall be evaluated annually by the Town Board, and the Town Board shall review such evaluation with the Town Manager. 
D.  The Town Board, upon a majority vote of all members of the Town Board, may remove the Town Manager or any Acting Town Manager from office. However, the Town Board shall provide the Town Manager or any Acting Town Manager with notice of its intent to consider such removal at its next regular or special meeting. 
8.2 - Acting Town Manager 
    The Town Manager shall designate a qualified Town employee to serve as acting Town Manager or administrative contact as needed during the Manager's temporary absence or disability. Whenever the position of Town Manager has been vacated, the Town Board shall make the appointment of an Acting Town Manager to carry out the responsibilities and duties of the Town Manager until the position is filled. 
8.3 - Exclusive Service to Town 
    During the period of the appointment, the Town Manager shall not be an employee of, or perform any services for compensation from, any person or entity other than the Town, unless the Manager has first obtained the approval of the Town Board. 
8.4 - Powers and Duties 
A.  Be responsible for the enforcement of the ordinances, resolutions, franchises, contracts, and other enactments of the Town; 
B.  Establish and implement personnel rules and regulations for Town employees. Such rules and regulations shall provide for the selection, promotion, and retention of Town employees on the basis of ability, training, experience, and performance; 
C.  Prepare a proposed budget and submit it to the Town Board and administer the adopted budget; 
D.  Prepare and submit to the Town Board at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the Town; and upon request of the Town Board, report on the affairs of the Town supervised by the Town Manager; 
E.  Advise the Town Board of the financial condition of the Town and make recommendations to the Town Board for future Town needs; 
F.  Except as to the Municipal Court and the office of the Town Attorney, exercise supervision and control over all Town departments, and make recommendations to the Town Board concerning the establishment, consolidation or abolition of such departments; 
G.  Attend meetings of the Town Board and participate in discussions with the Town Board in an advisory capacity; 
H.  Be responsible for informing the public on, and involving the public in, Town functions, plans and activities; 
I.  Perform such other duties as prescribed in this Charter or as prescribed by ordinance or by the Town Board and that are not in conflict with this Charter. 
8.5 - Town Board's Relationship to Employees 
    Neither the Town Board, the Mayor, nor any Board Member shall dictate or interfere with the appointment of, or removal of, or the duties of any Town employee subordinate to the Town Manager, the Town Attorney, or the Municipal Judge, or prevent or interfere with the exercise of judgment in the performance of the employee's Town responsibilities. The Town Board, the Mayor, and each Board Member shall deal with such employees solely through the Town Manager, the Town Attorney, or the Municipal Judge as applicable and shall not give orders or reprimands to any such employee. The Town Manager alone shall be responsible to the Town Board for the proper administration of all matters placed in the Manager's charge by or pursuant to this Charter. 
8.6 - Town Clerk 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk to perform duties required by applicable law and ordinance and such other duties as directed by the Town Manager. 
8.7 - Director of Finance 
    The Town Manager shall appoint a qualified person as Director of Finance to perform duties required by law and ordinance and such other duties as may be required by the Town Manager. 
ARTICLE IX - Legal and Judiciary 

9.1 - Town Attorney 
A.  The Town Board, by the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the Town Board in office at the time, shall appoint a Town Attorney to serve at the pleasure of the Town Board. 
B.  The Town Board shall establish the Town Attorney's compensation. 
C.  The Town Attorney shall be, at all times while serving as Town Attorney, an attorney at law admitted to practice in Colorado. 
D.  The Town Attorney shall serve as the chief legal advisor of the Town, shall advise the Town Board and other Town officials in matters relating to their official powers and duties, and shall perform such other duties as may be designated by the Town Board. 
E.  Town employees subordinate to the Town Attorney shall be subject to the sole supervision and control of the Town Attorney. 
F.  The job performance of the Town Attorney shall be evaluated annually by the Town Board, and the Town Board shall review such evaluation with the Town Attorney. 
G.  The Town Board may employ such special counsel as may be recommended by the Town Attorney or the Town Manager. 
H.  The removal of the Town Attorney shall require a majority vote of all members of the Town Board. 
9.2 - Municipal Court; Municipal Judge 
A.  There shall be a Municipal Court vested with jurisdiction over matters arising under the Charter and ordinances of the Town. 
B.  The Town Board shall appoint, by the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the Town Board in office at the time, a presiding Municipal Judge and such Deputy Municipal Judges as the Town Board deems necessary. 
C.  The presiding Municipal Judge and each Deputy Municipal Judge shall be, at all times while serving as judge, an attorney at law admitted to practice in Colorado. 
D.  The Town Board shall establish the compensation for the presiding Municipal Judge and each Deputy Municipal Judge. The compensation shall not be dependent upon the outcome of the matters to be decided by the Judge. 
E.  The removal of any Municipal Judge during a term of office shall require a majority vote of all members of the Town Board. Any such removal shall be only for cause as specified in the State Statutes applicable to the removal of Municipal Judges or for any other conduct that would constitute a violation of the Colorado Code of Judicial Conduct, as from time to time amended, if committed by a judge subject to such code. 
ARTICLE X - Boards and Commissions 

10.1 - Boards and Commissions 
A.  The Town Board may, by ordinance, establish, consolidate, or abolish any board or commission, except that the Planning Commission and the Boards of Adjustment and Appeals may not be abolished. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance, each board and commission shall be advisory in character. The selection, term, responsibilities, policies, and other matters concerning each board and commission shall be as established by ordinance. 
C.  The appointment or removal of any board or commission member who is required by ordinance to be appointed by the Town Board shall require the vote of a majority of the Town Board. Each member of a board or commission shall be a resident of the Town at the time of appointment and throughout the member's term. A member appointed by the Town Board shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Board. 
D.  The members of each board and commission shall serve without compensation but may be paid authorized expenses actually incurred in the performance of the duties of the office. 
E.  No board or commission shall hold any executive session except in accordance with procedures that shall be consistent with those established in Article 4.5 of this Charter and only for the purposes specified in said Article 4.5. 
ARTICLE XI - Finance, Budget and Audit 

11.1 - Fiscal Year 
    The fiscal year of the Town shall commence on the first day of January or on such date each year as shall be fixed by the Town Board. 
11.2 - Annual Budget Estimates 
A.  Unless a different date is set by the Town Board, each department head shall submit to the Town Manager, on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of September, the department's proposed budget for the next ensuing fiscal year. 
B.  Unless a different date is set by the Town Board, the Town Manager shall submit to the Town Board, on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of October of each year, a proposed budget for the Town for the next ensuing fiscal year. 
C.  The proposed budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the Town in a format acceptable to the Town Board. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the proposed budget shall be prepared in accordance with the State Statutes establishing the local government budget laws and the local government uniform accounting laws. Such budget shall present a complete financial plan by fund and by spending agency with each fund and shall set forth the following: 
1.  All proposed expenditures for administration, operation, maintenance, debt service, and capital projects to be undertaken or executed by any spending agency during the fiscal year; 
2.  Anticipated revenues for the fiscal year; 
3.  Estimated beginning and ending fund balances; 
4.  The corresponding actual figures for the prior fiscal year and estimated figures projected through the end of the current fiscal year, including disclosures of all beginning and ending fund balances, consistent with the basis of accounting used to prepare the budget; 
D.  Each fund in the budget must be balanced. The budget shall not provide for expenditures in excess of projected revenues and beginning fund balances. 
E.  The budget shall set forth, in a supplemental schedule, each of the following: 
1.  The total amount to be expended during the ensuing fiscal year for payment obligations under all lease-purchase agreements involving real property; 
2.  The total maximum payment liability of the Town under all lease-purchase agreements involving real property over the entire terms of such agreements, including all optional renewal terms; 
3.  The total amount to be expended during the ensuing fiscal year for payment obligations under all lease-purchase agreements other than those involving real property; and 
4.  The total maximum payment liability of the Town under all lease-purchase agreements other than those involving real property over the entire terms of such agreements, including all optional renewal terms. 
11.3 - Capital Program 
A.  The Town Manager, with such assistance as needed or as the Town Board may direct, shall ensure a long-range capital program is prepared and submitted to the Town Board for a long-range capital program for the ensuing fiscal year and the four (4) fiscal years thereafter, prior to or concurrent with the submission of the recommended budget. 
B.  The capital program shall include: 
1.  A clear general summary of its contents; 
2.  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the life of such long-range capital programs, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for the improvement; 
3.  Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended schedules for each improvement; and 
4.  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
C.  This information may be revised or extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
11.4 - Budget Hearing 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget and capital program shall be held by the Town Board after receipt of the proposed budget. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least one (1) time at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and shall state that copies of the proposed budget and the proposed capital projects programs are available for public inspection in the office of the Town Clerk. 
11.5 - Town Board Action on Budget 
    After the public hearing the Town Board may adopt the budget as presented or as amended. In amending the budget Town Board may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease programs or amounts except those expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit. Such amendments shall not increase the total expenditures for the overall budget as presented at the public hearing. If such amendment does increase the total expenditures, then another public hearing shall be held prior to adoption of the budget. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, any resolution approving or amending the budget or making any appropriation, or any ordinance levying any ad valorem property tax, shall be effective upon final adoption of such resolution or ordinance. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
11.6 - Town Board Adoption 
A.  The Town Board shall adopt the budget by resolution on or before the final day of the fiscal year. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for the current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the Town Board adopts the budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
B.  Monthly or more often if required by the Town Board, the Town Manager shall ensure that the Town Board is submitted data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date. 
11.7 - Appropriations 
A.  Adoption of the budget by Town Board shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein for expenditure from the funds indicated. 
B.  The proceeds of any municipal borrowing authorized by Article 11.13 of this Charter shall not be subject to any requirement of prior budgeting or appropriation as a condition of their expenditure. 
C.  The amount necessary to repay any such municipal borrowing, including interest, need not be budgeted or appropriated in full in the year in which the borrowing occurs; however, such amounts necessary to pay debt service shall be budgeted and appropriated on an annual basis, provided that no failure to budget and appropriate such annual debt service amounts shall affect the enforceability of any covenant of the Town to make such payments. 
11.8 - Property Tax Levy 
    The Town Board shall cause the ad valorem property tax levy to be certified as provided by law. 
11.9 - Public Records 
    Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public records and shall be made available to the public through the Town Clerk's office. 
11.10 - Amendments After Adoption 
A.  Supplemental Appropriations: If during the fiscal year the Town Manager certifies that there are revenues available for appropriation in excess of those estimated in the budget, the Town Board may by resolution make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess, provided that such additional spending is not in conflict with the Colorado Constitution. 
B.  Emergency Appropriations: To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Town Board may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency resolution. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Town Board may by emergency resolution, authorize the issuance of emergency notes as provided in this Charter. 
C.  Reduction of Appropriations: If during the fiscal year it appears probable to the Town Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, it shall be reported to the Town Board without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action taken, and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The Town Board shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit, and for that purpose it may by resolution reduce one or more appropriations. 
D.  Transfer of Appropriations: During the fiscal year the Town Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office, project or agency within a fund. Upon written request from the Town Manager, the Town Board may also authorize by resolution the transfer of part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one fund, department, office, agency, or project to another. 
E.  Limitation: No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred. No appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. 
F.  Effective date: The supplemental appropriations, emergency appropriations, and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this Article may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
11.11 - Payments and Obligations Prohibited 
    During the fiscal year no Town official, employee, or spending agency shall expend any money, incur any liability, or enter into any contract which, by its terms, involves the expenditures of money in excess of the amounts appropriated. Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this Article shall be void, and no monies belonging to the Town shall be paid on such contract. 
11.12 - Independent Audit 
A.  The Town Board shall provide for an independent annual audit of all Town accounts by a certified public accountant selected by the Town Board and may provide for more frequent audits, as it deems necessary. 
B.  The audit shall be performed in accordance with the State Statutes establishing the local government audit laws. 
C.  The accountant selected shall have no direct personal interest in the fiscal affairs of the Town, an elected official of the Town, or any employee of the Town. 
D.  Unless another date is provided by ordinance, the audit shall be completed within six (6) months after the close of the fiscal year. 
E.  Upon completion, the audit shall be presented to the Town Board and copies made available for public inspection through the Town Clerk's office. 
11.13 - Municipal Borrowing 
    The Town may, subject to any applicable limitations in the Colorado Constitution, borrow money and issue securities or enter into other obligations to evidence such borrowing in any form and in any manner determined by the Town Board to be in the best interests of the Town. 
11.14 - Provision for Tax System 
    The Town Board may, by ordinance, provide a system for the assessment, levy, and collection of all Town taxes not inconsistent with this Charter. 
11.15 - Municipal Taxation 
    The Town Board may adopt by ordinance for municipal taxes as long as those taxes comply with the following conditions: 
A.  Such taxes are subject to any applicable limitations in the Colorado Constitution, including any requirements for voter approval; and 
B.  The Town Board may, subject to ordinance requirements and limitations, adopt ordinances providing for the establishment and operation of any enterprise deemed to be in the best interest of the Town. Within this Article, enterprise refers to a government-owned business authorized to issue its own revenue bonds and receiving less than 10% of its annual revenue in grants from all Colorado state and local governments combined. 
11.16 - Bonding 
    Before permitting any member of the Town Board or any Town employee to perform any function or duty involving the handling of Town funds, the Town shall obtain a fidelity bond or insurance coverage in an amount acceptable to the Town Board. 
11.17 - Municipal Investments 
    The Town Board may, by ordinance or resolution, initiate and adopt guidelines for municipal investments as long as those guidelines comply with and are subject to any applicable limitations in the Colorado Constitution, including any requirements for voter approval. 
ARTICLE XII - Town-Owned Utilities 

12.1 - Authority and Powers 
    The Town shall have and exercise all the authority and powers provided by the Colorado Constitution, State Statutes, and other applicable laws in any matter pertaining to Town-owned utilities, including water and water rights and acquisition thereof, and bonded indebtedness in connection therewith. 
12.2 - Utility Rates and Finances 
A.  The Town Board shall from time to time fix, establish, maintain, and provide for the collection of rates, fees, and charges for water, sewer, and other utility services furnished by the Town. 
B.  Such rates, fees, and charges shall be sufficient in the Town Board's judgment to provide good service to the customers, pay all bonded indebtedness, pay legally required refunds, cover the cost of operation, maintenance, additions, extensions, betterments, and improvements, provide a reasonable return on the Town's investment in utility properties and capital investments, and reimburse the general fund for administrative services and overhead provided and incurred by the Town on behalf of each utility, as allowed by the Colorado Constitution and other applicable laws. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall be subject at all times to the performance by the Town of all covenants and agreements made by it in connection with the issuance, sale, or delivery of any bonds of the Town, payable out of the revenues derived from the operation of its water, sewer, and other utilities, whether such revenue bonds be heretofore or hereafter issued. 
12.3 - Separate Utility Accounting 
A.  All monies derived from Town-owned utilities shall be accounted for separately from other monies of the Town. 
B.  Any loan of money derived from a Town-owned utility to any other Town-owned utility, or to any other Town fund, shall be approved by ordinance. The motion approving the loan shall specify the terms of the loan. 
ARTICLE XIII - Franchises 

13.1 - New Franchises and Renewals 
A.  A franchise may be granted or renewed for a period of twenty-five (25) years or less. 
B.  Any franchise, and any renewal of or amendment to a franchise, shall be granted by the Town Board by ordinance. Any ordinance granting, renewing or amending a franchise shall be subject to a referendum, notwithstanding any emergency declaration in the ordinance, if one is filed in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in this Charter. If such an election is ordered, the grantee of such franchise shall deposit the cost of the election with the Town Clerk in an amount determined by the Town Clerk. 
ARTICLE XIV - Permits 

14.1 - Revocable Permits or Licenses 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Town may grant a permit or license at any time for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley, other public way, or Town-owned place. Any such permit or license shall be revocable by the Town at any time and without cause, whether or not such right to revoke is expressly reserved in the permit or license. 
ARTICLE XV - Special Districts 

15.1 - Power to Create Districts 
    The Town Board, subject to applicable restrictions in the Colorado Constitution, shall have full authority to create by ordinance special districts within the Town. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
ARTICLE XVI - Miscellaneous Provisions 

16.1 - Interpretation 
A.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in or indicated by the context, all words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
B.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in or indicated by the context, the singular number shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as individuals. 
16.2 - Severability of Charter Provisions 
    If any part of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is found to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of any remaining part of this Charter, and to this end this Charter is declared to be severable. 
16.3 - Sale or Encumbrance of Property 
    The Town Board may not sell, exchange, or dispose of public utilities or permanent public buildings or any fee interest in real property except by ordinance or a majority vote of the electors at the option of the Town Board Members. The Town Board may not mortgage or encumber public utilities or permanent public buildings or real or personal property except by ordinance or majority vote of the electors at the option of the Town Board Members. (Amended by voters on April 3, 2012) 
16.4 - Bequests, Gifts and Donations 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Town Board, on behalf of the Town, may receive bequests, gifts, and donations of all kinds of property with power to manage, sell, lease, or otherwise dispose or provide for the disposition of the same. 
16.5 - Penalty for Violation of Charter 
    Any willful violation of a provision of this Charter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in the Municipal Court. Any person convicted of such a violation may be punished by imprisonment for a term not to exceed the maximum term of imprisonment that the Municipal Court is authorized to impose, or by a fine in an amount not to exceed the maximum fine that the Municipal Court is authorized to impose, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
16.6 - Competitive Bidding 
    The Town Board shall establish by ordinance procedures requiring competitive bidding for contracts for the procurement of services, equipment, and supplies. Any such ordinance may provide exclusions from the competitive bidding requirements for contracts below an amount specified in the ordinance, for the types of contracts specified in the ordinance, and for the types of services, equipment, or supplies specified in the ordinance. 
16.7 - Continuity of Government 
    The Town Board shall provide by ordinance for continuity of government for the Town in the event of natural or enemy-caused disaster or in the event of riot, insurrection, or emergency. Such ordinance shall provide for an orderly line of succession of Town officials with the authority to take appropriate action for the protection of life and property. 
16.8 - Eminent Domain 
    The Town Board, subject to applicable restrictions in the Colorado Constitution, shall have full powers of eminent domain and dominant eminent domain. 
ARTICLE XVII - Transitional Provisions 

17.1 - Effective Date of Charter 
    This Charter shall become effective immediately upon filing and recording with the Secretary of State of Colorado following approval of the registered electors of the Town. 
17.2 - Prior Town Legislation 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the Town which are not inconsistent with this Charter, and which are in force and effect on the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. Any provision of any ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation that is inconsistent with this Charter is hereby repealed. 
17.3 - Continuation of Present Elected Officials 
    The present Board Members and Mayor, in office on the date this Charter becomes effective, shall continue to serve and carry out the functions, powers and duties of their offices until their successors assume the duties of their offices, and they shall in all respects be subject to provisions of this Charter with the term limits of Article 3.4 applying to those terms served prior to adoption of this Charter. 
17.4 - Continuation of Present Boards and Commissions 
    All boards and commissions in existence on the effective date of this Charter shall continue to function as established by ordinance. The members of each Town Board and commission, serving on the effective date of this Charter, shall continue as though they had been appointed in the manner provided in this Charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Charter. 
17.5 - Continuation of Present Personnel 
    The employment of all employees of the Town serving on the effective date of this Charter shall continue as though they had been employed in the manner provided in this Charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Charter. 
17.6 - Saving Clause 
    This Charter shall not affect any suit pending in any court or any document heretofore executed in connection therewith. Nothing in this Charter shall invalidate any existing contracts between the Town of Windsor and individuals, corporations, or public agencies. 
17.7 - Directives to Write Ordinances 
    The ordinances required by Articles 5.2.B.5, 16.6 and 16.7 of this Charter shall be adopted by the Town Board no later than six months after the effective date of this Charter. 
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
ARTICLE I - Code 

Sec. 1-1-10. - Adoption of Code. 
    The published code known as the Windsor Municipal Code, of which one (1) copy is now on file in the office of the Town Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours, is enacted and adopted by reference as a primary code and incorporated herein as if set out at length. This primary code has been promulgated by the Town of Windsor as a codification of all the ordinances of the Town of Windsor, Colorado, of a general and permanent nature through Ordinance No. 2006-1236 for the purpose of providing an up-to-date code of ordinances, properly organized and indexed, in published form for the use of the citizens and officers of the Town. 
(Prior code 1-1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-1-20. - Title and scope. 
    This Code constitutes a compilation, revision and codification of all the ordinances of the Town of Windsor, Colorado, of a general and permanent nature, and shall be known as the Windsor Municipal Code. 
(Prior Code 1-2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-1-30. - Purpose. 
    The Town Board finds, determines and declares that the ordinance codified in this Chapter is necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Prior code 1-3; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-1-40. - Adoption of codes by reference. 
    Codes may be adopted by reference, as provided in Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter. 
(Prior code 1-4; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-1-50. - Matters not affected by repeal. 
    The repeal of ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature by Section 1-1-60 of this Code shall not affect any offense committed or act done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, right or obligation established prior to the time said ordinances and parts of ordinances are repealed. 
(Prior code 1-5; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-1-60. - Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Town Board, and in force on the date of adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of the adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code 1-6; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-1-70. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
    The continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances and parts of ordinances, although omitted from this Code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom, and the adoption of the Code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or part of any such ordinance. Among the ordinances not repealed or amended by the adoption of this Code are ordinances: 
(1)  Creating, opening, dedicating, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys and other public ways. 
(2)  Naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways. 
(3)  Establishing the grades of specific streets and other public ways. 
(4)  Establishing the grades or lines of specific sidewalks. 
(5)  Authorizing or relating to specific issuances of general obligation bonds. 
(6)  Creating specific sewer and paving districts and other local improvement districts. 
(7)  Authorizing the issuance of specific local improvement district bonds. 
(8)  Making special assessments for local improvement districts and authorizing refunds from specific local improvement district bond proceeds. 
(9)  Annexing territory to or excluding territory from the Town. 
(10)  Dedicating or accepting any specific plat or subdivision. 
(11)  Calling or providing for a specific election. 
(12)  Authorizing specific contracts for purchase of beneficial use of water by the Town. 
(13)  Approving or authorizing specific contracts with the State, with other governmental bodies or with others. 
(14)  Authorizing a specific lease, sale or purchase of property. 
(15)  Granting rights-of-way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies or other public carriers. 
(16)  Granting a specific gas company or other public utility the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets and alleys or of otherwise using the streets and alleys. 
(17)  Granting a franchise to a specific public utility company or establishing rights for or otherwise regulating a specific public utility company. 
(18)  Appropriating money. 
(19)  Levying a temporary tax or fixing a temporary tax rate. 
(20)  Relating to salaries. 
(21)  Amending the Official Zoning Map adopted May 11, 1970, by Ordinance No. 415 N.S. 
(Prior code 1-7; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-1-80. - Code supersedes prior ordinances. 
    This Code shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances and parts of ordinances passed by the Town Board, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect as shall hereafter be set forth by reference. 
(Prior code 1-8; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-1-90. - Changes in previously adopted ordinances. 
    In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Town for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such. 
(Prior code 1-9; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE II - Definitions and Usage 

Sec. 1-2-10. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the Town of Windsor and/or any codification of the same, shall be construed as defined in the Home Rule Charter and as established in this Article, unless a different meaning is intended from the context or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
    Computation of time means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    County means the County of Weld, Colorado. 
    C.R.S. means Colorado Revised Statutes. 
    Law denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, the ordinances of the Town and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May is permissive. 
    Misdemeanor means and is to be construed as meaning violation and is not intended to mean crime or criminal conduct. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Must and shall . Each is mandatory. 
    Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
    Owner , applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust or organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
    Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property includes real and personal property. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the Town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State. 
    Tenant and occupant , applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Title of office . Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the Town, or his or her designated representative. 
    Town Board means the Board of Trustees of the Town of Windsor. 
    Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
(Prior code 1-21; Ord. 2004-1193 1-3; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-2-20. - Usage of terms. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Prior code 1-22; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-2-30. - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply to Town ordinances: 
(1)  Any gender includes the other genders. 
(2)  The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(4)  Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Prior code 1-23; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE III - General 

Sec. 1-3-10. - Titles and headings not part of Code. 
    Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code or inserted in the Code, may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code, and are not part of the ordinances. 
(Prior code 1-41; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-20. - Authorized acts. 
(a)  When an ordinance requires an act to be done which may as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
(b)  The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; but if the time for an act to be done shall fall on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, the act shall be done upon the next regular business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Prior code 1-42; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-30. - Prohibited acts. 
    Whenever in Town ordinances any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Prior code 1-43; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-40. - Acts by agents, representatives. 
    When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent or representative as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent or representative . (Prior code 1-44; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-50. - Purpose of ordinances. 
    The provisions of Town ordinances, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objectives and to promote justice. 
(Prior code 1-45; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-60. - Repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Prior code 1-46; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-70. - Adoption of ordinances. 
    The procedure for adopting ordinances shall be as set forth in Article IV of the Home Rule Charter (Prior code 1-47; Ord. 2004-1193 1, 4-6; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-80. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Code are declared to be severable, and if any section, provision or part thereof shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this Code shall continue in full force and effect, it being the legislative intent that this Code would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional matter had not been included therein. It is further declared that, if any provision or part of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application thereof to other persons shall not be affected thereby. 
(Prior code 1-48; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-90. - Amendments to Code. 
    Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature, passed or adopted after the adoption of this Code, may be passed or adopted either in the form of amendments to the Code adopted by this Code or without specific reference to the Code. However, in either case, all such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to the Code, and all of the substantive, permanent and general parts of said ordinances and changes made thereby in the Code shall be inserted and made in the Code as provided in Section 1-3-110 hereof. 
(Prior code 1-49; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-100. - Examination of Code. 
    The Town Clerk shall carefully examine at least one (1) copy of the Code adopted by this ordinance to see that it is a true and correct copy of the Code. Similarly, after each supplement has been prepared, printed and inserted in the Code, the Town Clerk shall carefully examine at least one (1) copy of the Code as supplemented. The copy of the Code as originally adopted or amended, certified and sealed shall constitute the permanent and general ordinances of the Town as of the date indicated in the certificate and shall be so accepted by the courts of law, administrative tribunals and all others concerned. 
(Prior code 1-50; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532  1) 
Sec. 1-3-110. - Copy of Code on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the Code shall be kept in the office of the Town Clerk at all times, and such Code may be inspected by any interested person at any time during regular office hours, but may not be removed from the Town Clerk's office except upon proper order of a court of law. 
(Prior code 1-51; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-120. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  The Town Clerk shall cause supplementation of the Code to be prepared and printed from time to time as he or she may see fit. All substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Town Board or adopted by initiative and referendum, and all amendments and changes in ordinances or other measures included in the Code prior to the supplementation and since the previous supplementation, shall be included. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the Town Clerk, to keep up to date the copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for the use of the public. 
(Prior code 1-52; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-130. - Sale of Code books. 
    Copies of the Code book may be purchased from the Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town Board. 
(Prior code 1-53; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-3-140. - Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall alter, change or amend this Code, except in the manner prescribed in this Article, or who shall alter or tamper with the Code in any manner so as to cause the ordinances of the Town to be misrepresented thereby shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20. 
(Prior code 1-54; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE IV - General Penalty 

Sec. 1-4-10. - Violations. 
    It is a violation of this Code for any person to do any act which is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, or to fail to do or perform any act required, in this Code. 
(Prior code 1-71; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-4-20. - General penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of any chapter of this Code for which a different penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction thereof, by punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00). The maximum fine level set forth herein shall be adjusted on January 1 of each year by the annual percentage change in the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, and Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index. In addition to any such fine, such person, firm or corporation shall pay all costs and expenses in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the aforesaid fine, the Municipal Judge shall add thereto a surcharge in the amount of seven dollars ($7.00) for each ordinance violation, but the total fine imposed under Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section may not exceed the maximum fine established in Subsection (a) above. All proceeds generated by the surcharge under this Subsection shall be paid into a separate account of the Town, fifty percent (50%) of which shall be used for the purpose of funding the participation of the Town in the Weld County Drug Task Force, and the remaining fifty percent (50%) of which shall be deposited into a Town Methamphetamine Remediation Fund (MRF) account, with such MRF funds being dedicated to defraying the cost of methamphetamine laboratory remediation costs incurred by the Town. The balance in the MRF fund shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); any excess accumulation in the MRF fund shall be reallocated for the purpose of funding the Town's participation in the Weld County Drug Task Force. Any reduction of the MRF fund caused by payment of Town methamphetamine laboratory remediation expenses will be restored through subsequent allocations to assure an ongoing target balance of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Should any funding called for hereunder be or become unnecessary for any reason, the surcharge will continue and be used for the purpose of law enforcement training, administration and/or acquisition of equipment. 
(Ord. 2014-1470 1; Ord. 2014-1472 1) 
Sec. 1-4-30. - Application of penalties to juveniles. 
    Every person who, at the time of commission of the offense, was at least ten (10) but not yet eighteen (18) years of age, and who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of this Chapter, shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum fine established pursuant to Subsection 1-4-20(a) above per violation or count. Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. 
(Ord. 2014-1472 2) 
Sec. 1-4-40. - Penalty for violations of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in the Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20 or 1-4-30, unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. 
(Prior code 1-74; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-4-50. - Default, default judgments and collections. 
(a)  Application. This section applies to all non-criminal traffic, parking and ordinance violations. 
(b)  Service. Before a violation can be subject to the procedures set forth in this section, the action must have been properly initiated by personal service, or proper substituted service of a complaint, summons and complaint, citation, penalty assessment, notice or other document charging the party with any non-criminal traffic, parking or ordinance violation. Service shall comply with Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure Rule 204. 
(c)  Default and default judgment. Failure to appear to enter a plea or defend any non-criminal ticket at a scheduled court date shall result in the finding of default. Notice of the default, notice of pending default judgment, and Notice of Hearing shall be sent to the Defendant, at the Defendant's last known physical address and/or by email at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing date. Failure to appear at the duly-noticed hearing shall result in entry of a default judgment, the setting of fine and referral for collections as provided below. 
(d)  Setting aside default. A motion to set aside a default and/or a default judgment shall be made within a reasonable time, not to exceed six (6) months. The court may, for good cause shown, set aside an entry of default, and/or a default judgment. 
(e)  Collections. In any case where a default judgment has entered, the Municipal Court shall have the authority to pursue collection of the amount due from the Defendant. The Municipal Court shall adopt procedures for the collection of default judgments which, in addition to any other remedy available, may include the engaging of third-party collection services. 
(f)  Liability for collection costs. In addition to the amount of any default judgment entered pursuant to this Section, the Defendant shall additionally pay any associated collection costs, fees and/or commissions for third-party collection services. 
(Ord. 2018-1579 ) 
ARTICLE V - Inspections 

Sec. 1-5-10. - Entry. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance, or whenever there is probable cause to believe that there exists an ordinance violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the Town, any public inspector or other authorized representative of the Town may, upon presentation of proper credentials and upon obtaining permission of the occupant or if unoccupied, the owner, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by ordinance. In the event the occupant, or if unoccupied, the owner, refuses entry to such building or premises, or the public inspector or other authorized representative is unable to obtain permission of such occupant or owner to enter such building or premises, the public inspector or other authorized representative is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Prior code 1-91; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 1-5-20. - Authority to enter premises under emergency. 
    Law enforcement officers, members of the Windsor-Severance Fire Department, other fire departments operating under a mutual assistance agreement or automatic aid agreement with the Town, certified emergency medical technicians and paramedics during the course of employment with a governmental agency are hereby granted the authority to enter private residences within the Town without invitation from the occupant or occupants of the residence at any time such person has reasonable grounds to believe a medical emergency is in progress within the subject premises and the occupant or occupants of such premises are incapable of consenting to the entry because of such medical emergency. 
(Prior code 1-92; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VI - Seal 

Sec. 1-6-10. - Corporate seal. 
    A seal, the impression of which shall contain in the center the word "Seal" and around the outer edge the words "Town of Windsor, Colorado," shall be and hereby is declared to be the Seal of the Town. 
(Prior code 1-101; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VII - Referendum Procedures 

Sec. 1-7-10. - Referendum power. 
    The registered electors of the Town shall have the power at their option to approve or reject, by election, any ordinance adopted by the Town Board which is subject to referendum pursuant to the Colorado Constitution, the Charter and applicable state law. 
(Ord. 2007-1287 1) 
Sec. 1-7-20. - Commencement of proceedings. 
(a)  One (1) or more registered electors may commence referendum proceedings by filing with the Town Clerk a mandatory notice of protest of the subject ordinance within ten (10) days after the final publication of said ordinance. The notice of protest must be in writing and must fully identify the ordinance proposed to be the subject of the referendum. The notice of protest may be brief, but shall clearly state the intention of the elector or electors to commence the referendum process. The filing of the notice of protest shall be a condition precedent to the filing of a referendum petition, and the failure to do so shall preclude the later filing of any such petition. In the event a notice of protest is filed during the ten-day period, the operation of the subject ordinance shall be suspended until such time as the registered elector or electors giving such notice have failed to comply with the referendum requirements hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Not later than ten (10) days after the filing of the notice of protest, the proponents thereof shall present to the Town Clerk the final form of a referendum petition relating to the ordinance identified in the notice of protest, and said petition shall conform with the requirements of the Home Rule Charter, the Colorado Constitution and state statutes. 
(c)  In the event the conforming notice of protest and the conforming referendum petition form are timely presented, the Town Clerk shall evaluate and determine the adequacy of the form of the petition in accordance with the referendum provisions of the Home Rule Charter, the Colorado Constitution and state statutes. Upon approval of the form of the petition by the Town Clerk, the petition shall then be available for circulation and thereafter signed, verified and filed in accordance with the Home Rule Charter, Colorado Constitution and state statutes as aforesaid. 
(Ord. 2007-1287 2) 
Sec. 1-7-30. - Signatures required. 
    A referendum petition shall be signed by registered electors of the Town equal in number to at least five percent (5%) of the total number of electors of the Town registered to vote at the last regular municipal election. 
(Ord. 2007-1287 4) 
Sec. 1-7-40. - Petition deadline. 
    A completed referendum petition with all required information attached thereto shall be filed with the Town Clerk no later than thirty (30) days after the Town Clerk's approval of the petition for circulation. Upon receipt of a completed referendum petition, the Town Clerk shall evaluate the petition for certification in accordance with the provisions of the Home Rule Charter, Colorado Constitution and the state statutes. If a completed referendum petition is not filed within this thirty-day period, the referendum effort shall be deemed null and void, the petition shall not be further circulated and the subject ordinance shall become effective. 
(Ord. 2007-1287 5) 
Sec. 1-7-50. - Town Board action. 
    The presentation to the Town Clerk of a timely notice of protest as aforesaid, the timely filing of a referendum petition and thereafter the certification by the Town Clerk to the Town Board of a petition sufficient for referendum shall further suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Town Board or final determination by the registered electors. The Town Board shall reconsider the ordinance at the next regular or special meeting of the Town Board following the receipt and verification of the petition by the Town Clerk. If the ordinance, or that part sought to be repealed, is not repealed, the Town Board shall refer the same to a vote of the registered electors in accordance with the referendum powers as set forth in the Home Rule Charter, the Colorado Constitution and state statutes. 
(Ord. 2007-1287 6) 
CHAPTER 2 - Administration and Personnel 
ARTICLE I - Mayor and Town Board 

Sec. 2-1-10. - Duties of Mayor. 
(a)  The Mayor shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature all bonds, warrants, contracts and instruments of and concerning the business of the Town, as the Board Members or any statutes or ordinances may require. 
(b)  Except as may be required by statute, the Mayor shall exercise only such powers as the Board Members shall specifically confer upon him or her. 
(Prior code 2-2; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-1-20. - Acting Mayor. 
    In the event of the absence or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the Board Members may designate another of their number to serve as acting Mayor during such absence or disability. 
(Prior code 2-4; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-1-30. - Regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the Town Board shall be held on the second and fourth Monday evenings of each month at the Town Hall at 7:00 p.m., except on legal holidays, when no meeting shall be held. 
(Prior code 2-6; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-1-40. - Conduct of meetings. 
    Meetings of the Town Board shall be conducted by the Mayor according to Robert's Rules of Order, Revised. 
(Prior code 2-8; Ord. 2004-1193 11; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-1-50. - Order of business. 
    At the hour appointed for meeting, the members shall be called to order by the Mayor or, in his or her absence, by the Mayor Pro Tem, and the Town Clerk shall proceed to call the roll, note the absentees and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum is present, the Town Board shall proceed with the business before it, in the manner and order as established by the Town Board. 
(Prior code 2-9; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-1-60. - Approval of claims. 
    All bills for labor, materials and services shall be itemized, giving the day and date that such labor and services were performed or materials bought. The itemized list of bills shall be presented monthly to the Town Board for approval. 
(Prior code 2-10; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-1-70. - Boards and commissions. 
(a)  The Town Board shall create and appoint members to such boards and commissions as may now or hereafter exist, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Board of Adjustment; 
(2)  Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board; 
(3)  Planning Commission; 
(4)  Tree Board; and 
(5)  Water and Sewer Board. 
(b)  Upon request of the duly appointed Chair of any board or commission for which alternate members are not by this Code specifically provided, the Mayor or Town Board, as the case may be, shall have the additional authority to appoint alternate members to such board or commission. Any alternate member so appointed shall serve for a term of office as otherwise applicable to that board or commission, and shall have voting powers only in the event that a full member of such board or commission is unable to attend a scheduled public meeting of said board or commission. No alternate member of any board or commission shall take office unless the board or commission has in its bylaws established protocols for the duties and authority of alternate members appointed under this Subsection. 
(Ord. 2010-1388 1; Ord. 2012-1430 2; Ord. 2017-1532 2) 
ARTICLE II - Officers and Employees 

Sec. 2-2-10. - Powers and duties of officers generally. 
    Appointed officers of the Town shall have such power and perform such duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by the state laws, the ordinances of the Town and the Town of Windsor Home Rule Home Rule Charter, and shall further perform any additional duties required by the Town Board, and shall be subject to the control and orders of the Town Board. 
(Prior code 2-32; Ord. 2004-1193 23; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-2-20. - Oath of office; bond. 
(a)  When required by the Town Board, each officer or employee, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall take and subscribe to an oath to support the Constitution and laws of the United States and the State and the ordinances of the Town. 
(b)  In all cases where, by law, ordinance or resolution of the Town Board, a bond is required of any such officer, he or she shall make and execute to the Town a bond in such sum as is required, to be approved by the Town Board, conditioned for the faithful performance of all duties pertaining to such office, the proper care of all money or property of the Town coming into his or her hands and the proper accounting for or delivery of the same. 
(Prior code 2-33; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-2-30. - Compensation. 
    Compensation for employees shall be in accordance with the current Position Classification and Compensation Plan. 
(Prior code 2-39; Ord. 2004-1193 29; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-2-40. - Residency requirement. 
(a)  During his or term of employment, the Chief of Police shall reside within the boundaries of the Town. 
(b)  Except as provided for in Subsection (a) above, the duties of the employment positions hereinafter named clearly and demonstrably require that the employees in said positions reside in close proximity to the Town. All such employees shall reside within thirty (30) minutes' driving time of the Town Hall. Those employee positions are as follows: 
(1)  Director of Public Works. 
(2)  All Town employees whose positions require periodic emergency responsibilities. 
(Prior code 2-40; Ord. 2004-1193 30; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-2-50. - Maximum value of nonpecuniary gifts. 
    Nothing contained in the Home Rule Charter shall prohibit any elected or appointed official, public body member or employee from accepting an occasional nonpecuniary gift of a value not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), or from accepting an award, publicly presented, in recognition of public service. However, no elected or appointed official, public body member or employee shall accept a nonpecuniary gift of any value if the gift is or may be in any way associated with a contract that is or may be one for which the elected or appointed official, public body member or employee has the power or duty to perform an official action. 
(Prior code 2-41; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE III - Social Security 

Sec. 2-3-10. - Legislative declaration. 
    In the opinion of the Town Board, the extension of the social security system to employees and officers of the Town will be of great benefit not only to the employees of said Town by providing that said employees and officers may participate in the provision of the old-age and survivors insurance system, but also to the Town by the efficiency of its government. 
(Prior code 2-51; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-3-20. - Payroll deductions. 
    The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll deductions to be matched by payments by the Town to be made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the Department of Employment Security, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the Town. Such payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 1400 of the Federal Insurance Contribution Act on all services which constitute employment within the meaning of that Act. Payments made to the State Department of Employment Security shall be due and payable on or before the 18 th day of the month immediately following the completed calendar quarter, and such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (1/2%) per month until such time as payments are made. 
(Prior code 2-52; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532 3) 
ARTICLE IV - Municipal Court 

Sec. 2-4-10. - Municipal Court Judge; term of office; oath of office. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2011, the Municipal Court Judge, and any Assistant Judge or Assistant Judges subsequently appointed to serve the Municipal Court, shall serve a fixed term of two (2) calendar years, which appointments shall be made by resolution of the Town Board adopted at the first regular Town Board meeting in January of each odd-numbered calendar year. The term of office for the Municipal Court Judge in office as of final adoption of the ordinance codified herein shall expire, unless renewed as provided in this Subsection, on January 1, 2011. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, every Municipal Judge shall take an oath or affirmation that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State and the laws of the Town, and will faithfully perform the duties of his or her office. 
(Ord. 2010-1392 1) 
Sec. 2-4-20. - Qualified court of record; jurisdiction. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2011, the Municipal Court shall be designated and shall henceforth function in all respects as a qualified court of record, as the term is defined by Section 13-10-102(3), C.R.S. 
(b)  In addition to the powers otherwise vested in qualified courts of record, the Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction as set forth in Section 9.2(A) of the Home Rule Charter. 
(Ord. 2010-1392 2) 
Sec. 2-4-30. - Sessions generally. 
    There shall be regular sessions of the Municipal Court for the trial of cases as may be fixed by the presiding judge. The Municipal Judge may hold special sessions of court at any time, including Sundays, holidays and night court. All sessions shall be open to the public. 
(Prior code 2-65; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-4-40. - Rules of procedure. 
    In addition to other powers, a Municipal Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the business of the Municipal Court, consistent with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. 
(Prior code 2-66; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-4-50. - Bench warrants. 
    If a defendant fails to appear for arraignment or trial at the time or place required in the summons or other notice or otherwise fails to appear as required by statute, rule or ordinance or by the Court, or fails to pay any fine or costs or obey any lawful order of the Court, the Court may issue a bench warrant directed to any law enforcement officer, commanding such officer to apprehend the defendant and bring the defendant forthwith before the Court. 
(Prior code 2-67; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-4-60. - Contempt power. 
(a)  When the Court finds any person to be in contempt, the Court may vindicate its dignity by imposing on the contemnor a fine not to exceed the maximum established pursuant to Section 1-4-20 (a) of this Code. 
(b)  In cases of indirect contempt, the alleged contemnor shall have all the rights, privileges, safeguards and protections of a defendant in a petty offense case, including but not limited to a formal written complaint, arraignment and trial by jury. 
(Prior code 2-68; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2010-1392 6; Ord. 2017-1532 4) 
Sec. 2-4-70. - Court Clerk; establishment; appointment. 
    The office of the Municipal Court Clerk is hereby established. The Municipal Court Clerk and any deputy court clerks deemed necessary and made available by the Town Manager, shall be appointed by the presiding Municipal Judge. The Municipal Court Clerk, and any deputy court clerk assigned, shall perform all duties assigned by the presiding Municipal Judge necessary for the operation of the Municipal Court, as delegated by law or by applicable court rule, as approved by the Town Manager. 
(Ord. 2017-1532 5) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2017-1532 ,  5, adopted April 10, 2017, repealed the former  2-4-70 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  2-4-70 pertained to Court Clerk; establishment; appointment; performance bond and derived from Ord. 2010-1392,  3. 
Sec. 2-4-80. - Monthly accounting by Court Clerk. 
    The Court Clerk, or the Presiding Judge when acting as Clerk, shall file monthly reports with the Town Clerk of all moneys collected by the Court. On the last day of each month, the Court Clerk shall pay to the Director of Finance all moneys collected by the Court. 
(Prior code 2-71; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532 6) 
Sec. 2-4-90. - Compensation of Municipal Judge; compensation of Municipal Court Clerk; annual appropriations. 
    In conjunction with the annual budgeting process, the Town Board shall on an annual basis by ordinance budget and appropriate such moneys as may be necessary for the proper operation of the Municipal Court. Such appropriations shall include the fixing of compensation for the Municipal Court Judge and any Assistant Judge assigned to the Municipal Court, with due regard for the limitations established in Section 9.2(D) of the Home Rule Charter. Such appropriations shall include the fixing of compensation for the office of the Municipal Court Clerk. 
(Ord. 2010-1392 4) 
Sec. 2-4-100. - Appeals; bonds. 
(a)  Appeals taken from judgments of the Municipal Court shall be made to the District Court in and for Weld County, Colorado. The practice and procedure in such case shall be the same as provided by Section 13-6-310, C.R.S., and applicable rules of procedure for the appeal of misdemeanor convictions from the county court to the district court. 
(b)  When an appellant desires to stay the judgment of the Municipal Court, the appellant shall execute a bond to the Town of Windsor, in such penal sum as may be fixed by the presiding Municipal Court Judge as provided by law. All such bonds shall be in the form of a cash deposit or a written undertaking of a corporate surety. 
(c)  The bond executed pursuant to this Section shall be conditioned such that the appellant will duly prosecute such appeal and satisfy any judgment that may be rendered upon conclusion of the case in the appropriate appellate court to which appeal is taken, and that the appellant will surrender himself or herself in satisfaction of such judgment if that is required. 
(d)  If the bond is forfeited, the appellate court, upon motion of the Town, shall enter judgment against the appellant and sureties on the bond for the amount of such bond. The Town shall hereby be deemed to consent to entry of judgment against the appellant and sureties on the bond for the amount of such bond. The judgment so entered may, upon the express consent of the Municipal Prosecutor, be set aside or modified. 
(Ord. 2010-1392 5) 
Sec. 2-4-110. - Municipal Court costs. 
    The Municipal Court shall assess court costs as follows: 
(1)  In conjunction with each sentence imposed upon any defendant who appears before the Court and pleads guilty or nolo contendere, any defendant who enters into any plea agreement, or any defendant who, after trial, is found guilty of any violation of this Code, the Municipal Court shall assess court costs of twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(2)  Any court costs imposed under this Section shall be in addition to any surcharge assessment otherwise provided within this Code. 
(3)  Any revenue collected pursuant to court costs imposed under this Section shall be exclusively applied to defray the costs of operating the Municipal Court and shall not be co-mingled or applied to the general costs of Town government. 
(Ord. 2011-1403) 
ARTICLE V - Police Department 

Sec. 2-5-10. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department for the Town which shall consist of one (1) Chief of Police and as many police deputies as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the Town. 
(Prior code 2-91; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-5-20. - Departmental rules and regulations. 
    The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the Town Board. 
(Prior code 2-92; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-5-30. - Chief of Police; appointment; powers and duties. 
(a)  The Town Board, upon the recommendation of the Town Manager, shall appoint a Chief of Police who shall be the head of the Police Department. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to: 
(1)  See that the ordinances of the Town and the laws of the State are duly enforced and the rules and regulations of the Police Department obeyed, and perform such duties as may be required by the Town Board. 
(2)  Direct the operations of the Police Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
(3)  Arrest any person violating any of the Town ordinances and take such violator before the Municipal Court for trial. 
(4)  Render such accounts of the Police Department, his or her duties and receipts as may be required by the Town Board, and keep the records of his or her office open to inspection by the Town Board at any time. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of such office, the Chief of Police shall take and subscribe to an oath that he or she will support the Constitution and laws of the State, the Constitution of the United States and ordinances of the Town, and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he or she is about to enter. 
(Prior code 2-93; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-5-40. - Duties of police officers. 
    All members of the Police Department shall have power and duties as follows: 
(1)  They shall perform all duties required of the Chief of Police. 
(2)  They shall suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace and apprehend all disorderly persons in the Town, and shall pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of the State. 
(3)  They shall be the enforcement officers of the Town and shall see that the provisions of the ordinances of the Town and the laws of the State are complied with. They shall arrest without process all persons engaged in the violation in their presence of any provision of the ordinances of the Town or the law of the State. 
(4)  They shall execute and return all writs and process to them directed by the Municipal Judge in any case arising under a Town ordinance, and they may serve the same in any part of the County. 
(Prior code 2-94; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-5-50. - Oath. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, each police officer shall take and subscribe an oath that he or she will support the Constitution and laws of the State, the Constitution of the United States and the ordinances of the Town, and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he or she is about to enter. 
(Prior code 2-95; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-5-60. - Duty of citizens to aid police officers. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons, when called upon by any police officer, to promptly aid and assist such officer in the discharge of his or her duties. 
(Prior code 2-96; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-5-70. - Extraterritorial duty. 
    The Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion, upon request of the Chief of Police or person exercising the functions thereof in any other jurisdiction, assign police officers under his or her control, together with such equipment as he or she shall deem to be proper, to perform temporary duty in the requesting jurisdiction. 
(Prior code 2-97; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-5-80. - Reserve police. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established the Reserve Police Force, which force shall be subject to and operate under the direction and control of the Chief of Police. The members of the Reserve Police Force shall be appointed and commissioned by the Chief of Police as Reserve Police Officers. 
(b)  Conditions. No person who is a member of the Reserve Police Force shall be considered an employee of the Town for any purpose, nor shall such person be entitled to any compensation, police pension benefits, sick leave, longevity pay or compensatory time benefits; and each such person shall, before becoming a member of the Reserve Police Force, execute to the Town a waiver of any claims for any compensation, remuneration, benefits or injury incurred as a result of his or her being a member of the Reserve Police Force. 
(c)  Regulations. The Chief of Police, with approval of the Town Manager, is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations governing the conduct and terms of service of any member of the Reserve Police Force. The Reserve Police Force will not affect the authorized strength or increase of strength of the regular police in the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall proscribe strict rules in regard to the carrying and use of weapons and in regard to the wearing of a uniform identifying such persons as members of the Reserve Police Force. 
(d)  Regular training meetings shall be established by the Chief of Police to ensure that all members of the Reserve Police Force are effectively trained to participate in their assigned duties. The Chief of Police shall certify that such training has been completed prior to the appointment of such person or persons as members of the Reserve Police Force. 
(Prior code 2-98; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-5-90. - Concealed weapons permits to be issued to police officer only. 
    Written permits for the carrying of concealed weapons may be issued by the Chief of Police only to regular officers of the Police Department. 
(Prior code 2-99; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VI - Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board 

Sec. 2-6-10. - Creation; membership; qualifications and eligibility. 
(a)  There shall be a Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board consisting of eight (8) members. Except as provided in Paragraph 2-6-20(a)(2) below, the members of this Advisory Board shall be residents of the Town. The members of this Advisory Board shall serve without pay. Except as provided in Paragraph 2-6-20(a)(2), if any member of the Advisory Board ceases to reside in the Town, his or her membership shall immediately terminate. 
(b)  No voting member of the Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board shall be eligible to serve on any other board or commission of the Town during that member's tenure on the Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board. 
(Prior code 2-111; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2010-1369 1; Ord. 2012-1430 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-6-20. - Terms; constitution of Advisory Board; appointment; removal. 
(a)  This Advisory Board shall be composed of members drawn from the following constituencies and for the following terms: 
(1)  The Mayor shall appoint one (1) member from the Town Board as a nonvoting liaison member of the Advisory Board. This member's term shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for subsequent one-year terms for so long as he or she remains a member of the Town Board. 
(2)  One (1) voting member shall be appointed upon recommendation from the Windsor RE-4 School Board. This member's term shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for subsequent one-year terms for so long as he or she remains on the Windsor RE-4 School Board. In the event that the Windsor RE-4 School Board cannot recommend a suitable appointee from its membership who is a resident of the Town, the member appointed under this Paragraph may, in the sole discretion of the Town Board, be a nonresident of the Town. Except as provided in this Paragraph, all other qualifications for membership on this Advisory Board shall apply to a nonresident appointed pursuant to this Paragraph. 
(3)  The remaining six (6) members of the Advisory Board shall be appointed as members at large by the Town Board. At-large members shall be appointed to serve a term of four (4) years. Two (2) of the at-large members shall have demonstrated academic training or professional experience in the arts or culture disciplines. If the required number of professional members cannot be found to serve on the Advisory Board, this requirement may be waived until the next vacancy occurs. 
(b)  The Town Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to appoint at-large members to this Advisory Board, and any recommendations made under the provisions of this Section shall be advisory only. 
(c)  Voting members of the Parks and Recreation Board may be removed from office for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance, upon written notice and after public hearing. The removal of any Parks and Recreation Board member whose appointment is required by this Code to be by vote of the Town Board shall require the vote of a majority of the Town Board. 
(d)  The Town Board shall make such appointments as necessary to fill the unexpired terms of vacancies which may occur on this Advisory Board, with the exception of any vacancy left by the nonvoting liaison member, which shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor. 
(Prior code 2-112; Ord. 2004-1193 1, 33; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2010-1369 2; Ord. 2012-1430 3) 
Sec. 2-6-30. - Organization and procedure. 
(a)  The Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board shall adopt bylaws and rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(b)  This Advisory Board shall have regular meetings once a month. Special meetings may be called by the chairman at the request of two (2) members, provided that notice of the special meeting, including the agenda, is delivered to each members of the Board at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time set for the special meeting. 
(c)  Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, an affirmative vote of a majority of the members present shall be necessary to authorize any action by this Advisory Board. 
(d)  This Advisory Board shall keep minutes and records of its meetings and transactions. 
(e)  Except for such provisions as are herein expressly provided for, this Advisory Board shall have power to make reasonable rules and bylaws for the conduct of its business. 
(Prior code 2-113; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2012-1430 2; Ord. 2017-1532 7) 
Sec. 2-6-40. - Functions and duties. 
    The Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Make recommendations to the Town Board concerning the purchase or disposition of park, recreation and open lands. 
(2)  Make recommendations to the Town Board concerning any expenditure or appropriation from the Park Fund. 
(3)  Make recommendations to the Town Board concerning policies relating to the public use and management of park, recreation and open lands. 
(4)  Review the Town Manager's proposed annual budget as it relates to park, recreation and open land matters, and submit its recommendations concerning said budget to the Town Board. 
(5)  May, at the request of the Town Board, Town Manager or Director of Parks and Recreation, prepare and submit to the Town Board, Town Manager or Director of Parks and Recreation, recommendations on such parks, recreation and open land matters not provided for by Paragraphs (1), (2), (3) and (4) above. 
(Prior code 2-114; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2012-1430 2) 
ARTICLE VII - Planning Commission 

Sec. 2-7-10. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to state law, there is hereby created a Planning Commission for the Town. 
(Prior code 2-131; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-7-20. - Functions and duties. 
    The Planning Commission is created for the following purposes: 
(1)  To prepare and maintain, subject to periodic revision as necessary, a Master Plan as described by state statutes. 
(2)  To implement the provisions of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances of the Town and to perform all functions referred to in said ordinances where appropriate reference to the Planning Commission is made. 
(3)  To study and recommend to the Town Board amendments to the Zoning Maps of the Town. 
(4)  To study and recommend appropriate zoning classifications for all annexations to the Town. 
(5)  To exchange information with other governmental agencies charged with planning and zoning responsibilities. 
(6)  To have all other duties and powers incidental to the above and any and all powers and duties set out by state statute, except that nothing herein shall permit the Planning Commission to make amendments to changes in the zoning of the Town, such powers expressly being reserved by the Town Board. 
(Prior code 2-132; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-7-30. - Membership; terms; qualifications; vacancies. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall consist of eight (8) members who shall serve without pay. The Mayor shall appoint one (1) member from the Town Board as a nonvoting liaison member of the Planning Commission. This member's term shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for subsequent one-year terms for so long as he or she remains a member of the Town Board. 
(b)  The remaining seven (7) voting members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed as members at large by the Town Board. At-large members shall be appointed to serve a term of four (4) years. 
(c)  Members of the Planning Commission may be removed from office for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance, upon written notice and after public hearing. The removal of any Planning Commission member whose appointment is required by this Code to be by vote of the Town Board shall require the vote of a majority of the Town Board. 
(d)  No voting member of the Planning Commission shall be eligible to serve on any other board or commission of the Town during that member's tenure on the Planning Commission. 
(e)  Members of the Planning Commission may be removed from office by the Town Board for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance, upon written notice and after public hearing. 
(f)  The Town Board shall make such appointments as necessary to fill the unexpired terms of vacancies which may occur on the Planning Commission, with the exception of any vacancy left by the nonvoting liaison member, which shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor. 
(Prior code 2-133; Ord. 2004-1193 1, 34; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-7-40. - Organization and procedure. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall hold a minimum of one (1) regular meeting each month. 
(b)  The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws and rules for transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Prior code 2-134; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VIII - Tree Board 

Sec. 2-8-10. - Creation; membership; qualifications; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  There shall be a Tree Board consisting of eight (8) members. The members of the Tree Board shall be residents of the Town and shall serve without pay. If any member ceases to reside in the Town, his or her membership shall immediately terminate. The Mayor shall appoint one (1) member of the Town Board as a nonvoting liaison member of the Tree Board. This member's term shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for subsequent one-year terms for so long as he or she remains a member of the Town Board. The remaining seven (7) members of the Tree Board shall be appointed as members at large by the Town Board. At-large members shall be appointed to serve a term of four (4) years. 
(b)  No voting member of the Tree Board shall be eligible to serve on any other board or commission of the Town during that member's tenure on the Tree Board. 
(c)  Members of the Tree Board may be removed from office for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance, upon written notice and after public hearing. The removal of any Tree Board member whose appointment is required by this Code to be by vote of the Town Board shall require the vote of a majority of the Town Board. 
(d)  The Town Board shall make such appointments as necessary to fill the unexpired terms of vacancies which may occur on the Tree Board, with the exception of any vacancy left by the nonvoting liaison member, which shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor. 
(Prior code 2-141; Ord. 2004-1193 1, 35; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-8-20. - Organization and procedure. 
(a)  The Tree Board shall adopt bylaws and rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(b)  The Tree Board shall have regular meetings once a month. Special meetings may be called by the chairman at the request of two (2) members, provided that notice of the special meeting, including the agenda, is delivered to each member of the Board at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time set for the special meeting. 
(c)  The Tree Board shall keep minutes and records of its meetings and transactions. 
(d)  Except for such provisions as are herein expressly provided for, the Tree Board shall have power to make reasonable rules for the conduct of its business. 
(Prior code 2-142; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532 8) 
Sec. 2-8-30. - Functions and duties. 
    The Tree Board shall: 
(1)  Make recommendations to the Town Board concerning the purchase or disposition of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges or plants located upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the Town. 
(2)  Make recommendations to the Town Board concerning policies, rules, regulations and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges and other plants upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the Town or upon privately owned property in the Town. Upon adoption by the Town Board, copies of such policies, rules, regulations and specifications shall be available to the public through the office of the Town Clerk. 
(Prior code 2-143; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE IX - Water and Sewer Board 

Sec. 2-9-10. - Creation; membership; terms; qualifications; vacancies. 
(a)  There shall be a Water and Sewer Board consisting of eight (8) members. The members of the Water and Sewer Board shall be residents of the Town and shall serve without pay. If any member ceases to reside in the Town, his or her membership shall immediately terminate. The Mayor shall appoint one (1) member of the Town Board as a nonvoting liaison member of the Water and Sewer Board. This member's term shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for subsequent one-year terms for so long as he or she remains a member of the Town Board. The remaining seven (7) voting members of the Water and Sewer Board shall be appointed as members at large by the Town Board. At-large members shall be appointed to serve a term of four (4) years. 
(b)  The Water and Sewer Board shall adopt bylaws and rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(c)  No voting member of the Water and Sewer Board shall be eligible to serve on any other board or commission of the Town during that member's tenure on the Water and Sewer Board. 
(d)  Voting members of the Water and Sewer Board may be removed from office for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance, upon written notice and after public hearing. The removal of any Water and Sewer Board member whose appointment is required by this Code to be by vote of the Town Board shall require the vote of a majority of the Town Board. 
(e)  The Town Board shall make such appointments as necessary to fill the unexpired terms of vacancies which may occur on the Water and Sewer Board, with the exception of any vacancy left by the nonvoting liaison member, which shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor. 
(Prior code 2-161; Ord. 2004-1193 1, 36; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-9-20. - Functions and duties. 
(a)  The Water and Sewer Board shall advise the Town Board on all matters pertaining to the acquisition, control and disposition of water rights. 
(b)  The Water and Sewer Board shall advise the Town Board on all matters pertaining to the municipal water works system. 
(c)  The Water and Sewer Board shall advise the Town Board on all matters pertaining to water and sanitary sewage disposal systems of the Town. 
(d)  The Water and Sewer Board shall advise the Town Board on all matters pertaining to stormwater drainage in the Town. 
(e)  The Water and Sewer Board is authorized to make such studies as it may deem necessary and advisable as approved by the Town Board. 
(f)  The Water and Sewer Board shall perform such other duties and functions and have such other powers as may be authorized by the ordinances of the Town or the Town Board. 
(Prior code 2-162; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE X - Housing Authority 

Sec. 2-10-10. - Creation. 
    The Housing Authority of the Town, as established by resolution on June 10, 1974, in the Town, pursuant to Section 29-4-204, C.R.S., shall be managed, operated and controlled in accordance with the provisions of said laws. 
(Prior code 2-181; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-10-20. - Membership; terms; qualifications. 
    The Housing Authority of the Town shall consist of five (5) commissioners appointed by the Mayor who shall serve a term of five (5) years from the date of their appointment. Vacancies other than by reason of expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor. A commissioner shall hold office until his or her successor has been appointed and has qualified. A commissioner shall reside within the Town and shall receive no compensation for his or her services. 
(Prior code 2-182; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XI - Emergency Management 

Sec. 2-11-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    The provisions of this Article are intended to provide for an orderly succession of governmental powers necessitated by the inability of Town officials to serve due to natural and/or enemy-caused disaster and, further, to provide for such orderly succession in the event of riot, insurrection or emergency. 
(Prior code 2-201; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-11-20. - Definitions. 
    When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Emergency shall mean any combination of circumstances of such urgency that the customary manner of governance will be rendered impossible without immediate action under this Article. 
    Emergency government shall mean any form of governance established pursuant to this Article. 
    Enemy-caused disaster shall mean a circumstance brought about by hostile man-made forces of such magnitude that the customary manner of governance is rendered impossible. 
    Insurrection shall mean a revolt of such magnitude that the customary manner of governance is rendered impossible. 
    Natural disaster shall mean a circumstance where forces of nature render the customary manner of governance impossible. 
    Riot shall mean a violent public disorder of such magnitude that the customary manner of governance is rendered impossible. 
    Unable to serve shall mean the inability of a public official to discharge the duties conferred upon that official due to a natural disaster, enemy-caused disaster, riot, insurrection or emergency. 
(Prior code 2-202; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 2-11-30. - Line of succession of government. 
    In the event of natural disaster, enemy-caused disaster, riot, insurrection or emergency, the following line of succession of government shall be implemented: 
(1)  In the event the Mayor is unable to serve, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of Mayor; in the event both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem are unable to serve, the senior-most member of the Town Board shall perform the duties of Mayor and shall preside over the emergency government. 
(2)  In the event the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem and all members of the Town Board are unable to serve, the Town Manager shall perform the duties of Mayor and shall preside over the emergency government. In such event, the emergency government shall consist of the Town Manager (presiding as provided in this Subsection), the Chief of Police and the Town Attorney. 
(3)  In the event the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, all members of the Town Board and the Town Manager are unable to serve, the Chief of Police shall perform the duties of Mayor and shall preside over the emergency government. In such event, the emergency government shall consist of the Chief of Police and the Town Attorney. 
(4)  In the event the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, all members of the Town Board, the Town Manager and the Chief of Police are all unable to serve, the Town Attorney shall perform the duties of Mayor and shall discharge the powers and duties of Town government until sufficient order is restored and an emergency government is no longer required under this Article. 
(Prior code 2-203; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532 9) 
Sec. 2-11-40. - Power to take appropriate action. 
    The emergency government established by the ordinance codified herein shall have the power to take appropriate action for the protection of life and property until order is sufficiently restored to allow for governance in its absence. 
(Prior code 2-204; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XII - Reserved[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1506 , adopted Sept. 28, 2015, repealed the former Art. XII.,  2-12-10, 2-12-20, which pertained to conduct of mail ballot elections and derived from Ord. 2010-1376 1 and Ord. 2014-1467 1. 

CHAPTER 4 - Revenue and Finance 
ARTICLE I - Fiscal Year 

Sec. 4-1-10. - Fiscal year established. 
    The fiscal year of the Town shall be as set forth in Section 11.1 of the Home Rule Charter. 
(Prior code 4-1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE II - General and Special Funds 

Sec. 4-2-10. - General Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a fund, to be known as the General Fund , which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  All cash balances of the Town not specifically belonging to any existing special fund of the Town. 
(2)  All fixed assets of the Town (to be separately designated in an account known as the General Fund Fixed Assets ) not specifically belonging to any existing special fund of the Town. 
(Prior code 4-11; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-2-20. - Special funds created. 
    The following special funds are hereby created: 
(1)  Capital Improvement Fund. There is hereby established a special fund of the Town to be known as the Town of Windsor Sales Tax Capital Improvement Fund . Forty percent (40%) of the revenues derived from the two-percent (2%) sales tax and one hundred percent (100%) of the one-percent (1%) sales tax imposed by this Chapter shall be deposited to said fund and used solely for the purpose of providing capital improvements or paying debt service on bonds issued for such purposes pursuant to state law . Moneys deposited into such fund shall not be available to be pledged or expended, by interfund transfer or otherwise, for any general municipal purpose. 
(2)  Community and Recreation Center Fund. There is hereby established a special fund of the Town to be known as the Town of Windsor Community and Recreation Center Fund. Said fund shall be considered a capital improvement fund within the meaning of Section 29-2-111, C.R.S. One hundred percent (100%) of the revenues derived from the two-tenths percent (0.2%) sales and use tax imposed by this Chapter shall be deposited into said fund and used solely for the purpose of paying the costs of constructing Town community and recreation centers, acquiring land for or equipping Town community and recreation centers, paying the costs of operating and maintaining Town community and recreation centers or paying the debt service on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued for said purposes. With the exception of said purposes, moneys deposited into such fund from the two-tenths percent (0.2%) sales and use tax shall not be available to be pledged or expended, by interfund transfer or otherwise, for any general municipal purposes; provided, however, that no sales or use tax revenues in the Community and Recreation Center Fund may be expended for purposes of operating and maintaining Town community and recreation centers unless said fund contains sufficient revenues to pay the anticipated annual debt service on any revenue bonds for which moneys in the fund have been pledged. 
(3)  Conservation Trust Fund. There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Conservation Trust Fund. 
a.  All funds hereafter received by the Town from the State pursuant to Section 29-21-101, C.R.S., shall be credited to the Conservation Trust Fund. 
b.  There shall be transferred into this fund, as of the effective date of this Article, all amounts then on hand received and collected in the Conservation Trust Fund pursuant to this Subsection, and all moneys later received or deposited for such purposes. 
c.  All moneys taken from this Fund shall be expended only for the purposes sought to be accomplished by state law, including the acquisition of new conservation sites, as that phrase is defined in Section 29-21-101, C.R.S., and as authorized by the Town Board. 
d.  Nothing in this Article shall prevent the Town Board from appropriating revenues of the Town, other than moneys received from the State pursuant to House Bill No. 1084, to the Conservation Trust Fund; however, any moneys appropriated to the Conservation Trust Fund from such other sources also shall be expended in the manner provided herein. 
(4)  Debt Service Fund. There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Debt Service Fund. 
a.  There shall be transferred into this fund, as of the effective date of this Article, all amounts then on hand received on account of special assessments against property made pursuant to this Code, together with all amounts on hand received from special assessments against property for other improvements, such as sidewalk repairs, care, protection and removal of trees, and weed removal and control, together with all moneys later received or deposited for such purposes. Assets in such funds shall be segregated into accounts representing the separate projects out of which such assets arise and, in addition, there shall be created a separate account within such fund for surpluses and deficiencies. 
b.  Such funds shall be expended for payment of special assessment bonds issued in connection with the special improvement district to which the funds relate and for payment of other obligations for the payment of which such funds were collected, as authorized by the Town Board. 
(5)  Park Improvement Fund. There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Park Improvement Fund. 
a.  There shall be transferred into this fund, as of the effective date of this Article, all moneys then on hand and all moneys later received or deposited as park and recreation fees collected pursuant to Chapter 18 of this Code, together with any other deposits made into such fund for the purpose of general park improvements. 
b.  Such funds shall be expended for the acquisition, maintenance and repair of park and recreation facilities, as such expenditures may be authorized by the Town Board. 
(6)  Sewer Fund . There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Sewer Fund. 
a.  Assets in such fund shall be segregated into separate accounts, which shall describe the purpose for which such accounts were placed in the Sewer Fund. Each account shall be separately kept and maintained as if each account were a separate special account. Such account shall include those funds collected pursuant to Chapter 13 of this Code and accounts for the payment of bonds issued by the Town to extend or improve the sewer utility. There shall be such additional accounts within such fund as are necessary to segregate and identify assets of such fund set aside for particular purposes by ordinances or other actions of the Town Board. 
b.  There shall be transferred into this fund, as of the effective date of this Article, the cash balance then on hand in the following funds now maintained by the Town: the sewer fund and all other funds collected pursuant to Chapter 13 of this Code. In addition, there shall be transferred into such fund all fixed assets owned by the Sewer Department. 
c.  There shall be placed in said fund, from time to time, all earnings of the sewer utility and such additional amounts as may be appropriated to such fund by the Town Board. In addition, there shall be placed in such fund any receipts from the sale of bonds issued by the Town for the purpose of extending or bettering the sewer utility, any grants received from the federal or state government to be used for the extension or betterment of the sewer utility and any amounts earned through the investment of the assets of the fund. 
d.  Expenditures shall be made from such fund for the purpose of operating the sewer utility, providing extensions and betterments to the sewer utility and such other purposes relating to the sewer utility as may be authorized by law. Expenditures from accounts within such fund shall be made only for the purpose for which such account was created, provided that, if the Town Board finds and determines that there are amounts in any account in excess of the amount required to satisfy the purpose of such account, the Town Board may, by ordinance, authorize the transfer of such excess amount to any other account of any other fund of the Town. It shall further be proper for the Town Board to authorize the lending of amounts in excess of the immediate needs of such fund to other funds of the Town upon such terms and conditions as the Town Board may prescribe. 
(7)  Small Cities Grant Fund. There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Small Cities Grant Fund . 
a.  There shall be transferred into said fund all amounts of moneys received or deposited by the Town from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for CDBG Small Cities Single-Purpose Grants Program, to be utilized by the Town for the administration of such Grants Program as may be approved by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
b.  The Town may also deposit to the Small Cities Grant Fund other moneys received by the Town from other public or private sources, where such moneys are used for purposes similar to the CDBG Small Cities Single-Purpose Grants Program. 
c.  Such funds shall be received, managed, spend or paid pursuant to the Rules of Administration for the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for CDBG Small Cities Single-Purpose Grants Program and shall be segregated from all other funds on the books of the Town so that at all times the receipt of such funds, their use, management and expenditure may be clearly identified from any other funds of the Town. 
d.  Within the Small Cities Grant Fund shall be maintained a separate identity of all loan repayment moneys received by the Town from loans made by the Town to private property owners for real property, improvements or rehabilitation, where such loans are made pursuant to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for CDBG Small Cities Single-Purpose Grants Program. 
e.  Moneys in the fund herein created shall be in the custody of the Town Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall maintain accounting records and account for all of said funds as provided by law. Moneys in said fund shall be invested and deposited in accordance with the provisions of law. All income from the assets of this fund shall become a part of the fund from which it was derived and shall be used for the purpose for which such fund was created. 
(8)  Water Fund. There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Water Fund. 
a.  Assets in such fund shall be segregated into separate accounts, which shall describe the purpose for which such accounts were placed in the Water Fund. Each account shall be separately kept and maintained as if each account were a separate special fund. There shall be such additional accounts within such fund as are necessary to segregate and identify assets of such fund set aside for particular purposes by ordinances or other actions of the Town Board. 
b.  There shall be transferred into said fund, as of the effective date of this Article, the cash balance then on hand in the following funds now maintained by the Town: all funds collected pursuant to Article II, Chapter 13, of this Code, all fixed assets owned by the Water Department and all other assets identified with and pertaining to the Water Department. 
c.  There shall be placed in said fund, from time to time, all earnings of the water utility of the Town and such additional amounts as may be appropriated to such fund by the Town Board. In addition, there shall be placed in such fund any receipts from the sale of bonds issued by the Town for the purpose of extending or bettering the water utility, any grants received from the federal or state government to be used for the extension or betterment of the water utility and any amounts earned through the investment of the assets of the fund. 
d.  Expenditures shall be made from such fund for the purpose of operating the water utility, providing extensions and betterments to the water utility and for such other purposes relating to the water utility as may be authorized by law. Expenditures from accounts within such fund shall be made only for the purpose for which such account was created, provided that, if the Town Board finds and determines that there are amounts in any account in excess of the amount required to satisfy the purpose of such account, the Town Board may, by ordinance, authorize the transfer of such excess amount to any other account or any other fund of the Town. It shall further be proper for the Town Board to authorize the lending of amounts in excess of the immediate needs of such fund to other funds of the Town upon such terms and conditions as the Town Board may prescribe. 
(9)  Community Recreation Center Expansion Fund. 
a.  There is hereby established a special fund of the Town to be known as the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion Fund. Said fund shall be considered a capital improvement fund within the meaning of  29-2-111, C.R.S. One hundred percent (100%) of the revenues derived from seventy-five-hundredths percent (.75%) of the three and ninety-five-hundredths percent (3.95%) sales and use tax imposed by this Chapter shall be deposited into said fund and used solely for the purposes set forth in subsections a.1 and a.2 below. With the exception of said purposes, moneys deposited into such fund from seventy-five-hundredths percent (.75%) of the three and ninety-five-hundredths percent (3.95%) sales and use tax shall not be available to be pledged or expended, by interfund transfer or otherwise, for any general municipal purposes; provided however, no sales or use tax revenues in the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion Fund may be expended for purposes of operating, maintaining, equipping and depreciation of the Windsor Community Recreation Center unless said fund contains sufficient revenues to pay the anticipated annual debt service on any revenue bonds for which moneys in the fund have been pledged. 
All revenues deposited to the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion Fund from seventy-five-hundredths percent (.75%) of the three and ninety-five-hundredths percent (3.95%) sales and use tax imposed by this Chapter shall be allocated and applied as follows: 
1.  All of such revenues shall be allocated to and available for paying the costs of constructing and equipping the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion, and paying the debt service on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued for said purposes; and 
2.  No more than twenty-seven percent (27%) of such revenues shall be allocated to and available for paying the costs of equipping, operating, maintaining and depreciating the Windsor Community Recreation Center. 
b.  At such time as the reduced sales tax rate set forth in subsection 4-3-110(b) takes effect, all revenues derived from the first twenty-hundredths percent (.20%) of the reduced sales tax rate imposed by this Chapter shall be deposited into the Community Recreation Center Expansion Fund and shall be used solely for the purpose of paying the costs of operating, maintaining, equipping and depreciation of the Windsor Community Recreation Center. With the exception of said purposes, moneys deposited into such fund from the first twenty-hundredths percent (.20%) of the reduced sales tax rate imposed by this Chapter shall not be available to be pledged or expended, by interfund transfer or otherwise, for any general municipal purposes. 
c.  At such time as the reduced use tax rate set forth in subsection 4-3-120(b) takes effect, all revenues derived from the first twenty-hundredths percent (.20%) of the reduced use tax rate imposed by this Chapter shall be deposited into the Community Recreation Center Expansion Fund and shall be used solely for the purpose of paying the costs of operating, maintaining, equipping and depreciation of the Windsor Community Recreation Center. With the exception of said purposes, moneys deposited into such fund from the first twenty-hundredths percent (.20%) of the reduced use tax rate imposed by this Chapter shall not be available to be pledged or expended, by interfund transfer or otherwise, for any general municipal purposes. 
d.  Remaining revenue, disposition. 
1.  Definition of remaining revenue. For purposes of this subsection (9), remaining revenue shall be defined as any sales tax revenue and use tax revenue derived from seventy-five-hundredths percent (.75%) of the sales tax and use tax rates imposed by this Article and which exceed the annual combined total of: 
A.  All accrued debt service obligations on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this subsection (9) has been paid; and 
B.  The combined annual operations, maintenance, equipping and depreciation costs of the Community Recreation Center funded pursuant to the allocation set forth in Section 4-2-20(9)a.2. 
2.  Disposition of remaining revenue. Until such time as all costs of debt service associated with revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this subsection (9) are paid in full, all remaining revenue shall be first accumulated and applied to paying in advance any remaining debt service on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued for said purpose, but only so long as doing so does not violate any call restriction provisions of bonded indebtedness issued pursuant to this subsection (9). Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the use of current or accumulated remaining revenue for the payment of current debt service obligations in the event that current revenue is insufficient to satisfy current debt service obligations. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the accumulation of remaining revenues in a reserve fund for application of such accumulated remaining revenue to remaining debt service following the expiration of any call restriction provisions of bonded indebtedness issued pursuant to this subsection (9). 
3.  Restrictions on remaining revenue. Under no circumstances shall remaining revenue be applied to pay the costs of equipment, operations and maintenance or depreciation of the Windsor Community Recreation Center. 
4.  Expiration. Upon payment in full of all costs of debt service associated with revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued pursuant to this subsection (9) are paid in full, the requirements of this subsection (9)d. shall expire. 
(Prior code 4-12; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2015-1498, 1 ) 
Sec. 4-2-30. - Custody and management of funds. 
    Moneys in the funds herein created shall be in the custody of and managed by the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance shall maintain accounting records and account for all of said moneys as provided by law. Moneys in the funds of the Town shall be invested or deposited by the Director of Finance in accordance with the provisions of law. All income from the assets of any fund shall become a part of the fund from which derived and shall be used for the purpose for which such fund was created; provided that, except as otherwise provided in this Article or by other ordinances or laws or by this Code, the Town Board may transfer out of any fund any amount at any time to be used for such purpose as the Town Board may direct. 
(Prior code 4-13; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532 9) 
ARTICLE III - Sales and Use Tax 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 4-3-10. - Title. 
    The provisions of this Article shall be known and cited as the "Sales and Use Tax Code." (Prior code 4-21; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-20. - Purpose and composition. 
(a)  The provisions of this Article shall apply to the imposition as well as administration, enforcement and collection of sales and use taxes by the Town, and shall apply to the administration of the Town license as described in this Code. 
(b)  As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise provides, the term code means and includes the provisions of this Article and the provisions of each and every ordinance or code administered under the provisions of this Article. 
(c)  The provisions of this Article shall be construed to effect uniformity of administration, enforcement and collection of taxes, and to establish uniform procedures, but shall not be construed to extend or increase the application, rate or amount of any tax levied or imposed herein; provided, however, that the imposition of a penalty, interest or both penalty and interest shall be lawful and shall not be construed as an extension or increase of the application, rate or amount of tax. Wherever in this code reference is made to Title 39, Chapter 26, C.R.S., that reference shall mean the provisions of such article in title in effect as of December 31, 2004. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, changes in state law and/or regulations or definitions after January 1, 2005, may be added to this Article by subsequent amendment to this Article. 
(d)  The purpose of this code is to provide the power necessary to exercise effectively the right to raise revenue that is essential to home rule and self-government. Any similarities to state law herein are adopted for the purpose of promoting efficiency in the collection of revenue. Regardless of any such similarities, the provisions contained herein are matters of solely local concern, except as provided in Subsection (c) above. 
(Prior code 4-22; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-30. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the definitions of words contained in this Article, whether capitalized or not in usage, shall be defined as follows: 
    Aircraft means a device that is used or intended to be used for flight in the air. 
    Aircraft Part means any tangible personal property that is intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft. 
    Airline Company means any operator who engages in the carriage by aircraft of persons or property as a common carrier for compensation or hire, or the carriage of mail, or any aircraft operator who operates regularly between two (2) or more points and publishes a flight schedule. Airline Company shall not include operators whose aircraft are all certified for a gross takeoff weight of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds or less and who do not engage in scheduled service or mail carriage service. Airline Company shall have the same meaning as Commercial Airline. 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Charitable Organization means any entity which: (1) has been certified as a nonprofit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and (2) is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental, or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government. 
    Claim for recovery means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
    Coins means monetized bullion or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, platinum, palladium or other such metals now, in the future or heretofore designated as a medium of exchange under the laws of this State, the United States or any foreign nation. 
    Coins shall have the same meaning as Bullion and Coins. 
    Collection costs shall include, but is not limited to, all costs of audit, assessment, bank fees, hearings, execution, lien filing, distraint, litigation, prosecution and attorney fees. 
    Collection proceedings shall include the mailing of a notice of audit, an audit and all remedies exercised by the Director pursuant to this code to collect any unpaid taxes, penalties and interest. 
    Construction Materials means tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a structure or project including public and private improvements. Construction Materials include, but are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an integral and inseparable part of completed structure or project are not construction materials. 
    Consumer means any person in the City who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, purchased from sources inside or outside the City. 
    Contractor means any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify, or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure, or other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement. For purposes of this definition, Contractor also includes subcontractor. 
    Deficiency shall have the same meaning as "tax deficiency". 
    Director means the Town's Finance Director or such person's designee. Director shall also have the same meaning as means the Finance Director of the Town of Windsor. 
    Distribution means the act of distributing any article of tangible personal property for use or consumption, which may include, but not be limited to, the distribution of advertising gifts, shoppers guides, catalogs, directories, or other property given as prizes, premiums, or for goodwill or in conjunction with the sales of other commodities or services. 
    Engaged in Business in the Town means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption, within the Town. Engaged in Business in the Town includes, but is not limited to, any one (1) of the following activities by a person: (1) Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; (2) Sends one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; (3) Maintains one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; (4) Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or (5) Makes more than one (1) delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a twelve-month period by any means other than a common carrier. 
    Factory Built Housing means a manufactured home or modular home. 
    Farm Equipment means any farm tractor, as defined in Section 42-1-102(33), C.R.S., any implement of husbandry, as defined in Section 42-1-102(44), C.R.S., and irrigation equipment having a per unit purchase price of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Farm Equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, attachments and bailing wire, binders twine and surface wrap used primarily and directly in any farm operation. Farm Equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, parts that are used in the repair or maintenance of the Farm Equipment described in this Paragraph, all shipping pallets, crates, or aids paid for by a farm operation, and aircraft designed or adapted to undertake agricultural applications. Farm Equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, dairy equipment. Except for shipping pallets, crates or aids used in the transfer or shipping of agricultural products, Farm Equipment does not include: (1) Vehicles subject to the registration requirements of Section 42-3-103, C.R.S., regardless of the purpose for which such vehicles are used; (2) Machinery, equipment, materials, and supplies used in a manner that is incidental to a farm operation; (3) Maintenance and janitorial equipment and supplies; and (4) Tangible personal property used in any activity other than fanning, such as office equipment and supplies and equipment and supplies used in the sale or distribution of farm products, research, or transportation. 
    Farm Operation means the production of any of the following products for profit, including, but not limited to, a business that hires out to produce or harvest such products: (1) Agricultural, viticultural, fruit, and vegetable products; (2) Livestock; (3) Milk; (4) Honey; and (5) Poultry and eggs. 
    Internet Access Services means services that provide or enable computer access by multiple users to the Internet, but shall not include that portion of packaged or bundled services providing phone or television cable services when the package or bundle includes the sale of Internet Access Services. 
    License means a Town of Windsor sales tax license. 
    Machinery means any apparatus consisting of interrelated parts used to produce an article of tangible personal property. The term includes both the basic unit and any adjunct or attachment necessary for the basic unit to accomplish its intended function. 
    Manufactured Home means any preconstructed building unit or combination of preconstructed building units, without motive power, where such unit or units are manufactured in a factory or at a location other than the residential site of the completed home, which is designed and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in either temporary or permanent locations, and which unit or units are not licensed as a vehicle. 
    Manufacturing means the operation or performance of an integrated series of operations which places a product, article, substance, commodity, or other tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different from that in which it was acquired whether for sale or for use by a manufacturer. The change in form, composition or character must result in a different product having a distinctive name, character or use from the raw or prepared materials. 
    Occasional sales means retail sales of tangible personal property, including concessions, for fund-raising purposes, if the funds raised by the charitable organization through these sales are retained by the organization to be used in the course of the organization's charitable service, and: 
(1)  The sale of tangible personal property by the charitable organization takes place for no more than twelve (12) days, whether consecutive or not, during any one (1) calendar year; or 
(2)  The funds raised by the charitable organization through these sales do not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) of gross profit during any one (1) calendar year. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Point of Sale. For the purpose of this Article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to a destination outside the limits of the Town or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the Town. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the Town or has more than one (1) place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of this Article shall be determined by the provisions of Title 39, Article 26, C.R.S., and by rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Revenue. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the value of construction and building materials on which a use tax has previously been collected by an incorporated town, city or county shall be exempt from this sales tax if the materials are delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to a site within the limits of the Town. 
    Precious Metal Bullion means any precious metal, including but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum, palladium, that has been put through a process of refining and is in such a state or condition that its value depends upon its precious metal content and not its form. 
    Price or Purchase Price means the aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this article, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: 
(1)  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, or 
(2)  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
    Price or Purchase Price includes: 
(1)  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits. 
(2)  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
(3)  Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange. 
(4)  The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges which are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated at the time of sale is not part of the purchase price. 
(5)  Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated. 
(6)  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
(7)  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
(8)  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
    Price or Purchase Price shall not include: 
(1)  Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado or by any political subdivision thereof. 
(2)  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailers' usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out of state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
(3)  Discounts from the original price if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
    Prosthetic Devices for Humans means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic Devices for Humans include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Purchase or Sale means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, or sold. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
(1)  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
(2)  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
(3)  Utilization of coin operated devices, except coin-operated telephones, which do not vend articles of tangible personal property; 
(4)  Performance of taxable services; or 
(5)  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services. 
    The terms Purchase and Sale do not include: 
(1)  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
(2)  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(3)  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(4)  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
(5)  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(6)  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
(7)  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
(8)  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
(9)  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this article was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent any transfer referred to in this paragraph (11) shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this paragraph (11), a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent company owns stock possessing or membership interest at least eighty percent (80%) of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least eighty percent (80%) of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    Resident means a person who resides or maintains one (1) or more places of business within the Town, regardless of whether that person also resides or maintains a place of business outside of the Town. Any person who does not meet the definition of Resident shall be deemed a non-resident. 
    Retailer means any person selling, leasing, renting, or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. Retailer shall include, but is not limited to, any: (1) auctioneer; (2) salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; (3) Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes; (4) Retailer-Contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property. 
    Retailer-Contractor means a contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for sale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
    Retail Sales means all sales except wholesale sales. 
    Return means any form prescribed by the Town of Windsor administration for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
    Sale that Benefits a Colorado School means a sale of a commodity or service from which all proceeds of the sale, less only the actual cost of the commodity or service to a person or entity as described in this Article, are donated to a school or a school-approved student organization. 
    School means a public school or Charter school as defined in Section 22-1-101, C.R.S, or a private school, providing education for students in kindergarten through 12th grade or any portion thereof. 
    Special Sales Event means any sales event which includes more than three (3) Vendors taking place at a single location for a limited period of time not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days. 
    Special Fuel means, notwithstanding any statutory definition otherwise, kerosene oil, kerosene distillate, diesel fuel, all liquefied petroleum gases, and all combustible gases and liquids for use in the generation of power for propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft, railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
    Storage means any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the Town from any person or vendor. 
    Student means any person enrolled in a school. 
    Tangible Personal Property means personal property that can be one (1) or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
    Tax means the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
    Tax Deficiency means any amount of tax, penalty, interest, or other fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the date that any return or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this Article. 
    Taxable Sales means gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this Article. 
    Taxable Services means services subject to tax pursuant to this Article. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this Article. 
    Use means the exercise, for any length of time by any person within the Town of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the Town from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the Town whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer. Use also includes the withdrawal of items from inventory for consumption. 
    Use Tax means the tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the Town. 
    Vendor fee means a credit, as designated by the Director, to be allowed against the tax due on timely filed sales tax returns. The amount of the credit, and any limitation per return, will be stated on the sales tax return as approved by the Director. 
    Wholesaler means any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to Retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other Wholesalers, for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption, or distribution. 
    Wholesale Sales means a sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by Wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be Retail Sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 2018-1562 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1562 ,  1, adopted July 9, 2018, repealed the former  4-3-30 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  4-3-30 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior code, 4-23; Ord. 2005-1230,  1, 2; and Ord. 2006-1236,  1. 
Sec. 4-3-40. - Severability; saving clause. 
(a)  As used in this Article, the term provision means and includes any part, division, subdivision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase; the term application means and includes an application of an ordinance or any part thereof, whether considered or construed alone or together with another ordinance or ordinances, or part thereof, of the Town; and the term this ordinance means and includes the ordinance enacting this Article, together with any and all exhibits and schedules therein incorporated, and each article, chapter and section of this Code in which such ordinance is codified. 
(b)  If any provision of this Article, or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Article are declared to be severable. The Town Board hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified herein and each provision thereof, even though any one (1) of the provisions might be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(c)  The amendment, repeal or supersession of any ordinance or provision of any ordinance by this Article shall not release, extinguish, alter, modify or change, in whole or in part, any penalty, liability or right which may have been incurred or obtained under such ordinance or provision thereof; and such ordinance or provision thereof so amended, repealed or superseded shall be treated and held as remaining in force for the purpose of sustaining any and all proper actions, suits, proceedings and prosecutions, for the enforcement of such penalty, liability or right and for the purpose of sustaining any judgment, decree or order which can or may be rendered, entered or made in such actions, suits, proceedings or prosecutions imposing, inflicting or declaring such penalty or liability or enforcing such right, and shall be treated and held as remaining in force for the purpose of sustaining any and all proceedings, actions, hearings and appeals pending before any court or administrative tribunal. 
(Prior code 4-24; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-50. - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this Article shall take effect January 1, 2005, and shall apply to transactions consummated after that date. 
(Prior code 4-25; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Division 2 - Imposition of Tax 

Sec. 4-3-110. - Imposition of sales tax. 
(a)  Initial sales tax rate. There is imposed a sales tax of three and ninety-five-hundredths percent (3.95%) on the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of taxable services, as provided herein at Section 4-3-170 of this Code and at  29-2-105(1)(d), C.R.S. (the "Statute"). 
(b)  Reduced sales tax rate. At such time as the costs of paying the debt service on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued for construction of the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion or equipping Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion have been paid in full, the sales tax rate shall be reduced to three and four-tenths percent (3.4%) without further voter approval or Town Board action. 
( Ord. 2015-1498, 2 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2015-1498, 2 , adopted June 8, 2015, repealed and reenacted  4-3-110 to read as herein set out. Former  4-3-110 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior Code 4-26; Ord. 2006-1236 1. 
Sec. 4-3-120. - Imposition of use tax. 
(a)  Initial use tax rate. There is imposed a use tax of three and ninety-five-hundredths percent (3.95%), to be imposed only for the privilege of storing, using or consuming within the Town any construction and building materials or construction equipment located within the boundaries of the Town for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(b)  Reduced use tax rate. At such time as the costs of paying the debt service on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued for construction of the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion or equipping the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion have been paid in full, the use tax rate shall be reduced to three and four-tenths percent (3.4%) without further voter approval or Town Board action. 
( Ord. 2015-1498, 3 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. Ord. 2015-1498, 3 , adopted June 8, 2015, repealed and reenacted  4-3-120 to read as herein set out. Former  4-3-120 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior Code 4-27; Ord. 2006-1236 1. 
Sec. 4-3-130. - Sales; where consummated. 
    For the purpose of this Article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to a destination outside the limits of the Town, or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the Town. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges. If legal title to the property sold is transferred to the purchaser or his or her agent prior to delivery to a destination outside the limits of the Town, the place of taxation is deemed within the Town. 
(Prior code 4-28; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-140. - Credit for taxes previously paid to another municipality. 
    The Town sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another municipality equal to or in excess of the rate imposed under this Article. A credit shall be granted against the Town's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the rate currently imposed. 
(Prior code 4-29; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-150. - Tax as a separate and distinct item. 
    Except as provided in Section 4-3-160, retailers shall add the tax imposed hereby, or the average equivalent thereof, to the purchase price or charge of the item or service, and provide the customer with a receipt that shows the tax charged as a separate and distinct charge; and, when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(Prior code 4-30; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-160. - Tax included in selling price. 
    Only retailers selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink, vending machine sales and special event vendor sales may include the tax levied by this Article in the sales price or charge. No retailer shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that tax is not included as a part of the sales price to the consumer. No retailer shall gain any benefit from the collection or payment of such tax, nor shall the use of rates set forth in Sections 4-3-110 and 4-3-120 of this Article release such retailer from liability for payment of the full amount of the tax levied by this Article. 
(Prior code 4-31; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-170. - Sales tax; taxable property and services. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax in the amount stated in Section 4-3-110 of this Article, upon the sale at retail of such tangible personal property and the furnishing of such certain services as are set forth in Title 39, Article 26, C.R.S., which provisions are incorporated herein by this reference; and upon the sale at retail of tangible personal property, on sales of food and purchases of machinery or machine tools, and the furnishing of services on sales and purchases of electricity, coal, gas, fuel oil and coke for domestic and commercial consumption. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this Article for any seller not to collect the sales tax levied by this Article. It shall also be a violation of this Article for any purchaser not to pay the sales tax levied by this Article or to pay the tax levied upon a sale where the status of exemption is disputed. 
(Prior code 4-32; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-180. - Sales tax; exempt property and services. 
(a)  There shall be exempt from sales taxation under the provisions of this Article all of the tangible personal property and services which are exempt under the provisions of Title 39, Article 26, C.R.S., as in effect on January 1, 2005, which exemptions are incorporated herein by this reference, except the exemption allowed by Section 39-26-114(11), C.R.S., for purchases of machinery or machine tools, and except the exemption for sales and purchases of electricity, coal, gas, fuel oil and coke as provided in Section 39-26-114(1)(a)(XXI), C.R.S., and except the exemption for sales of food. 
(b)  All "occasional sales" by charitable organizations of tangible personal property shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Article. 
(c)  All sales of property and services made by public and private kindergarten through grade 12 (K-12) schools, K-12 school activity booster organizations, K-12 parent-teacher organizations, K-12 student classes and K-12 student organizations shall be exempt, provided that: 
(1)  All proceeds of such sales are for the benefit of a K-12 school or K-12 school-approved student organization; or 
(2)  In the case of a parent-teacher organization, all proceeds of such sales are used for the reasonable expense of the parent-teacher organization conducting such sales. 
Nothing in this Subsection (c) shall be construed to amend or modify the definition of occasional sales or the exemption extended to occasional sales under Subsection (b) above 
(d)  All sales of motor vehicles from dealer inventory found on any licensed automobile dealer sales lot located within the Town, the purchaser of which is a Town of Windsor resident, shall be exempt from sales tax. For purposes of this Subsection, motor vehicle shall mean any self-propelled vehicle that is designed primarily for travel on the public highways and that is generally and commonly used to transport persons and property over the public highways or a low-speed electric vehicle or a motorcycle as defined in Section 42-1-102(55), C.R.S.; the term does not, however, include low-power scooters, wheelchairs, electrical assisted bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices or vehicles moved solely by human power. 
(Ord. 2011-1396 1; Ord. 2018-1562 2) 
Sec. 4-3-190. - Use tax; taxable property and services. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be paid a use tax in the amount stated in Section 4-3-120 of this Article, upon the following: 
(1)  Construction and building materials. All sales of construction and building materials, except for sales of construction and building materials to contractors and subcontractors for use in the building, erection, alteration or repair of structures, highways, roads, streets and other public works owned and used by: 
a.  The United States government, the State, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental capacities only; 
b.  Charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular charitable functions and activities; or 
c.  Schools, other than schools held or conducted for private or corporate profit; 
(2)  Construction equipment. Construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of the Town for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days shall be subjected to the full applicable use tax of the Town. 
a.  Construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of the Town for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less shall be subjected to the Town's use tax in an amount calculated as follows: the purchase price of the equipment shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is one (1) and the denominator of which is twelve (12), and the result shall be multiplied by three and ninety-five-hundredths percent (3.95%), until such time as the costs of paying the debt service on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued for construction of the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion or equipping the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion have been paid in full, at which time the use tax rate shall be reduced to three and four-tenths percent (3.4%). 
b.  Where the provisions of this Paragraph (2) are utilized, the credit provisions of Section 4-3-860 of this Article shall apply at such time as the aggregate sales and use taxes legally imposed by and paid to other statutory and home rule municipalities on any such equipment equal to three and ninety-five-hundredths percent (3.95%), until such time as the costs of paying the debt service on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued for construction of the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion or equipping the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion have been paid in full, at which time the use tax rate shall be reduced to three and four-tenths percent (3.4%). 
c.  In order to avail himself or herself of the provisions of this Paragraph (2), the taxpayer shall comply with the following procedure: 
1.  Prior to or on the date the equipment is located within the boundaries of the Town, the taxpayer shall file with the Building Department an equipment declaration on a form provided by the Town. Such declaration shall state the dates on which the taxpayer anticipates that the equipment will be located within and removed from the boundaries of the Town, shall include a description of each such anticipated piece of equipment, and shall include such other information as reasonably deemed necessary by the Town. 
2.  The taxpayer shall file with the Town an amended equipment declaration reflecting any changes in the information contained in any previous equipment declaration no less than once every ninety (90) days after the equipment is brought into the boundaries of the Town or, for equipment which is brought into the boundaries of the Town for a project of less than ten (10) days, after substantial completion of the project. 
3.  The taxpayer need not report on any equipment declaration any equipment for which the purchase price was under two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
d.  If the equipment declaration is given as provided in Subparagraph c.1 of this Section, then as to any item of construction equipment for which the customary purchase price is under two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) which was brought into the boundaries of the Town temporarily for use on a construction project, it shall be presumed that the item was purchased in a jurisdiction having a local sales or use tax as high as then-effective Town sales or use tax and that such local sales or use tax was previously paid. In such case, the burden of proof in any proceeding before the Town, the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue or the district court shall be on the Town to prove that such local sales or use tax was not paid. 
e.  If the taxpayer fails to comply with the provisions of Subparagraph c.1 of this Section, the taxpayer may not avail himself or herself of the provisions of Paragraph (3) of this Section and shall be subject to the provisions of Paragraph (2) of this Section. However, substantial compliance with the provisions of Paragraph (5) of this Section shall allow the taxpayer to avail himself or herself of the provisions of Paragraph (3) of this Section. 
(Prior code 4-34; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1538 1) 
Sec. 4-3-200. - Use tax; exemptions. 
    The use tax shall not apply to: 
(1)  Storage, use or consumption. The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax imposed by the Town. 
(2)  Resale items. The storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the Town, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of a business. 
(3)  Nonresident temporary use. The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the Town by a nonresident thereof for his or her own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the Town; however, this exemption does not apply to the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the State by a nonresident to be used in the conduct of a business in the State. 
(4)  Exempt organization use. The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government or the government of the State, or its institutions or political subdivisions, in their governmental capacities only, or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions. 
(5)  Manufacturing products. The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished, and the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof; 
(6)  Credit for other tax. The storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property, the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a sales or use tax of another town, city or county equal to or in excess of that imposed by this Article. A credit shall be granted against the use tax imposed by this Article with respect to a person's storage, use or consumption in the Town of tangible personal property purchased by him or her elsewhere. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him or her by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of another town, city or county on his or her purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax imposed by this Article. 
(7)  Previously purchased household items. The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside of the Town and brought into it by a nonresident acquiring residency. 
(Prior code 4-35; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-210. - Taxpayer (vendor and consumer) liability. 
(a)  Burden of proof of exemption. The burden of proving that any vendor, retailer, consumer or purchaser is exempt from collecting or paying the tax upon any goods sold or purchased shall be on the vendor, retailer, consumer or purchaser under such reasonable requirements of proof as the Director may prescribe. 
(b)  Director may require reports and records. The Director may require any person, by regulation or notice served on such person, to make such return, render such statement, keep and furnish such records or make such information reports as the Director may deem sufficient to show whether or not such person is liable under this Article for payment or collection of the tax imposed herein. 
(c)  Vendor responsibility for collection of tax. Every retailer or vendor engaged in business and selling at retail shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to the amount of the tax imposed by this Article computed on the total of all sales made by the retailer or vendor of commodities or services as specified in Section 4-3-170 above. 
(d)  Vendor responsibility for remittance of tax. The retailer shall add the tax as a separate and distinct item, and such tax shall be a debt from the consumer to the retailer and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debt. 
(e)  Due date of returns. Every retailer or vendor engaged in business and selling at retail shall file a return as prescribed herein with the Director on or before the twentieth day of the month for the preceding month or months under report and remit the amount of tax imposed by this Article computed on the total of such sales, and also the amount of any excess tax collections, less two and one-third percent (2.33%) of the amount of taxes to be paid by him or her under this Article or two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is less, to cover the retailer's expense of collection and remittance of the tax for the reporting period; however, if any vendor is delinquent in remitting said tax other than in unusual circumstances shown to the satisfaction of the Director, the vendor shall not be allowed to retain any amounts to cover his or her expense in collecting and remitting said tax, and an amount equivalent to the full tax shall be remitted to the Director by any such delinquent vendor. Vendors not selling at retail may be required by the Director to file a return as prescribed herein. 
(f)  Timely payment evidence; computation of dates. 
(1)  Timely payment may be evidenced by the postmark date if mailed; otherwise, timely payment may be evidenced by the Finance Department validation date. 
(2)  Any due date, payment date or deadline for paying tax due, paying the license renewal fee, providing information or taking other action which falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday recognized by either the federal government or the State shall be extended to the first business day following such weekend or holiday. 
(Prior code 4-36; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Division 3 - Licensing 

Sec. 4-3-310. - Licensing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling at retail tangible personal property and services subject to the tax imposed by this Article without first having obtained a license. 
(b)  Every person who comes within the definition of engaged in business in the Town , as defined in section 4-3-30, shall obtain a license in order to do business in the Town. 
(c)  Application contents. The Town sales tax license shall be granted only upon application stating the name, address and date of birth of the person desiring such license, the name of such business and the character thereof, the applicable federal identification number and the state license number of the business, the physical location of the business, the physical location phone number and the applicable contact phone number, fax and e-mail address. Other facts may be required by the Director such as, but not limited to, the date of birth, driver's license number and Social Security number of an officer or owner of the business. The application must be signed and dated under penalty of perjury by an owner or officer of the business. A valid digital signature, or the equivalent thereof, on a license application transmitted electronically over the Internet or transmitted via other similar means is accepted and held as a written signature. A signature on a license application sent via fax is accepted and held as a written signature. Any person doing business as a wholesaler shall obtain a retailer's license if any sales are made at retail as defined herein. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Director. The Director shall issue and renew such licenses. The license application by itself is not public record; however, the nonconfidential items on the application are public record. Confidential items on the application must be noted as confidential items. 
(d)  Each retail establishment to be licensed. In case business is transacted at two (2) or more separate places by one (1) person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. Consolidated tax returns may be filed for those various locations as set forth in Subsection 4-3-510(b). Each owner of a different business located at the same location must obtain a separate license for each business. 
(e)  License form. Each license shall be numbered and shall show the licensee name, physical location address, mailing address and expiration date of the license. 
(f)  License carrying or posting required. No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Article upon his or her person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any retail trade, profession or business for which the license was granted; except that where such trade or business is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, such license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in the place of business. Every licensee shall produce his or her license for examination when requested to do so by any person representing the Town. 
(g)  Nontransferable. No license shall be transferable. 
(h)  License fee. Each application for and renewal of a license issued pursuant to this Article shall be accompanied by payment of an annual fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), as may be modified from time to time by Town Board Resolution. An exempt institution shall be exempt from this license fee. 
(i)  Expiration, renewal and renewal fees. All licenses shall be issued by the Director of Finance or designee on an annual basis, and shall expire twelve (12) months after issuance. A license holder may apply to the Department of Finance for a renewal license for the next twelve-month period, by submitting the renewal application thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. A license for a new business or for a transfer of ownership is subject to the renewal provisions of this Section. All applications for renewal licenses shall be made on forms prescribed and furnished by the Department of Finance. Failure to obtain a renewal license by the expiration date of the original license shall result in payment of an increased renewal fee, which may be modified from time to time by Town Board Resolution, according to the following schedule: 
Renewal Date Penalty Total Due After thirty (30) days $ 5.00 $30.00 After sixty (60) days 10.00 35.00 After ninety (90) days 15.00 40.00  
(Prior code 4-37; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2019-1588 1) 
Sec. 4-3-320. - Engaged in business without a sales tax license. 
    Any person engaged in business in the Town as defined in this Article, without having secured a sales tax license therefor, except as specifically provided herein, shall be guilty of a violation of this Article. 
(Ord. 2019-1588 2) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2019-1588 ,  2, adopted June 10, 2019, repealed the former  4-3-320 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  4-3-320 pertained to engaged in business without a license and derived from prior code 4-38; and Ord. 2006-1236,  1. 
Sec. 4-3-330. - Revocation of license by Director. 
(a)  The Director may, on reasonable notice and after full hearing, revoke the license of any person found to have violated any provisions of this Article. 
(b)  Any findings and order of the Director revoking the license of any person shall be subject to review by the district court upon application of the aggrieved party, in accordance with Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Prior code 4-39; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-340. - Special events. 
(a)  No special event shall occur without the issuance of a special events license to the organizer of the event, which license shall cost ten dollars ($10.00) for each special event. The vendors of a special event need not individually obtain a license if a special events license has been issued to the organizer of the special event. If there is no special events organizer, the vendors at the special event must obtain their own sales tax licenses and collect and remit the tax to the Town pursuant to this Article. The organizer shall remit all taxes collected by the vendors who do not have a sales tax license for the event and for all vendors who have a license but who elect to have the organizer remit the tax. 
(b)  No later than two (2) days before the start of the special event, the special events organizer shall provide the Director with a list of the names and addresses of all vendors of the special event, and a list of all tax license numbers of vendors who have obtained their own licenses for the event and are remitting the tax to the Town themselves. 
(c)  Vendors or organizers of a special event must remit the sales tax they collect and complete a tax schedule on a form provided by the Director. The tax schedule and tax remittance is due fifteen (15) days after the special event ends. Only the organizer will be permitted to take the deduction for the two and two-thirds percent (2.33%) of taxes remitted. This deduction is limited to two hundred dollars ($200.00). This deduction is not allowed if the schedule and tax remittance are not received by the Department of Finance by the due date. 
(Prior code 4-40; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-350. - Contractors. 
    Every contractor, owner of realty or lessee of realty who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify or improve any building, dwelling or other structure, or improvement to real property, not including work performed on federal, state, county, Town and exempt institution job sites in the Town, and who shall purchase lumber, fixtures or any other building materials, supplies and other tangible personal property used, consumed or stored therefor on realty, improvements and/or attached or affixed structures situated in the Town, from sources within or without the Town, shall pay the Town sales and use tax by paying the tax on the "Estimated Percentage Basis," based on a percentage of the total valuation of the construction contract and paid, either through the owner, lessee or general contractor, or separately, if he or she is a subcontractor electing to do so, at the time a building permit is issued. The minimum valuation of material is established at fifty percent (50%) of the job valuation. The use tax collected totals three and ninety-five-hundredths percent (3.95%), until such time as the costs of paying the debt service on revenue bonds or refunding bonds issued for construction of the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion or equipping the Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion have been paid in full, at which time the use tax rate shall be reduced to three and four-tenths percent (3.4%). The contractor, property owner/lessor and property lessee are held liable for any tax due in this Article, and all applicable parties may be required to provide adequate records as requested to the Director for the Director to ascertain that taxes were paid in full. Contractors are considered to be the end users of building materials in the Town. Owners, lessors, contractors and their subcontractors must not pay municipal sales tax to a vendor in another jurisdiction for building materials to be used, consumed or stored at a location in the Town, as it is the intent of this code for all Town taxes to be paid at the time a building permit is issued. No refund of another municipality's tax will be paid if a contractor or subcontractor pays another municipality's tax. The Director may enter into a payment agreement for the tax referenced in this Subsection, to be paid in installments that include an interest rate of nine percent (9%) per annum. 
(Ord. 2018-1561 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1561 ,  1, adopted June 25, 2018, repealed the former  4-3-350 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  4-3-350 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior code 4-41; and Ord. 2006-1236,  1. 
Sec. 4-3-360. - Seasonal sales tax licenses. 
    Any seasonal sales or farmers markets, as defined by Section 16-2-20 of this Code, engaged in business in the Town shall first obtain a seasonal sales tax license in order to do business within the Town. A seasonal sales tax license shall be issued upon and subject to the all of the following conditions: 
(1)  Application and contents. The Town seasonal sales tax license shall be granted only upon an application, signed and dated under penalty of perjury, in person by an owner or officer of the business, and providing the following information: 
a.  The name, address and date of birth of the person desiring such license; 
b.  The name of such business, its character and proposed duration thereof; 
c.  The applicable federal identification number and the state license number of the business, if any; 
d.  The intended temporary physical location of the business; 
e.  The total retail value of the inventory intended for sale at the intended temporary physical location of the business; 
f.  The applicable contact phone number, fax and e-mail address of the applicant; and 
g.  The date of birth, driver's license number and Social Security number of an officer or owner of the business. 
(2)  License form. Each seasonal sales tax license shall be numbered and shall show the licensee name, physical location address, mailing address and expiration date of the license. 
(3)  License posting and presentation required. The seasonal sales tax license issued pursuant to this Section shall be displayed at all times in some conspicuous place within or upon each temporary place of business. Every licensee shall produce his or her license for examination when requested to do so by any person representing the Town. 
(4)  Nontransferable. Seasonal sales tax licenses are personal to the licensee and shall not be transferable. 
(5)  License fee. Each application for and renewal of a seasonal sales tax license shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable licensing fee in the amount of the then-prevailing application fee or renewal fee for a seasonal sales tax license, respectively, at the time the application or renewal is submitted for review. 
(6)  Expiration, renewal and renewal fees. Notwithstanding any information submitted within the application required under Paragraph (1) above, all seasonal sales tax licenses shall expire upon expiration of the seasonal sales permit issued pursuant to Chapter 16, Article XXXII of this Code. 
(7)  Filing of returns, payment of tax due. The licensee under any seasonal sales tax license shall in person file a seasonal sales tax return in the form approved by the Director. The seasonal sales tax return shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the licensee and filed with payment in full of all tax due within forty-eight (48) hours of the conclusion of temporary sales at the physical location identified in the application. 
(Ord. 2011-1404 1) 
Division 4 - Collection 

Sec. 4-3-410. - Refunds. 
(a)  Disputed tax. Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any sale, service or commodity is exempt from taxation under this Article, nevertheless the seller shall collect and the purchaser shall pay the tax and the seller shall issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate, on forms prescribed by the Director, showing the names of the seller and the purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. 
(b)  Refund allowed if exempt. A refund shall be made, or a credit allowed, for the tax so paid under dispute by any purchaser who has an exemption under this code; provided that such refund shall be made by the Director after compliance with the following conditions precedent: Applications for refund must be made within sixty (60) days after the purchase of the goods whereon an exemption is claimed and must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and certificate issued by the seller; and be made upon such forms as shall be prescribed and furnished by the Director, which forms shall contain such information as the Director shall prescribe. 
(c)  Refund disallowed. Upon receipt of such application, the Director shall examine the same with all due speed and shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of his or her decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants, within fifteen (15) days after such decision is sent, may petition the Director for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in Section 4-3-660. 
(d)  Refund of excess taxes. Whenever the Director discovers from the examination of a return or pursuant to an audit of a taxpayer's records that the taxpayer has overpaid taxes due the Town, the Director shall issue a warrant for payment of the excess taxes to the taxpayer, unless the overpayment is applied to offset other tax due. The Director shall keep a duplicate of said warrant and also a statement which sets forth the reason why such refund was ordered. If the refund totals less than fifteen dollars ($15.00), the refund amount shall be credited to the taxpayer's tax account, unless the taxpayer requests payment of the refund. 
(e)  Taxpayer's discovery of overpayment of tax. A taxpayer may apply for a refund of payment of excess taxes within sixty (60) days after discovery of the overpayment. The Director may deny such refund if he or she finds the taxpayer did or reasonably should have discovered the overpayment more than sixty (60) days prior to the date of the application for a refund. The taxpayer may petition the Director for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in Section 4-3-660 within fifteen (15) days after the Director's Denial of Refund is sent to the taxpayer. 
(f)  Statute of limitations. With the exception of a written document that tolls the running of the statute of limitations, no refund shall be allowed or paid under any circumstances more than three (3) years after the Town's receipt of sales or use taxes in question. 
(g)  Refund to offset previous tax due. Whenever it is established that any taxpayer has, for any period, overpaid a tax imposed by this code, and that there is an unpaid balance of tax and interest accrued according to the records of the Director, owing by such taxpayer for any other period, so much of the overpayment of tax plus interest allowable thereon as does not exceed the amount of such unpaid balance shall be credited thereto and any excess of the overpayment shall be refunded. 
(h)  Refund of overpayment of taxes paid by the estimated payment basis. Application for refund by contractors prepaying on an estimated percentage payment basis, or actual tax basis, shall be made within three (3) years after the date of the certificate of occupancy or date of purchase, whichever is sooner. The Director may require data to accompany the application and may require an audit to be done before the refund is paid. 
(i)  Refunds not assignable. The right of any person to a refund under this code shall not be assignable, and such application for refund must be made by the same person who purchased the goods and paid the tax thereon as shown in the invoice of the sale thereof, except as provided in Subsection (j) below. The Director may, upon receiving a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and evidence to substantiate that the tax was remitted in error to another municipality, issue a joint refund check in the name of the taxpayer and the municipality, provided that the municipality has entered into an agreement to grant similar privileges to the Town. 
(j)  Burden of proof of exemption. The burden of proving that sales, services and commodities on which tax refunds are claimed are exempt from taxation or were not at retail, shall be on the one making such claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the Director may prescribe. 
(k)  Claims for recovery. The intent of this Section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect and remit sales and use taxes to the Town. 
(1)  As used herein, claim for recovery means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(2)  When it is determined by the Director that sales and use tax owed to the Town has been reported and paid to another municipality, the Town shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted and that, as of the date of the notice, the vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(3)  The Town may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the Town or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a claim for recovery lies in the sole discretion of the Town. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor releasing his or her claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny, in whole or in part, the claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The municipality to which the Town submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the Town shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(4)  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the Town shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the Town shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty (30) days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim of recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(5)  The Town may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(6)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six-month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. This period may be extended only if a written document was approved by the Director and taxpayer to toll the running of this thirty-six-month period. 
(Prior code 4-42; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-420. - Interest on overpayments and refunds. 
(a)  Interest allowance basis. No interest shall be paid upon any overpayment of sales or use tax unless: 
(1)  Such overpayment was made under protest; and 
(2)  The taxpayer has requested a refund in writing within sixty (60) days after the tax was paid. 
(b)  Payment of interest. 
(1)  Interest owed by the taxpayer on an audit may be applied against calculated interest that would be credited if allowed. 
(2)  Interest paid on an eligible overpayment of taxes pursuant to Subsection (a) above under protest shall be allowed at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum. 
(3)  Interest shall accrue only from the date of the taxpayer's application for a refund. If the refund is to be applied against other taxes owed by the taxpayer, interest shall not be paid on the refund for the period after the due date of the amount against which the credit is taken. 
(c)  Refund erroneously made to bear interest. Any portion of a sales or use tax, or any interest, assessable penalty, additional amount or additional tax, which has been erroneously refunded, shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum from the date of the payment of the refund. 
(Prior code 4-43; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-430. - Sale or purchase of business or property. 
(a)  New license required. Any sale, transfer or purchase of an interest in a business enterprise by any person, as defined, where the respective interest of the person purchasing or selling as a result of the transaction has changed in any degree, requires, in the case of a retailer or other person required to be licensed under this Article, the issuance of a new license. 
(b)  Final return. Any person, vendor or taxpayer who sells out his or her business or stock of goods or all the assets of a business to another person, or any person or taxpayer who quits business, shall make out the return as required by this Article and remit all taxes due within fifteen (15) days after the business or stock of goods is sold, or the taxpayer quits business. 
(c)  Tax due on business property. The Town tax shall be remitted on the purchase price paid for tangible personal property that is acquired with the purchase, transfer of title or transfer of possession of a business, with the exception of items to be resold in the ordinary course of business operations of the new business. The tax shall be based on the price paid for such chattels as recorded in the bill of sale or agreement and constituting a part of the total transaction at the time of the sale or transfer, provided that the valuation is as great as or greater than the fair market value of such merchandise or chattels. Where the transfer of ownership is a package deal made by a lump-sum transaction, the tax shall be paid on the book value if no determination has been made. When a business is taken over in return for the assumption of outstanding indebtedness owed by former owners, the tax shall be paid on the fair market value of all taxable tangible personal property acquired by the purchaser. The "sale" or "sale and purchase" of a business does not include the items under Section 39-26-102(10), C.R.S. A bona fide gift of tangible personal property is not a "sale." 
(d)  Prior taxes due. Taxes due upon the sale of a business or stock of goods include all sales taxes which were collected or should have been collected prior to the sale, and all use taxes accruing or payable prior to the sale. 
(e)  Purchaser to withhold payment until tax paid. The purchaser or successor to the business, stock of goods or assets shall withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover all of said taxes until such time as the former owner produces a receipt from the Director showing that all taxes have been paid in full. 
(f)  Purchaser liable for prior owner's unpaid tax. The purchaser of a business is liable for any unpaid tax of a predecessor. Vendors or consumers having outstanding accounts on which sales or use tax has not been remitted must compute and pay the tax at the time of sale. 
(g)  Seller and seller's agent liable for tax. The seller or his or her agent will be held liable for tax remittance on the sale of business in the event the purchaser fails to remit the tax due on the purchase. 
(h)  Seller and purchaser both liable. Until all taxes due under this Section are paid in full, both the former owner and the purchaser shall remain personally liable thereon and subject to all collection proceedings available under this Article. Action by the Town against the former owner shall not prevent the exercise by the Town of all remedies provided herein against the successor owner. 
(i)  Delinquent taxes a lien on property. Any person who takes or purchases personal or real property under lease, title-retaining contract or other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale or otherwise, takes the same subject to the lien for any delinquent taxes owed by the original owner and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent taxes, interest, penalty and collection costs of such prior owner, not however, exceeding the value of the property so taken or acquired. Any person who takes title to or possession of any real property upon which a tax is owed takes said property subject to the lien for said delinquent tax and shall be liable for the payment thereof to the extent of the tax, interest, penalties and collection costs. 
(Prior code 4-44; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-440. - No final inspection unless tax paid. 
    No final inspection shall be made by the Building Inspector, and no certificate of occupancy, temporary or otherwise, shall be issued unless all taxes due as provided in this Article have been paid or arrangements therefor made with the Director. 
(Prior code 4-45; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-450. - Certificate of discharge. 
(a)  Certificate of discharge subject to lien. If any property, real or personal, under the law, shall be subject to a lien for the payment of any tax due the Town, the Director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if he or she finds that the fair market value of that part of such property remaining subject to the lien is at least double the amount of the liability remaining unsatisfied in respect to such tax and the amount of all prior liens upon such property. 
(b)  Certificate of discharge to part of property. If any property, real or personal, under the law, shall be subject to a lien for the payment of any tax due the Town, the Director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if there is paid over to the Director in part satisfaction of the liability in respect to such tax an amount determined by the Director, which shall not be less than the value, as determined by him or her, of the interest of the Town in the part to be so discharged. 
(c)  How values determined. In determining such values, the Director shall give consideration to the fair market value of the part to be so discharged and to such liens thereon as have priority to the lien of the Town. 
(d)  Certificate of release conclusive. A certificate of release or of partial discharge issued under Subsection (a) above shall be held conclusive that the lien of the Town upon the property released therein is extinguished, but shall not extinguish, nor release, any portion of the lien or property not specified in the release. 
(Prior code 4-46; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-460. - Closing agreements. 
(a)  Satisfaction of liability. For the purpose of facilitating the settlement and distribution of estates, trusts, receiverships, other fiduciary relationships and corporations in the process of dissolution or which have been dissolved, the Director may agree with the fiduciary or surviving directors upon the amount of taxes due from the decedent, or from the decedent's estate, trust, receivership or other fiduciary relationship, or corporation, for any of his, her or its taxable periods, under the provisions of the taxes covered by this Article and except upon a showing of fraud, malfeasance or misrepresentation of a material fact, payment in accordance with such agreement shall be full satisfaction of the taxes for the taxable periods to which the agreement related. 
(b)  Personal liability. Except as provided in Subsection (d) below, any personal representative of a decedent or of the estate of a decedent, any trustee, receiver or other person acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any director of a corporation in the process of dissolution or which has been dissolved, who distributes the estate or fund in his or her control without having first paid any taxes covered by this Article due from such decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation, covered by this Article and which may be assessed within the time limited by this Article, shall be personally liable to the extent of the property so distributed, for any unpaid taxes of the decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation, covered by this Article and which may be assessed within the time limited by this Article. 
(c)  Notification of liability. The distributee of a decedent's estate or a trust estate or fund, or the stockholder of any dissolved corporation who receives any of the property of such decedent's estate, trust estate, fund or corporation, shall be liable to the extent of the decedent, trust estate, fund or corporation, covered by this Article and which may be assessed within the time limited by this Article. Notice to such distributee or stockholder shall be given in the same manner and within the time limit which would have been applicable had there been no distribution. 
(d)  Limitation of liability. 
(1)  In case a tax covered by this Article is due from a decedent or his or her estate, or by a corporation, in order for personal liability under Subsection (b) above to remain in effect, determination of the tax due shall be made and notice and demand therefor shall issue within three (3) years after written request for such determination, filed after the filing of the decedent's final return or filed after the filing of the return of the decedent's estate with respect to which such request is applicable, by any personal representative of such decedent, or by the corporation, filed after the filing of its return; but a request under this provision shall not extend the period of limitation otherwise applicable. 
(2)  This Subsection will not apply in the case of a corporation unless: 
a.  Such request notifies the Director that the corporation contemplates dissolution at or before the expiration of such three-year period; 
b.  The dissolution is begun in good faith before the expiration of such three-year period; and 
c.  The dissolution is completed. 
(3)  Upon the expiration of said three-year period, without determination being made and notice and demand being issued, the personal representative or representative of the decedent and the directors of the corporation no longer will be liable under the provisions of Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(Prior code 4-47; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-470. - Limitations. 
(a)  General limitations. 
(1)  Statute of limitations. Except as provided in this Section, the taxes for any period, together with the interest thereon and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by this Article shall not be assessed nor credit taken, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant be issued, suit for collection be instituted or any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period. In the case of a failure to make a return or in the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. The commencement of collection proceedings, including the mailing of a notice of audit, shall toll the running of the statute of limitations. For purposes of the application of the statute of limitations to use tax paid on a building permit, tax shall not be assessed nor credit taken, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant be issued, suit for collection be instituted, or any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three (3) years after the date of the certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Date fixed. For purposes of this Section, a tax return filed before the last day prescribed by law, or by regulation promulgated pursuant to law for the filing thereof, shall be considered as filed on such last day. 
(3)  Payment arrangement. Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed in this Section for the assessment of tax, both the Director and the taxpayer have consented in writing to any assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon or by the commencement of collection proceedings made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. Additional interest must be paid on payments at a rate of nine percent (9%) per annum. 
(4)  Revision qualification. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit any right accrued or to revive any liability barred by any statute at the date this code becomes effective. 
(b)  Taxes held in trust. All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by this Article shall be and remain public money, the property of the Town, in the hands of such retailer. He or she shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the Town, until paid to the Director; and, for failure to so pay to the Director, such retailer shall be punished as provided by law. Thus, the statute of limitation provided herein does not apply to collections of public money in the possession of the retailer, and such monies are collectable at any time after their due date upon demand of the Director. Bankruptcy will not excuse unremitted taxes collected in trust. 
(Prior code 4-48; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-480. - Tax on credit sales. 
    Whenever tangible personal property is sold, including that sold in conjunction with the sale of a business, which is taxable hereunder, under a conditional sales contract or rental purchase contract whereby the seller retains title as security for all or part of the purchase price, or whenever the seller takes a chattel mortgage on such tangible personal property to secure all or part of the purchase price, the total tax based on the total selling price shall become immediately due and payable. The tax shall be charged, or collected and remitted by, the vendor. No refund or credit shall be allowed to either party to the transaction in case of repossession. 
(Prior code 4-49; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-490. - Excess collections. 
    If any vendor shall, during any reporting period, collect as a tax an amount in excess of the rates set forth in this Chapter, of his or her total taxable sales, he or she shall remit to the Director the full net amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess. If records of Town and state tax collections are kept separately, the vendor will remit the excess of the Town tax collected over and above Town net taxable sales and service. If there is no separate record kept of Town and state tax collections and it is not possible to determine the excess to be remitted to each, the vendor shall remit forty-nine percent ( 49%) of such excess to the Town. The retention by the vendor of any excess collections, or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the Director the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this Article, is hereby declared to be a violation of this Article. 
(Ord. 2018-1561 2) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1561 ,  2, adopted June 25, 2018, repealed the former  4-3-490 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  4-3-490 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior code 4-50; and Ord. 2006-1236,  1. 
Sec. 4-3-500. - Unlawful to advertise absorption of tax. 
    It shall be unlawful for any taxpayer or vendor to advertise, hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this Article will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor or taxpayer or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or, if added, that it or any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating this provision of this Article shall be subject to the penalties herein provided. 
(Prior code 4-51; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-510. - Tax returns; content, consolidation and reporting periods. 
(a)  Tax return: content, form. The returns to be filed by the taxpayer, or the taxpayer's trustee, manager, officer or director, shall contain such information and be completed in such manner and upon such forms as the Director may prescribe. When a return filed by a taxpayer does not include a signature, a correct Town account number or any other information required by the Director, the Director has the right to send back to the taxpayer the return and payment. The Director may consider an improperly filed return to be not filed with the Town. A valid digital signature, or the equivalent thereof, on a filed return transmitted electronically over the Internet or transmitted by other similar means is accepted and held as a written signature. Signing a return over the Internet can be done by any means acceptable to the Director. A signature on a return sent via fax is accepted and held as a written signature. 
(b)  Consolidation of returns. A vendor doing business in two (2) or more places or locations, whether in or without the Town, and collecting taxes hereunder, may file one (1) return covering all such places or locations, when accompanied by a supplemental report showing the gross sales and service and net taxable sales and service and taxes collected thereon for each such place or location. 
(c)  Reporting periods. Vendors must report and remit the tax on a monthly basis if the tax due per month, on average, is three hundred dollars ($300.00) or greater. The Director may permit a vendor or licensed consumer whose monthly tax collected is less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) to make returns and remit taxes at three-month intervals (i.e., on a quarterly basis). Nonretail businesses and home-based businesses that are required to file a return may be permitted by the Director to file yearly (on an annual basis). If any taxpayer who has been granted permission to file returns and pay tax on other than a monthly basis becomes delinquent, authorization for such alternate method of reporting may be revoked by the Director. Thereafter, following notice of such revocation, the taxpayer shall file returns and pay tax on a monthly basis. If the accounting methods regularly employed by the vendor or licensed consumer in the transaction of his or her business, or other conditions, are such that the returns aforesaid made on a calendar-month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the Director may, upon request of the vendor or licensed consumer, accept returns at such intervals as will, in his or her opinion, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax. 
(Prior code 4-52; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Division 5 - Administration 

Sec. 4-3-610. - Duties and powers of Director. 
    The administration of the licensing provisions of this code is hereby vested in the Director; and the administration of all other provisions of the code and of the Town sales and use tax is hereby vested in and shall be exercised by the Director, who shall prescribe forms and formulate and promulgate, with the approval of the Town Manager, appropriate rules and regulations to effectuate the purpose of this code, in conformity with this code and subject to other provisions of law relating thereto, for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the taxes imposed and for the proper administration and enforcement thereof, and to provide uniform methods of adding the tax, or the average equivalent thereof, to the purchase price. The Director shall have power and authority to add, enact, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations to this Article that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. Regulations adopted, amended or rescinded by the Director shall be effective in the manner and at the time prescribed by the Director, subject to the provisions of the code. The Director is authorized to delegate any duty or power to a subordinate unless otherwise provided herein. 
(Prior code 4-53; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-620. - Director to examine returns. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return or for the purpose of making an estimate of the tax due from any taxpayer, the Director shall have power to examine or cause to be examined by an employee, agent or representative designated by him or her for that purpose, any books, papers, records or memoranda bearing upon the matters required to be included in the return. Subject to the provisions of the code, the Director is authorized to prescribe the duties and powers of such officers, accountants, experts and other persons as may be necessary in the performance of his or her duty. 
(Prior code 4-54; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-630. - Audits. 
(a)  Taxpayer's retention of records. It shall be the duty of every person liable to the Town for any tax to keep and preserve for a period of at least three (3) years such books, accounts and records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax liability. 
(b)  Records to be made available for audit. All such books, accounts and records, together with all bills, receipts, invoices, cash register tapes or other documents of original entry supporting the entries in the books, shall be maintained by the ordinarily prudent business person and shall be open for examination at any reasonable time by the Director. The records should show: 
(1)  Gross receipts from sales or rental payments from leases of tangible personal property (including any services that are part of the sale or lease) made in the Town, irrespective of whether the seller or lessor regards the receipts to be taxable or nontaxable. 
(2)  All deductions allowed by law and claimed in filing returns. 
(3)  Total purchase price of all tangible personal property purchased for sale, consumption or lease in the Town. 
(c)  Travel required to perform audit. In the case of a person who does not keep the necessary books, accounts and records within the Town, it shall be sufficient if such person produces within the Town such books, accounts and records or such information as shall be reasonably required by the Director for examination by the Director, or, in lieu thereof, said person shall pay in advance, or as approved by the Director, such travel, lodging, meal and related expenses as shall reasonably be incurred by the Director in examination of said books, accounts and records at such place where said books, accounts and records are kept. 
(d)  Coordinated audit. 
(1)  Any taxpayer licensed in the Town and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four (4) other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
(2)  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may provide to the Director of the Town, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license and a declaration that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time-based limitation upon the Town's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period. 
(3)  Except as provided in Paragraph (7) below, any taxpayer who submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a waiver of limitation, if required, may be audited by the Town during the twelve (12) months after request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
(4)  If the Town desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer who submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to Paragraph (3) above, the Director shall so notify the finance director of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the taxpayer's request within ten (10) days after receipt of the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit. The Director shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
(5)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the Town, the Town's Director shall facilitate arrangements between this Town and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The Director shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities. 
(6)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the Town, the Town's Director shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between this Town and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The Director shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
(7)  The Town may conduct an audit in conjunction with another municipality at its own discretion. 
(8)  The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this Section shall not apply: 
a.  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit; 
b.  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective date of this Article; 
c.  When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of limitation; or 
d.  When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a coordinated audit as provided in Paragraph (2) above. 
(Prior code 4-55; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-640. - Tax reports and returns. 
(a)  Town's preservation of records. All reports and returns of taxes received by the Department of Finance covered by this code shall be preserved until the Town Clerk orders them destroyed. 
(b)  Confidential nature of returns. Except in accordance with judicial order, consent of the taxpayer or as otherwise provided by law, the Director, the Town Manager and the Town Attorney shall not divulge or make known in any way financial information disclosed in any document, report or return filed in connection with any of the taxes covered by this code. The officials charged with the custody of such documents, reports and returns shall not be required to produce them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Director in an action or proceeding under the provisions of any such taxing or open record statutes when the report of facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit into evidence, so much of said reports, or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. 
(c)  Taxpayer request for records. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his or her duly authorized representative of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his or her tax. Such copies may be certified by the Director and, when so certified, shall be evidence equally with and in like manner as the originals and may be received by the courts of this State as evidence of the contents. 
(d)  Publication of statistics. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the items thereof. 
(e)  Records available to authorized jurisdictions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the Director in his or her discretion may furnish to the County Finance Director or Treasurer and his or her authorized personnel, to the Colorado Department of Revenue Executive Director and his or her authorized personnel, to the taxing officials of any state political subdivisions, to the taxing officials of any other state and its political subdivisions, and to the United States, any financial information contained in tax returns and related schedules and documents filed pursuant to this code, or in the report of an audit or investigation made with respect thereto provided; provided that such financial information is to be used only for tax purposes. 
(Prior code 4-56; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-650. - Notice by mail. 
    The taxpayer shall at all times have the burden of ensuring that his or her correct mailing address, e-mail address and fax number are on file with the Director. In the event that a notice is sent to the taxpayer pursuant to this code and said notice is not received by the taxpayer through no fault of the Town, or the notice is returned by the post office as undeliverable or rejected by the taxpayer, such notice shall be deemed given on the date mailed, and the Town shall have no further obligation to complete service of the notice. 
(Prior code 4-57; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-660. - Hearings. 
(a)  Request for hearing. Any taxpayer may request a formal or informal hearing on any proposed tax by reason of Notice of Final Determination; Assessment and Demand for Payment, or by reason of denial of his or her claim for refund, by application to the Director within fifteen (15) days of the date that a notice of deficiency, assessment or denial of refund is sent by the Director. The request for hearing shall set forth the taxpayer's reasons for and the amount of the requested changes in the deficiency, assessment or denial of refund. 
(b)  Hearing time and place. The Director shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the time and place for such hearing thirty (30) days prior thereto, unless the taxpayer requests shorter notice or an extension of time. In no event shall the hearing be held more than sixty (60) days after the Director's receipt of request for a hearing. In all cases, the hearing shall be held at the office of the Director. 
(c)  Informal hearing. If the taxpayer elects to participate in an informal hearing, which hearing must be held within thirty (30) days of the Director's receipt of the taxpayer's request for a hearing, additional informal hearings shall not be permitted except at the discretion of the Director. Informal hearings shall be conducted in any manner acceptable to the taxpayer and the Director with the purpose of settling the outstanding issues between the parties. If no settlement is reached, the taxpayer must request, in writing, a formal hearing on the record within fifteen (15) days after the informal hearing, and the Director shall give notice of the formal hearing pursuant to Subsection (b) above. If the taxpayer fails to request a formal hearing, all further rights to a hearing and appeal are waived and the taxpayer shall be bound by the Notice of Final Determination; Assessment and Demand for Payment or final Denial of Refund. 
(d)  Director to conduct formal hearing. The hearing shall be held before the Director or a hearing officer designated by the Director. At the hearing, the taxpayer may assert any facts, make any arguments and file any briefs and affidavits he or she believes are pertinent to his or her case. The taxpayer shall be notified of the name of the hearing officer fifteen (15) days before the hearing date, and any objection by the taxpayer to the hearing officer shall be filed in writing at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the hearing. All reasonable costs to the Town for a hearing officer must be paid by the taxpayer requesting the formal hearing when the hearing officer determines no change in the tax due. 
(e)  Hearing based on written brief. The taxpayer may also file a written brief and such other written materials or documents as he or she shall deem appropriate, and request that the Director reconsider the deficiency without a hearing. The Director shall proceed to reconsider the deficiency in the same manner as if the written material submitted had been presented at a hearing pursuant to this Section. The submission of written material shall be considered for all purposes the same as a request for and submission of the material at a hearing. The Town staff and/or agents shall be permitted to respond in writing to the submittals of the taxpayer. Rebuttal submissions may be permitted at the discretion of the Director. 
(f)  Time limitation on request for hearing. After the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date that the Notice of Final Determination; Assessment and Demand for Payment or Denial of Refund is sent, if the tax has not been paid, or if no request for hearing has been requested or no written brief has been filed by the taxpayer, then the Notice of Final Determination; Assessment and Demand for Payment previously mailed, faxed or e-mailed shall constitute a final assessment of the amount of the tax specified, together with interest and penalty, or shall constitute a final Denial of Refund, as the case may be. The Director may promptly take necessary steps to collect all amounts owed. The taxpayer shall have no further right to a hearing, trial or appeal on the facts of the case. 
(g)  Director may adjust tax under question. Based on the evidence presented at any hearing or filed in support of the taxpayer's contentions, the Director may modify or abate in part or in full the tax and the interest and penalty related to such tax questioned at the hearing, or may approve a refund. 
(h)  Formal hearing determination notices. After a formal hearing, upon rejection, in whole or in part, of the claim for refund or upon the finding by the Director that, on hearing the evidence, an assessment in whole or in part has been made against the taxpayer validly, the Director shall send a hearing determination notice to the taxpayer, setting forth the amount of claim for refund denied or the amount of deficiency assessment of taxes found due, stating therein the grounds for allowance or rejection in whole or in part. 
(i)  Tax due date after hearing. Unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 4-3-670 of this Article, the tax, together with interest thereon and penalties, if any, shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the hearing determination notice is sent by the Director to the taxpayer. 
(Prior code 4-58; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-670. - Appeals. 
    The taxpayer may appeal the hearing determination notice of the Director issued pursuant to Section 4-3-660 within thirty (30) days of the date that such determination is sent by the Director. Such appeal shall be conducted pursuant to the terms of Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure or by the method of appeals set forth in Section 29-2-106, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 4-59; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-680. - Notice of sales and use tax ordinance amendment. 
(a)  In order to initiate a central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the Director shall file with the Colorado Municipal League, prior to the effective date of this code, a copy of the Town sales and use tax ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date of this Section. 
(b)  In order to keep current the central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the Director shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to the effective date of any amendment a copy of each sales and use tax ordinance amendment enacted by the Town. 
(c)  Failure of the Town to file such ordinance or ordinance amendment pursuant to this Section shall not invalidate any provision of the sales and use tax ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
(Prior code 4-60; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-690. - Participation in simplification meetings. 
    The Director shall cooperate with and participate on an as-needed basis with a permanent statewide sales and use tax committee convened by the Colorado Municipal League, which is composed of state and municipal sales and use tax and business officials. Said committee will meet for the purpose of discussing and seeking resolution to sales and use tax problems which may arise. 
(Prior code 4-61; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-700. - Joint sales and use tax collection, administration and enforcement. 
    The Town may enter into an intergovernmental agreement with another town, city or county for the joint collection, administration and enforcement of sales tax, use tax or both sales and use taxes. 
(Prior code 4-62; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Division 6 - Enforcement 

Sec. 4-3-810. - Assessment, penalties and interest. 
(a)  Assessment. Subsection (b) below shall apply if the Director determines that any person, taxpayer or vendor has failed, neglected or refused: 
(1)  To collect all taxes due; 
(2)  To make a return and pay all taxes due; 
(3)  To remit the proper amount of tax due; 
(4)  To pay in full all taxes due because of negligence, fraud or on a regular basis; or 
(5)  To remit taxes due pursuant to an audit, special assessment or special audit assessment. 
(b)  Assessment notice and due date. Penalties and interest shall be assessed and the Director shall give to the delinquent person, taxpayer or vendor a written Notice of Final Determination; Assessment and Demand for Payment, which notice shall state the full amount of taxes, penalties and interest due and shall be served personally, by mail or e-mail, which assessment of deficiency amount will be due and payable within fifteen (15) days of the date that such notice is sent by the Director. 
(c)  Estimated assessment. If the Director is unable to audit the records of a taxpayer, either due to the taxpayer's refusal or lack of cooperation, due to time constraints or due to other reasons which the Director may reasonably determine, the Director shall make an estimate based upon such information as may be available and shall issue an assessment as provided herein. If a person, taxpayer or vendor neglects or refuses to make a return, the Director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the taxes due for the period for which such person is delinquent. 
(d)  Failure to file penalty. If a person, taxpayer or vendor neglects or refuses to make a return as required in this code or fails to pay any sales or use tax as required by this code, and/or unless the taxpayer shows that his or her failure to comply fully with this code is due to reasonable cause, which the taxpayer may prove in a hearing requested pursuant to this code, the Director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the greater of the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or fifteen percent (15%) thereof, and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) from the date when due. 
(e)  Mathematical error on tax returns. In the event that the amount of tax is understated on the taxpayer's return due to a mathematical error, the Director shall notify the taxpayer by written Notice of Final Determination; Assessment and Demand for Payment of the amount of tax in excess of that shown in the return which is due and has been assessed. The taxpayer shall have no right of protest or appeal as in the matter of other assessments but shall pay the tax due and assessed or file an amended return to show the true amount of tax due within fifteen (15) days of the date that such assessment is sent by the Director. 
(f)  Penalty for fraud. If any deficiency in taxes paid is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, there shall be added, instead of the penalty prescribed in Subsection (d) above, a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency to the assessment required by Subsection (a) above. Interest on such deficiency shall accrue and be collected at a rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due. 
(g)  Special penalty for repeated enforcement. In any assessment issued to a person, vendor or taxpayer against whom enforcement proceedings have been commenced in the past, a special penalty, in addition to all others provided in this code, shall also be assessed. This special penalty shall be equal to the greater of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax deficiency. For purposes of this Subsection, enforcement proceedings shall mean: 
(1)  Issuance of a distraint warrant; 
(2)  Filing of a lawsuit in the district or county court; or 
(3)  Three (3) occurrences of the revocation of the person's, vendor's or taxpayer's license by the Director or issuance of a summons to Municipal Court for the nonpayment of taxes or a combination of revocations and summonses. 
(h)  Director may waive penalty. The Director is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed as provided in this code. Interest imposed in excess of nine percent (9%) per annum shall be deemed a penalty. If the Director finds that a taxpayer has, in good faith, paid tax to a vendor, the Director is hereby authorized to abate the interest and penalty in its entirety. 
(i)  Interest and penalty assessment. Interest and penalties prescribed under this Article shall be paid upon notice and demand, and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable. If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, no interest or penalty shall be imposed under this Section on the portion of the tax so satisfied. 
(Prior code 4-63; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-820. - Jeopardy assessment. 
(a)  Jeopardy enforcement. If the Director finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized by delay, in his or her discretion, he or she may declare the taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax and issue notice and demand for payment thereof; and, having done so, the tax shall be due and payable forthwith, and the Director may proceed immediately to collect such tax as provided in Section 4-3-850. 
(b)  Immediate enforcement action. In any other case wherein it appears that the revenue is in jeopardy, the Director may immediately issue demand for payment; and, regardless of the provisions of Sections 4-3-660 and 4-3-670 of this Article, the tax shall be due and payable forthwith and, in his or her discretion, the Director may proceed immediately to collect said tax as provided in Section 4-3-850. 
(c)  Security for payment. Collection under either Subsection (a) or (b) above may be stayed if the taxpayer gives such security for payment as shall be satisfactory to the Director. 
(Prior code 4-64; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-830. - False or fraudulent refund claim. 
(a)  Violation. Any applicant for refund under the provisions of this Article, or any other person who shall make any false statement in connection with an application for a refund of any taxes, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Article. 
(b)  Action to recover fraudulent claims. If any person is convicted of a violation of Subsection (a) above, such conviction shall be prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person during the current year were obtained unlawfully, and the Director is hereby empowered and directed to bring appropriate collection proceedings for recovery of such refunds. 
(Prior code 4-65; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-840. - Director's remedies in case of nonpayment. 
(a)  So long as a final assessment remains unpaid, the Director may take any of the following enforcement procedures against the defaulting taxpayer: 
(1)  Take such action as deemed necessary to revoke the taxpayer's sales tax license. 
(2)  Issue a summons to the person, vendor or taxpayer to appear in Municipal Court on charges of violating this Code. 
(3)  Issue a distraint warrant pursuant to this code. 
(4)  File a complaint in county or district court to collect all amounts owed. 
(b)  Regardless of the collection or enforcement procedures invoked by the Director, all unpaid taxes, penalties and interest shall be secured by a lien arising by operation of law as provided by this code. 
(Prior code 4-66; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-850. - Enforcing collection by distraint. 
(a)  Warrant. The Director may issue a warrant under his or her own hand directed to any representative of the Department of Finance, including the sheriff of any county of the State, commanding him or her to distraint, seize and sell the personal property of the taxpayer, except such personal property as is exempt from execution and sale by any provision of this Article, for the payment of the tax due, together with penalties and interest accrued thereon and collection costs: 
(1)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within fifteen (15) days from the date of Notice of Final Determination; Assessment and Demand for Payment therefor and no hearing has been requested and no appeal from such deficiency assessment has been docketed with any district court of this State within said period; 
(2)  When any other amount of tax, penalty or interest is not paid within fifteen (15) days from the date of the assessment and demand for payment thereof; or 
(3)  Immediately upon making of a jeopardy assessment or of the issuance of a demand for payment, as provided in Section 4-3-820. 
(b)  Distraint seizure. 
(1)  The agent charged with the collection shall make or cause to be made an account of the goods or effects distrained, a copy of which, signed by the agent making such distraint, shall be left with the owner or possessor, or at his or her usual place of abode with some member of his or her family over the age of eighteen (18) years, or at his or her usual place of business with his or her stenographer, bookkeeper or chief clerk; or, if the taxpayer is a corporation, shall be left with any officer, manager, general agent or agent for process, with a note of the sum demanded and the time and place of sale. If said notice cannot be served on the taxpayer within thirty (30) miles of the Town, it shall be mailed to the taxpayer's last known address, return receipt requested. 
(2)  The agent shall forthwith cause to be published a notice of the time and place of sale, together with a description of the property to be sold, in some newspaper within the county wherein distraint is made or, in lieu thereof and in the discretion of the Director, the agent or sheriff shall cause such notice to be publicly posted at the courthouse of the county wherein such distraint is made, and copies thereof to be posted in at least two (2) other public places within said county. 
(3)  The time fixed for the sale shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of such notification to the owner or possessor of the property and the publication or posting of such notices. Said sale may be adjourned from time to time by said agent or sheriff if he or she deems it advisable, but not for a time to exceed in all ninety (90) days from the date first fixed for the sale. When any personal property is advertised for sale under distraint as aforesaid, the agent or sheriff making the seizure shall proceed to sell such property at public auction, offering the same at not less than a fair minimum price, including the expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale. If the amount bid for the property at the sale is not equal to the fair minimum price so fixed, the agent or sheriff conducting the sale may declare the same to be purchased by him or her for the Town. The property so purchased may be sold by the agent or sheriff under such regulations as may be prescribed by the Director. 
(4)  In any case of distraint for the payment of taxes, the real property, goods, chattels or effects so distrained shall be restored to the owner or possessor if, prior to the sale, the amount due is paid, together with the fees and other charges, or may be redeemed by any person holding a chattel mortgage or other evidence of right of possession. 
(c)  Certificate of sale and evidence of purchase. In all cases of sale, the agent or sheriff making the sale shall issue a certificate of sale to each purchaser, and such certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the right of the agent or sheriff to make such sale and the conclusive evidence of the regularity of his or her proceedings in making the sale; and shall transfer to the purchaser all right, title and interest of such delinquent taxpayer in and to the property sold. Where such property consists of certificates of stock in the possession of the agent or sheriff, the certificate of sale shall be notice, when received, to any corporation, company or association of said transfer, and said certificate of such sale shall be authority for such corporation, company or association to record the transfer on its books and records. Where the subject of sale is securities or other evidences of debt in the possession of the agent or sheriff, the certificate of sale shall be good and valid evidence of title in the person holding the same, as against any other person. Any surplus remaining above the taxes, penalties, interest, all costs and all expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale shall be returned to the owner or such other person having a legal right thereto; and, on demand, the Director shall render an account in writing of the sale. Expenses of a seizure include all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the Town in enforcing collection by distraint, including but not limited to attorney's fees and all personnel costs of the Town. 
(Prior code 4-67; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-860. - Recovery of unpaid tax by action at law. 
(a)  Action at law. The Director may also treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the Town from the taxpayer personally. In case of failure to pay the tax or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the Director may receive at law the amount of such taxes, penalties, interest and collection costs in such county or district court of the county wherein venue may be proper under the applicable rule of civil procedure. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the Director as herein provided shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
(b)  Writs of attachment. Such actions may be actions in attachment, and writs of attachment may be issued to the sheriff. In any such proceedings, no bond shall be required of the Director nor shall any sheriff require of the Director an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings. The Director may prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing a bond therefor. The Town Attorney, when requested by the Director, may commence action for the recovery of taxes due under this Article, and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies or remedies provided in this Article. 
(c)  Civil action to enforce lien against real property. In any case where there has been a refusal or neglect to pay any tax due the Town, the Director may cause a civil action to be filed in the district court of the county in which is situated any real property which is subject to said tax, to enforce the lien of the Town for such tax upon the real property situated in that county or in any other county in the State which may be subject to such lien or to subject any real property or any right, title or interest in real property to the payment of such tax. The court shall decree a sale of such real property and distribute the proceeds of such sale, according to the findings of such court in respect to the interest of the parties and of the Town. The proceedings in such action and the manner of sale, the period for and manner of redemption from such sale and the execution of deed of conveyance shall be in accordance with the law and practice relating to foreclosures of mortgages upon real property. In any such action, the court may appoint a receiver of the real property involved in such action if equity so requires. 
(d)  Exhaustion of administrative remedies. No lawsuit may be filed by the Town until the time for the taxpayer to exercise his or her administrative remedies or to file an appeal has expired. This remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies available to the Town. No de novo trial of the facts shall be permitted if the taxpayer has had a hearing before the Director or has had the opportunity for such a hearing, but failed to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. 
(Prior code 4-68; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-870. - Sales and use tax constitutes lien. 
(a)  Any sales or use tax imposed by this code, together with the interest and penalties herein provided, and the cost of collection, shall be a first and prior lien upon: 
(1)  The goods, stock-in-trade and business fixtures of or used by any taxpayer under lease, title-retaining contract or other contractual arrangement; and 
(2)  The real and personal property owned or leased by any such taxpayer, including personal property affixed to real property, and shall take precedence on all such property over other claims and mortgages. 
(b)  This lien shall arise upon the day the tax becomes due and payable and shall be extinguished by operation of law when the tax is paid in full, including any interest, penalty and collection costs. 
(c)  Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this code shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for property or other taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this code, and for which said person is in any way liable under the terms of this code, shall be a prior and preferred lien against all the property of said taxpayer. No sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this code under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the Director the amount of any taxes due and payable under this code. If there are any such taxes due, owing or unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of said taxes out of the proceeds of said sale before making payment of any moneys to judgment creditors or other claims of whatsoever nature. 
(d)  At any time a tax has accrued but is unpaid, the Director may issue a notice of tax lien, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, penalties and interest, the date of the accrual thereof, and that the Town claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and tangible personal property of the taxpayer. Said notice may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in the state in which the taxpayer owns real or tangible personal property. Issuance of such notice and filing thereof shall be at the discretion of the Director and shall not affect the priority or validity of the lien provided by this code, which arises by operation of law when the tax accrues and is payable. 
(e)  Any representative of the Director to whom a distraint warrant has been issued may file a notice of lien on such forms as the Director may prescribe with the person in possession of any personal property or rights to property belonging to the taxpayer if not previously recorded with the county clerk and recorder. The Director may release said lien as to any part or all of the property or rights to property covered by such lien upon such terms as he or she may deem proper. 
(f)  Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the county clerk and recorder as herein provided, upon payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, shall be released by the Director in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. 
(Prior code 4-69; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-880. - Compromise. 
(a)  Compromise limitation. After an assessment has become final because the taxpayer has waived his or her right to a hearing or because the hearing officer has issued his or her final decision, the Director may compromise to the extent of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) any collection proceeding arising under this code. 
(b)  Compromise record. Whenever a compromise, in value or valuation, of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less is made by the Director in any case, there shall be placed on file in the office of the Director the opinion of the Director with his or her reasons therefor, which may include financial inability of the taxpayer to pay a greater amount, with a statement of: 
(1)  The amount of tax assessed; 
(2)  The amount of interest, additional amount, additional to the tax or assessable penalty, imposed by law on the person, vendor or taxpayer against whom the tax is assessed; and 
(3)  The amount paid in accordance with the terms of the compromise. 
(Prior code 4-70; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-890. - Evasion or avoidance of tax. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this Article for any retailer, vendor, consumer, purchaser or any other person subject to the tax levied by this Article to refuse to make any return provided to be made by this Article; to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statements in any return; to fail or refuse to make payment to the Director of any taxes collected or due the Town; in any manner to evade the collection and payment of the tax or any part thereof imposed by this Article; or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay such tax, evade the payment thereof or aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed by making a false return or a return containing a false statement. Such person shall be subject to prosecution and the imposition of penalties as provided by law. Any person in violation of any Section of this Article shall be subject to these same penalties. 
(b)  Separate violations. Each and every twenty-four-hour continuation of any violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(c)  Personal liability. Any taxpayer, or person who executes any form or report required by this Article to be submitted to the Town, shall be personally responsible for the payment of any taxes required under this Article. 
(d)  Summons to court for violations of code. The Town Manager or his or her duly authorized agents, including personnel of the Department of Finance, have the authority of peace officers, as that term is defined under the Colorado Municipal Court Rules, to summon into Municipal Court any person who may be in violation of this Article as set forth under Subsection (a) above. 
(Prior code 4-71; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-3-900. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the Article. Any violation of this Article shall be punishable under the penalty provisions of this Code. 
(Prior code 4-72; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE IV - Unclaimed Property 

Sec. 4-4-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property in the possession of or under the control of the Town. 
(Prior code 4-91; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-4-20. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms contained in this Article shall be defined as follows: 
    Owner means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than this Town, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of the same, which owns unclaimed property held by the Town. 
    Unclaimed property means any tangible or intangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges, that is held by or under the control of the Town and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than five (5) years after it became payable or distributable. 
(Prior code 4-92; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-4-30. - Administrative control. 
    Administration of the provisions of this Article shall be under the direction of the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 4-93; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-4-40. - Procedure for disposition of property. 
(a)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the Town Manager shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the Town department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the Town Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the Town and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(b)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or having no last known address of the owner, the Town Manager shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the Town Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within sixty (60) days of the date of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the Town and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(c)  If the Town Manager receives no written claim within the above sixty (60) day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the Town and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(d)  If the Town Manager receives a written claim within the sixty (60) day claim period, the Town Manager shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within ninety (90) days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The Town Manager may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
(e)  In the event that there is more than one (1) claimant for the same property, the Town Manager may, in the Town Manager's sole discretion, resolve said claims, or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the District Court in an interpleader action. 
(f)  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the Town and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(g)  The Town Manager is authorized to establish and administer procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property consistent with this Article, including compliance requirements for other Town officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property. 
(Prior code 4-94; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE V - Purchasing Procedures 
Division 1 - General 

Sec. 4-5-10. - Duties and authority of purchasing agent. 
(a)  The department head for each Town department shall serve as the "Purchasing Agent" for the Town as to his or her department's purchases pursuant to this Article and shall be responsible for oversight and administration of the procurement of all materials, professional services, services, capital purchases and construction for the Town which are governed by the terms of this Article. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this Article, the Purchasing Agent may establish purchasing procedures consistent with this Article upon the written approval of the Town Manager. 
(Prior code 4-101; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-5-20. - Applicability. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any Town officer or employee to order a procurement contrary to the provisions of this Article. Any procurement or contract so made shall be void and wholly without effect and shall not be binding upon the Town in any manner. The Town may undertake any contract not subject to this Article upon such terms as are deemed reasonable and necessary. 
(Prior code 4-102; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-5-30. - Exemptions to use of competitive bidding. 
    The following transactions shall be exempt from competitive bidding: 
(1)  Minor purchases. 
a.  The Purchasing Agent shall have the power to negotiate without formal competition for the purchase of any materials, services, capital purchases or construction not exceeding a cost of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00). 
b.  Minor purchases shall be made in the discretion of the Purchasing Agent, so long as such purchases are deemed reasonable, prudent and necessary. 
(2)  Emergency purchases. In the case of an apparent emergency requiring immediate capital purchases or the immediate purchase of materials, services or construction, the Town Manager shall have the power to authorize the Purchasing Agent to secure necessary items in the open market regardless of the amount of the expenditure. In the case of an emergency purchase, the contract price shall not exceed commercially reasonable prices. A full written report of the circumstances of all emergency purchases over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be made by the Town Manager to the Town Board within thirty (30) days of each emergency purchase. The report shall be received by the Town Board in an open meeting and shall be open to public inspection. 
(3)  Construction change orders. One (1) or more change orders to an existing construction contract may be executed without competition unless the cumulative amount of such change orders exceeds the greater of: fifteen percent (15%) of the contract amount or thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00). Any construction change order that authorizes a new improvement under an active construction contract may be executed without competition when: 
a.  The new improvement is required for the completion of an improvement that is currently under construction pursuant to a competitive bidding or competitive proposal process; 
b.  The new improvement results from the discovery of differing or unforeseen physical conditions at the site of the improvement under construction and is required for the completion of the improvement under construction; and 
c.  An administrative finding has been made by the Purchasing Agent that it would be in the Town's best interest to negotiate with the on-site contractor for the construction of the new improvement. 
A full written report of the circumstances of all change orders shall be made by the Town Manager to the Town Board within thirty (30) days of each change order. The report shall be received by the Town Board in an open meeting and shall be open to public inspection. 
(4)  Miscellaneous exemptions. 
a.  A contract for materials, services, capital purchases or construction may be awarded without competition after the Purchasing Agent first submits a justification statement to the Town Manager, who shall approve the procurement upon a determination that one (1) or more of the following conditions exists: 
1.  There exists only one (1) responsible source; 
2.  Although there exists more than one (1) responsible source, a competitive process cannot reasonably be used or, if used, will result in a substantially higher cost to the Town, will otherwise injure the Town's financial interests or will substantially impede the Town's administrative functions or the delivery of services to the public; 
3.  A particular material or service is required to maintain interchangeability or compatibility as a part of an existing integrated system; 
4.  A particular material, service, capital purchase or construction is required in order to standardize or maintain standardization for the purpose of reducing financial investment or simplifying administration; 
5.  The material is perishable; 
6.  A particular material is required to match materials in use, so as to produce visual harmony; 
7.  A particular material is required to enable use by a specific individual; 
8.  A particular material is prescribed by a professional advisor; 
9.  The material, service, capital purchase or construction is subject to a change order; 
10.  A party to any intergovernmental agreement to which the Town is a signatory specifies the materials, services, capital purchases or construction. 
b.  A contract for professional services shall not be subject to this Article and may be entered into by the Town upon such terms as may be necessary. 
(Prior code 4-103; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Division 2 - Procedures 

Sec. 4-5-110. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Procurements accomplished pursuant to this Article shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder after competitive sealed bidding. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. Public notice shall be given and shall include the bid title, place, and date and time of bid opening. 
(b)  All bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information as the Purchasing Agent deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded. Thereafter, the record of bids and each bid shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Purchasing Agent in the same manner as are other public records. In the event of good cause as determined by the Purchasing Agent, bid openings may be postponed. 
(c)  Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this Article. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria and/or processes for determining acceptability, such as inspection, provision of sample materials, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. The invitation for bids shall set forth all evaluation criteria to be used. 
(Prior code 4-121; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-5-120. - Correction or withdrawal of bids. 
(a)  Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be authorized when deemed appropriate by the Purchasing Agent. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be corrected or withdrawn in writing by the bidder prior to the time established for opening of bids. 
(b)  After bid opening, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  A low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted by the Purchasing Agent to correct his or her bid if the mistake is evident on the face of the bid document and the intended correct bid is similarly evident. 
(2)  A low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted by the Purchasing Agent to withdraw his or her bid: (1) if the mistake is evident on the face of the bid but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or (2) if the mistake is not evident on the face of the bid but the bidder submits evidence to the Purchasing Agent that clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made, in which case the bidder must show the nature of the mistake and the bid price actually intended. 
(c)  No changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interests of the Town or fair competition shall be permitted. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes will be supported by a written determination made by the Purchasing Agent. 
(Prior code 4-122; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-5-130. - Acceptance and rejection of bids. 
(a)  The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. If the lowest responsive and responsible bid exceeds budgeted funds, and either time constraints or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, the Purchasing Agent is authorized to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the lowest responsive and responsible bidder or to modify the scope of the work, so as to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. 
(b)  In addition to the authority for rejection found elsewhere in this Article, the Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to reject all bids or proposals or any portions thereof when the interests of the Town and the public will be served thereby. All such decisions will be supported by a written determination made by the Purchasing Agent. 
(Prior code 4-123; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 4-5-140. - Qualifications of bidders. 
(a)  In determining whether a bidder is acceptable for a contract award, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder or offeror to perform the contract or provide the services required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder or offeror can perform the contract or provide the service promptly and within the time specified without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder or offeror; 
(4)  The quality of the bidder's or offeror's performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder or offeror with the laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder or offeror to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the materials and services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder or offeror to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and 
(9)  Any other circumstances which will affect the bidder's or offeror's performance of the contract. 
(b)  The Purchasing Agent is authorized to establish rules and procedures for the prequalification of bidders upon such terms as may permit fair consideration of bids received under this Article. 
(c)  No Town contract shall be awarded to any bidder who is in default of the performance of any other contract with the Town or in the payment of any taxes, licenses or other monies due the Town. The Purchasing Agent may refuse to award a Town contract to any bidder who is in default of performance of any contract or who is in default on any taxes, licenses or other monies due to any person or entity. 
(Prior code 4-124; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VI - Sales Tax and Use Tax Credits, Rebates and Waivers 
(Business Assistance Agreement 
Dated March 27, 2017) 

Sec. 4-6-10. - Definitions. 
    When used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below: 
    Agreement. That certain Business Assistance Agreement dated March 27, 2017, between and among the Town of Windsor, Eagle Crossing Windsor, LLC, and Eagle Crossing Development, Inc. 
    Anchor grocer. A Retailer meeting the definition of Anchor Grocer under the terms of the Agreement. 
    Anchor retailer. Any Retailer meeting the definition of Anchor Retailer as set forth in the Agreement. 
    Developer. Eagle Crossing Windsor, LLC, or Eagle Crossing Development, Inc., or both. 
    Eligible sales tax. The revenue derived from the Town's sales tax rate, less any portion previously set aside for construction and expansion of the Windsor Community Recreation Center under Section 4-2-20 (2) and 4-2-20 (9) of this Code. 
    Eligible use tax. The revenue derived from the Town's use tax rate, less any portion previously set aside for construction and expansion of the Windsor Community Recreation Center under Section 4-2-20 (2) and 4-2-20 (9) of this Code. 
    Junior anchor retailer. Any Retailer meeting the definition of Junior Anchor Retailer as set forth in the Agreement. 
    Other retailer. Any Retailer doing business within The Brands East, but not meeting the definition of Anchor Retailer or Junior Anchor Retailer. 
    Retailer. Any sales tax licensee doing business at an address located within The Brands East. 
    The Brands East. That certain land area identified in Exhibit B to the Agreement, and referred to in the Agreement as the "Site". 
(Ord. 2017-1534  1) 
Sec. 4-6-20. - Sales tax rebate authorized. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the imposition of sales tax and requirements for collection, remittance and administration thereof under Article III of this Chapter, the Eligible Sales Tax remitted to the Town by each Anchor Retailer shall be subject to rebate as provided in and as limited by Section 6.1 of the Agreement. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the imposition of sales tax and requirements for collection, remittance and administration thereof under Article III of this Chapter, the Eligible Sales Tax remitted to the Town by each Junior Anchor Retailer shall be subject to rebate as provided in and as limited by Section 6.2 of the Agreement. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the imposition of sales tax and requirements for collection, remittance and administration thereof under Article III of this Chapter, the Eligible Sales Tax remitted to the Town by each Other Retailer shall be subject to rebate as provided in and as limited by Section 6.3 of the Agreement. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize a rebate of Eligible Sales Tax to any Retailer who becomes ineligible under Section 6.7 of the Agreement. 
(e)  The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to develop such rules and policies as are necessary to administer the rebate of Eligible Sales Tax collection as provided herein, and shall be specifically authorized to assess a reasonable fee to defray the actual costs of administration of the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. 2017-1534  1) 
Sec. 4-6-30. - Eligible use tax credit authorized. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the imposition of use tax and requirements for collection, remittance and administration thereof under Article III of this Chapter, each Anchor Retailer and Junior Anchor Retailer shall be granted a credit against Eligible Use Tax assessments as provided in and as limited by Section 5 (and all applicable sub-sections thereof) of the Agreement. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize a credit for Eligible Use Tax for any Redevelopment (as that term is defined in the Agreement) under Section 7.2 of the Agreement. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize a credit for Eligible Use Tax for any development subject to exclusions as provided in Section 7 of the Agreement, except as provided in sub-section 7.5. 
(d)  The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to develop such rules and policies as are necessary to administer the credit for Eligible Use Tax collection as provided herein, and shall be specifically authorized to assess a reasonable fee to defray the actual costs of administration of the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. 2017-1534  1) 
Sec. 4-6-40. - Waiver of eligible sales tax. 
    For so long as an Eligible Sales Tax rebate is authorized under Section 4-6-20 of this Code: 
(a)  Each Anchor Retailer who assesses, collects and remits a fee imposed as a Credit PIF pursuant to Section 6.5 of the Agreement shall not be required to collect and remit Eligible Sales Tax to the extent such Anchor Retailer has in fact assessed, collected and remitted the revenue derived from the Credit PIF in accordance with the requirements of the Developer. 
(b)  Each Junior Anchor Retailer who assesses, collects and remits a fee imposed as a Credit PIF pursuant to Section 6.5 of the Agreement shall not be required to collect and remit Eligible Sales Tax to the extent such Anchor Retailer has in fact assessed, collected and remitted the revenue derived from the Credit PIF in accordance with the requirements of the Developer. 
(c)  Each Other Retailer who assesses, collects and remits a fee imposed as a Credit PIF pursuant to Section 6.5 of the Agreement shall not be required to collect and remit Eligible Sales Tax to the extent such Anchor Retailer has in fact assessed, collected and remitted the revenue derived from the Credit PIF in accordance with the requirements of the Developer. 
(d)  With respect to an Anchor Grocer only, any Developer waiver of Credit PIF imposition or collection applicable to such Anchor Retailer shall not affect the Eligible Sales Tax credit otherwise authorized under this Section, but only to the extent of such Developer waiver. 
(e)  Except as to the waiver of Eligible Sales Tax collection set forth in this Section, each Anchor Retailer, Junior Anchor Retailer and Other Retailer shall collect and remit Town sales tax as otherwise required in this Chapter. 
(f)  The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to develop such rules and policies as are necessary to administer the waiver of Eligible Use Tax collection as provided herein, and shall be specifically authorized to assess a reasonable fee to defray the actual costs of administration of the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. 2017-1534  1) 
Sec. 4-6-60. - Credit against eligible use tax. 
(a)  Each Anchor Retailer and Junior Anchor Retailer shall be excused from payment of Eligible Use Tax to the extent of any credit against Town Use Tax (as that term is defined in the Agreement) as provided in Section 5 of the Agreement, and as further specified in the sub-sections to Section 5 of the Agreement. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be construed to excuse payment for Eligible Use Tax for any Redevelopment (as that term is defined in the Agreement) under Section 7.2 of the Agreement. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed to excuse payment for Eligible Use Tax for any development subject to exclusions as provided in Section 7 of the Agreement, except as provided in sub-section 7.5. 
(d)  The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to develop such rules and policies as are necessary to administer the credits against Eligible Use Tax collection as provided herein, and shall be specifically authorized to assess a reasonable fee to defray the actual costs of administration of the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. 2017-1534  1) 
Sec. 4-6-70. - Rebates, credits and waivers revocable. 
(a)  No rebate, credit or waiver of Town sales and use tax collections as provided in this Article shall be deemed irrevocable. Nothing in the Agreement or this Article shall be construed to limit the legislative discretion and authority of the Windsor Town Board to in the future revoke, modify or amend the rebates, credits and waivers set forth in the Agreement or this Article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the rebates, credits and waivers set forth in this Article, no imposition of the requirements of Article III of this Chapter upon Retailers shall be deemed a new tax, a tax rate increase, an extension of an expiring tax or a tax policy change, it being the Town's intention that each and every credit, rebate and waiver set forth in this Article and in the Agreement shall not be permanent. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the rebates, credits and waivers set forth in this Article, no re-imposition upon any Retailer of any tax subject to rebate, credit or waiver which expires or lapses as provided in the Agreement shall be deemed a new tax, a tax rate increase, an extension of an expiring tax or a tax policy change, it being the Town's intention that each and every credit, rebate and waiver set forth in this Article and in the Agreement shall not be permanent. 
(Ord. 2017-1534  1) 
Sec. 4-6-80. - Repeal or amendment by ordinance only. 
    Any repeal, modification or official action affecting the rebates, credits and waivers set forth in this Article shall only be taken by ordinance in accordance with the requirements of the Windsor Home Rule Charter. 
(Ord. 2017-1534  1) 
CHAPTER 5 - Franchises and Communication Systems 
ARTICLE I - Cable Television System 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 5-1-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number: 
    Access means the availability for noncommercial use by various governmental and educational agencies, institutions, organizations and other groups and individuals in the community, including the Town and its designees, of particular channels on the cable system to distribute programming to subscribers, as permitted under applicable law. 
a.  Educational access means access where schools are the primary users having editorial control over programming and services. 
b.  Government access means access where governmental institutions or their designees are the primary users having editorial control over programming and services. 
c.  PEG means Public, Educational and Governmental access. 
    Basic cable means the lowest-priced tier of cable service that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals and access programming. 
    Cable Act means Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
    Cable service means: (1) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (a) video programming, or (b) other programming service; and (2) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable system means the Grantee's facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the service area. 
    Dwelling unit means any building, or portion thereof, that has independent living facilities, including provisions for cooking, sanitation and sleeping, and that is designed for residential occupancy. Buildings with more than one (1) set of facilities for cooking shall be considered multiple dwelling units unless the additional facilities are clearly accessory. 
    FCC means Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto. 
    GAAP means generally accepted accounting principles. 
    Grantee means Comcast of Colorado IV, LLC, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
    Gross revenues means any and all revenue received by the Grantee as determined in accordance with GAAP from the operation of the Grantee's cable system to provide cable services in the service area. Gross revenues include, by way of illustration and not limitation, monthly fees charged subscribers for basic service; any expanded tiers of cable service; optional premium services; installation, disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees; leased access channel fees; remote control rental fees; all cable service lease payments from the cable system ; late fees and administrative fees; fees, payments or other consideration received by the Grantee from programmers for carriage of programming on the cable system and accounted for as revenue under GAAP; revenues from rentals or sales of converters or other cable system equipment used to receive cable service; net advertising revenues; the fair market value of consideration received by the Grantee for use of the cable system to provide cable service and accounted for as revenue under GAAP;revenues from program guides; additional outlet fees; agreement fees; revenue from the sale or carriage of other cable services on the cable system; and revenue from home shopping, bank-at-home channels and other revenue-sharing arrangements. Gross revenues shall include revenue received by any entity other than the Grantee where necessary to prevent evasion or avoidance of the obligation under this agreement to pay the agreement fees. Gross revenues shall not include (i) to the extent consistent with GAAP, bad debt; provided, however, that all or part of any such bad debt that is written off but subsequently collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period collected; or (ii) any taxes on services furnished by the Grantee which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the State, County, Town or other governmental unit and which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of said governmental unit. The agreement fee is not such a tax. 
    Headend means any facility for signal reception and dissemination on a cable system, including cables, antennas, wires, satellite dishes, monitors, switchers, modulators and processors for broadcast signals. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
    Residential subscriber means any person who receives cable service delivered to dwelling units or multiple dwelling units, excluding such multiple dwelling units billed on a bulk-billing basis. 
    Right-of-way means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and/or maintained under public authority or by others and located within the Town: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas. 
    Service area means the area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Town. 
    Standard installation is defined as one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the nearest cable tap to the subscriber's terminal. 
    Subscriber means a person who lawfully receives cable service of the cable system with the Grantee's express permission. 
    Town means the Town of Windsor, Colorado, and all of the area within its boundaries. 
    Town Board means the Town Board of the Town of Windsor, or its successor, the governing body of the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 1.1) 
Sec. 5-1-15. - Grant of franchise agreement. 
    Pursuant to Article XIII of the Town of Windsor Home Rule Charter, the Town hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive agreement which authorizes the Grantee to construct and operate a cable system to provide cable services in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under or in any manner connected with right-of-way within the service area, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across or along any right-of-way such facilities and equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 2.1) 
Sec. 5-1-20. - Other ordinances. 
    The Grantee agrees to comply with the terms of any lawfully adopted generally applicable local ordinance concerning the construction or relocation of utility facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town may not unilaterally alter the material rights and obligations of the Grantee under this agreement. The Grantee reserves the right to challenge the provisions of any ordinance which conflict with its contractual rights, either now or in the future. The Grantee agrees that it is subject to the lawful exercise of the police power of the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 2.2; Ord. 2006-1245) 
Sec. 5-1-25. - Equal protection. 
    The Town shall not authorize or permit any person to enter into the Town's right-of-way for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the service area on terms or conditions which are more favorable or less burdensome to such person than those applied to the Grantee pursuant to this agreement, in order that one (1) operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 2.3) 
Sec. 5-1-30. - Term. 
    The agreement granted hereunder shall be for a term of fifteen (15) years, commencing on the effective date of the agreement as set forth in Section 5-1-855 of this Article, unless otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this agreement. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 2.4) 
Sec. 5-1-35. - Effect of acceptance. 
    By accepting the agreement, the Grantee: 
(1)  Acknowledges and accepts the Town's legal right as existed on the effective date of this agreement to issue and enforce the agreement; 
(2)  Accepts and agrees to comply with each and every provision of this agreement subject to applicable law; and 
(3)  Agrees that the agreement was granted pursuant to processes and procedures consistent with applicable law as existed as of the effective date of this agreement, and that it will not raise any claim to the contrary. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 2.5) 
Division 2 - Standards of Service 

Sec. 5-1-110. - Conditions of occupancy. 
    The cable system installed by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause no interference with the proper use of the right-of-way and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any such right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.1) 
Sec. 5-1-115. - Work in and restoration of right-of-way. 
    All work in the right-of-way, including restoration thereof, shall be undertaken pursuant to Town regulations or any replacement regulations thereto, provided that any such amendment or replacement regulation shall be reasonable and consistent with the Town's lawful police powers. The Grantee reserves the right to challenge the provisions of any such regulation that it believes is inconsistent with applicable law or its contractual rights under this agreement either now or in the future. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.2) 
Sec. 5-1-120. - Cable system facilities location. 
(a)  Underground cable drops installed by the Grantee to residences shall be buried according to generally applicable codes within one (1) calendar month of initial installation, or at a time mutually agreed upon between the Grantee and the subscriber. When freezing surface conditions or other weather conditions prevent the Grantee from achieving such timetable, the Grantee shall apprise the subscriber of the circumstances and the revised schedule for burial, and shall provide the subscriber with the Grantee's telephone number and instructions as to how and when to call the Grantee to request burial of the line if the revised schedule is not met. 
(b)  When required by general ordinances, resolutions, regulations or rules of the Town or applicable state or federal law, the Grantee's cable system shall be placed underground. Placing facilities underground does not preclude the use of ground-mounted appurtenances. 
(c)  Where electric, telephone and other above-ground utilities are installed underground at the time of cable system construction or upgrade , or when all such wiring is subsequently placed underground, all cable system lines shall also be placed underground with other wireline service at no expense to the Town or subscribers unless otherwise required by applicable law, including Section 29-8-101 et seq., C.R.S. Related cable system equipment, such as pedestals, must be placed in accordance with the Town's applicable code requirements and rules. In areas where either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, the Grantee may install aerial cable, except when a property owner or resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional cost in excess of aerial installation. 
(d)  The Grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduit wherever possible. 
(e)  In the event the Grantee cannot obtain the necessary poles and related facilities pursuant to a pole attachment agreement , and only in such event, then it shall be lawful for the Grantee to make all needed excavations in the right-of-way for the purpose of placing, erecting , laying, maintaining, repairing and removing poles, supports for wires and conductors, and any other facility needed for the maintenance or extension of the Grantee's cable system. All poles of the Grantee shall be located as reasonably designated by the proper Town authorities. 
(f)  This franchise does not grant, give or convey to the Grantee the right or privilege to install its facilities in any manner on specific utility poles or equipment of the Town or any other person. Copies of agreements for the use of poles , conduits or other utility facilities must be provided upon written request by the Town. 
(g)  The Grantee and the Town recognize that situations may occur in the future where the Town may desire to place its own cable or conduit for fiber optic cable in trenches or bores opened by the Grantee. The Grantee agrees to cooperate with the Town in any construction by the Grantee that involves trenching or boring , provided that the Town has first provided reasonable notice to the Grantee in some manner that it is interested in sharing the trenches or bores in the area where the Grantee's construction is occurring. The Grantee shall allow the Town to lay its cable, conduit and fiber optic cable in the Grantee's trenches and bores, provided that the Townshares in the cost of the trenching and boring on the same terms and conditions as the Town at that time shares the total cost of trenches and bores. The Town shall be responsible for maintaining its respective cable, conduit and fiber optic cable buried in the Grantee's trenches and bores under this Subsection. 
(h)  Nothing herein shall be construed as to waive any rights the Grantee may lawfully have for reimbursement of costs related to underground construction. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.3) 
Sec. 5-1-125. - Movement at request of Town. 
(a)  The Town shall have the right to require the Grantee to relocate, remove, replace, modify or disconnect the Grantee's facilities and equipment located in the right-of-way or on any other property of the Town in the event of an emergency or when reasonable public convenience requires such change (for example, without limitation, by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, right-of-way vacation, right-of-way construction, change or establishment of right-of-way grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other types of structures or improvements by the Town for public purposes). Unless otherwise provided by state or federal law, such work shall be performed at the Grantee's expense. Except during an emergency, the Town shall provide reasonable notice to the Grantee, not to be less than five (5) business days, and allow the Grantee the opportunity to perform such action. In the event of any capital improvement project exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in expenditures by the Town that requires the removal, replacement, modification or disconnection of the Grantee's facilities or equipment, the Town shall provide at least sixty (60) days' written notice to the Grantee. Following notice by the Town, the Grantee shall relocate, remove, replace, modify or disconnect any of its facilities or equipment within any right-of-way, or on any other property of the Town. If the Town requires the Grantee to relocate its facilities located within the right-of-way, the Town shall make a reasonable effort to provide the Grantee with an alternate location within the right-of-way. If funds are generally made available to users of the right-of-way for such relocation, the Grantee shall be entitled to its pro rata share of such funds. 
(b)  If the Grantee fails to complete this work within the time prescribed and to the Town's reasonable satisfaction, upon providing the Grantee at least ten (10) business days' notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, the Town may cause such work to be done and bill the reasonable cost of the work to the Grantee, including all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the Town due to the Grantee's delay. In such event, the Town shall not be liable for any damage to any portion of the Grantee's cable system unless the Town acted in a negligent manner. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of an itemized list of those costs, the Grantee shall pay the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.4) 
Sec. 5-1-130. - Movement at request of third party. 
    The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Town, temporarily raise or lower its cable system to permit the moving of such building, provided that: 
(1)  The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of the cable system is paid by said person, including, if required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance; and 
(2)  The Grantee is given not less than ten (10) business days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.5) 
Sec. 5-1-135. - Movement of cable system facilities for other franchise holders. 
    If any removal, replacement, modification or disconnection of the cable system is required to accommodate the construction, operation or repair of the facilities or equipment of another Town agreement holder, the Grantee shall, after at least thirty (30) days' advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested by the responsible entity. The Grantee may require that the costs associated with the removal or relocation be paid in advance by the benefited party at no cost to the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.6) 
Sec. 5-1-140. - Discontinuing use/ abandonment of cable system facilities. 
    Whenever the Grantee intends to discontinue using any facility within the right-of-way, the Grantee shall submit to the Town a complete description of the facility and the date on which the Grantee intends to discontinue using the facility. The Grantee may remove the facility or request that the Town permit it to remain in place. Notwithstanding the Grantee's request that any such facility remain in place, the Town may require Grantee to remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility to protect the public health, welfare, safety and convenience, or otherwise serve the public interest. The Town may require the Grantee to perform a reasonable combination of modification and removal of the facility. The Grantee shall complete such removal or modification in accordance with a reasonable schedule set by the Town. Until such time as the Grantee removes or modifies the facility as reasonably directed by the Town, or until the rights to and responsibility for the facility are accepted by another person having authority to construct and maintain such facility, the Grantee shall retain all liability for such facility and be responsible for all necessary repairs and relocations of the facility, as well as maintenance of the right-of-way, in the same manner and degree as if the facility were in active use. If the Grantee abandons its facilities, the Town may choose to use such facilities for any purpose whatsoever, including but not limited to access purposes. If the Town chooses to utilize any such abandoned facilities, the Grantee's liability for those facilities shall cease. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.7) 
Sec. 5-1-145. - Trimming of trees and shrubbery. 
    The Grantee may prune or cause to be pruned, using proper pruning practices, any tree in the Town's right-of-way which interferes with the Grantee's cable system. The Grantee shall comply with any general ordinance or regulations of the Town regarding tree trimming. Except in emergencies, the Grantee may not prune trees at a point below thirty (30) feet above sidewalk grade until one (1) week's written notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises abutting the right-of-way in or over which the tree is growing. The owner or occupant of the abutting premises may prune such tree at his or her own expense during this one-week period. If the owner or occupant fails to do so, the Grantee may prune such tree at its own expense. For purposes of this Section, emergencies exist when it is necessary to prune to protect the public or the Grantee's facilities from imminent danger only. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.8) 
Sec. 5-1-150. - Safety requirements. 
    Construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with generally applicable federal, state and local regulations and the National Electric Safety Code. The cable system shall not endanger or unreasonably interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.9) 
Sec. 5-1-155. - Access to open trenches in new developments. 
    The Town agrees to require in new developments as a condition of issuing permits to any utility or developer that: 
(1)  The utility or developer give the Grantee at least sixty (60) days' advance written notice of the beginning of project construction; 
(2)  The utility or developer give the Grantee ten (10) days' advance written notice of the availability of any open trenches; and 
(3)  The utility or developer provide the Grantee with reasonable access to the open trench. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.11; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-1-160. - Required extensions of cable system. 
    Whenever the Grantee receives a request for cable service from a subscriber in a contiguous unserved area where there are at least ten (10) residences within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable-bearing strand feet (one-quarter [1/4] cable mile) from the portion of the Grantee's trunk or distribution cable which is to be extended, the Grantee shall then extend its cable system to such subscriber at no cost to said subscriber for the cable system extension, other than the published standard/nonstandard installation fees charged to all subscribers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall have the right, but not the obligation, to extend the cable system into any annexed area that is not contiguous to the present service area of the Grantee. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.12) 
Sec. 5-1-165. - Subscriber charges for extensions of cable system. 
    No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily; however, if an area does not meet the density requirements of Section 5-1-160 above, the Grantee shall only be required to extend the cable system to subscribers in that area if the subscribers are willing to share the capital costs of extending the cable system. Specifically, the Grantee shall contribute a capital amount equal to the construction cost per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of residences per one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable-bearing strand feet from the Grantee's trunk or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals ten (10). Subscribers who request service hereunder shall bear the remaining cost to extend the cable system on a pro rata basis. The Grantee may require that payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance. Subscribers shall also be responsible for any standard/nonstandard installation charges to extend the cable system from the tap to the residence. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.13) 
Sec. 5-1-170. - Cable service to public buildings. 
    The Grantee, upon request, shall provide without charge a standard installation and one (1) outlet of basic cable to the Town administrative office, fire stations, police stations and state-accredited K-12 public and private schools that are passed by its cable system in the service area. The cable service provided shall not be distributed beyond the originally installed outlet without authorization from the Grantee. Such outlets may only be used for lawful purposes, shall not be located in public waiting areas and shall not be used to entertain public groups for commercial purposes. The Town shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the Grantee's cable system in any manner that results in the inappropriate use thereof or any loss or damage to the cable system. The Town shall hold the Grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of the provision and use of cable service required by this Section. The Grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where a nonstandard installation is required, unless the Town or the building owner/occupant agrees to pay the incremental cost of any necessary cable system extension and/or nonstandard installation. If additional outlets of basic cable are provided to such buildings, the building owner/occupant shall pay the usual installation and service fees associated therewith. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.14) 
Sec. 5-1-175. - Emergency use. 
    The Grantee shall provide to the Town an operating Emergency Alert System ("EAS") in accordance with and as required by the provisions of FCC Regulation Part II, and as such provision may from time to time be amended. The Grantee shall test the EAS as required by the FCC. Upon request, the Town shall be permitted to participate in and/or witness the EAS testing. If the test indicates that the EAS is not performing consistent with FCC requirements, the Grantee shall make any necessary adjustment to the EAS and the EAS shall be retested. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.15) 
Sec. 5-1-180. - Right-of-way meetings. 
    Subject to receiving reasonable advance notice, the Grantee will regularly attend and participate in meetings of the Town regarding right-of-way issues that may impact the cable system. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.16) 
Sec. 5-1-185. - Joint trenching/boring. 
    Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to joint trench or share bores or cuts, the Grantee shall work with other providers, permitees, and franchisees so as to reduce so far as possible the number of right-of-way cuts within the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.17) 
Sec. 5-1-190. - Emergency permits. 
    In the event that emergency repairs are necessary, the Grantee shall immediately notify the Town of the need for such repairs. The Grantee may initiate such emergency repairs, and shall apply for appropriate permits within forty-eight (48) hours after discovery of the emergency. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.18) 
Sec. 5-1-195. - Compliance with applicable codes. 
(a)  Town Construction Codes. The Grantee shall comply with all applicable Town construction codes, including without limitation the International Building Code, the International Fire Code, the Uniform Mechanical Code and zoning codes and regulations. 
(b)  Safety Codes. The Grantee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and Town safety requirements, rules, regulations, laws and practices, and employ all necessary devices as required by applicable law during construction, operation and repair of its cable system. By way of illustration and not limitation, the Grantee shall comply with the National Electrical Code, National Electrical Safety Code and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Standards. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.19) 
Sec. 5-1-200. - Locates. 
    Prior to doing any work in the right-of-way, the Grantee shall give appropriate notices to the Town and to the notification association established in Section 9-1.5-105, C.R.S. If a permit is required, notice to the Town shall be considered given when the permit application is made. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.20; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-1-215. - Undergrounding of multiple dwelling unit drops. 
    In cases of single site multiple-dwelling units, the Grantee shall minimize the number of individual aerial drop cables by installing multiple drop cables underground between the pole and the multiple dwelling units where determined to be technologically feasible, in agreement with the owners and/or owners' association of the multiple dwelling units. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.21) 
Sec. 5-1-220. - Burial standards. 
(a)  Depths. Subject to the National Electrical Code standards, for any construction on and after the effective date, unless otherwise required by law, the Grantee shall comply with the following burial depth standards. In no event shall the Grantee be required to bury its cable deeper than electric or gas facilities in the same portion of the right-of-way: 
(1)  Underground cable drops from the curb shall be buried at a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches, unless a sprinkler system or other construction concerns preclude it, in which case, underground cable drops shall be buried at a depth of at least six (6) inches. 
(2)  Feeder and trunk lines shall be buried at a minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches. 
(3)  Fiber optic cable shall be buried at a minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches. 
(b)  Timeliness. Cable drops installed by the Grantee to residences shall be buried according to these standards within thirty (30) days of initial installation, or at a time mutually agreed upon between the Grantee and the subscriber. When freezing surface conditions or other weather conditions prevent the Grantee from achieving such timetable, the Grantee shall apprise the subscriber of the circumstances and the revised schedule for burial, and shall provide the subscriber with the Grantee's telephone number and instructions as to how and when to call the Grantee to request burial of the line if the revised schedule is not met. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.22) 
Sec. 5-1-225. - Prewiring. 
    Any ordinance or resolution of the Town which requires prewiring of subdivisions or other developments for electrical and telephone service shall be construed to include wiring for cable systems. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.23) 
Sec. 5-1-230. - Inspection of construction and facilities. 
    The Town may inspect any of the Grantee's facilities, equipment or construction at any time upon at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice. If an unsafe condition is found to exist, the Town, in addition to taking any other action permitted under applicable law, may order the Grantee, in writing, to make the necessary repairs and alterations specified therein forthwith to correct the unsafe condition by a time reasonably established by the Town. The Town has the right to correct, inspect, administer and repair the unsafe condition and reasonably charge the Grantee therefor if the Grantee fails to do so after having received reasonable notice and having an opportunity to correct the unsafe condition. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.24) 
Sec. 5-1-235. - Stop work. 
(a)  On notice from the Town that any work is being performed contrary to the provisions of this agreement, in an unsafe or dangerous manner as reasonably determined by the Town, or in violation of the terms of any applicable permit, laws, regulations, ordinances or standards, the work may immediately be stopped by the Town. 
(b)  The stop work order shall be given in full compliance with requirements of any building codes, laws, ordinances or regulations of the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.25) 
Sec. 5-1-240. - Work of contractors and subcontractors. 
    The Grantee's contractors and subcontractors shall be licensed and bonded in accordance with the Town's generally applicable ordinances, regulations and requirements. Work by contractors and subcontractors is subject to the same restrictions, limitations and conditions as if the work were performed by the Grantee. The Grantee shall be responsible for all work performed by its contractors and subcontractors and others performing work on its behalf as if the work were performed by it, shall ensure that all such work is performed in compliance with this agreement and other applicable law, and shall be jointly and severally liable for all damages and correcting all damage caused by them. It is the Grantee's responsibility to ensure that contractors, subcontractors or other persons performing work on the Grantee's behalf are familiar with the requirements of this agreement and other applicable laws governing the work performed by them. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 3.26) 
Division 3 - Regulation by Town 

Sec. 5-1-310. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  As compensation for the benefits and privileges granted under this franchise and in consideration of permission to use the Town's rights-of-way, the Grantee shall pay as a franchise fee to the Town, throughout the duration of this franchise, an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the Grantee's gross revenues. Accrual of such franchise fee shall commence as of the effective date of this franchise. 
(b)  The Town recognizes that the Grantee may allocate revenue between cable services (which are subject to any franchise fee) and noncable services (which are not subject to any franchise fee but may be subject to other fees and/or taxes), when these two (2) types of service are bundled together in a discounted package offered to subscribers. In the event that the Town believes that the Grantee has unlawfully or unfairly allocated revenue between cable services and noncable services for the purpose of calculating any franchise fee payments, the Town and the Grantee shall meet upon advance notice from the Town to discuss the allocation methodology. If the Town and the Grantee cannot agree on the matter within a reasonable period of time, the Town and the Grantee shall submit the matter to a mutually agreeable third party for mediation. The cost of the mediation shall be shared equally between the Town and the Grantee. If the Town and the Grantee are unable to mutually agree on a mediator, then either the Town or the Grantee can bring the matter to a court of competent jurisdiction or pursue any other remedies available to them in this franchise or by law. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.1) 
Sec. 5-1-315. - Payments. 
    In accordance with the Cable Act, the twelve-month period applicable under the franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be a calendar year. The Grantee's franchise fee payments to the Town shall be computed quarterly for the preceding calendar quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than forty-five (45) days after said dates. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.2) 
Sec. 5-1-320. - Acceptance of payment and recomputation. 
    No acceptance of any payment from the Grantee shall be construed as an accord by the Town that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall any acceptance of payments be construed as a release of any claim the Town may have for further or additional sums payable or for the performance of any other obligation of the Grantee. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.3) 
Sec. 5-1-325. - Quarterly franchise fee reports. 
    The Grantee shall quarterly, along with each franchise fee payment, furnish to the Town a statement of the total amount of gross revenues for the quarter and all payments, deductions and computations for the quarter. Such statement shall include the number of basic cable subscribers and be signed by a financial officer, controller or General Manager of the Grantee, stating that it accurately reflects the gross revenues of the Grantee, prior to submission to the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.4) 
Sec. 5-1-330. - Audits. 
    On an annual basis, upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice, the Town, including the Town Auditor or his/her authorized representative, shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the Grantee's records reasonably related to the administration or enforcement of this agreement, in accordance with GAAP. If the audit shows that franchise fee payments have been underpaid by five percent (5%) or more, and such findings are not disputed by the Grantee, the Grantee shall pay the total cost of the audit, such cost not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The Town's right to audit and the Grantee's obligation to retain records related to a franchise fee audit shall expire three (3) years after any franchise fee payment has been made to the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.5) 
Sec. 5-1-335. - Tax liability. 
    Subject to applicable law, any franchise fees shall be in addition to any and all taxes or other levies or assessments which are now or hereafter required to be paid by businesses in general by any law of the Town, the State or the United States, including, without limitation, sales, use and other taxes, business franchise fees or other payments. Payment of any franchise fees under this agreement shall not exempt the Grantee from the payment of any other franchise fee, permit fee, tax or charge on the business, occupation, property or income of the Grantee that may be lawfully imposed by the Town. Any other franchise fees, taxes or charges shall be of general applicability in nature and shall not be levied against the Grantee solely because of its status as a cable operator, or against subscribers solely because of their status as such. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.6) 
Sec. 5-1-340. - Financial records. 
    The Grantee agrees to meet with a representative of the Town upon request to review the Grantee's methodology of record-keeping, the computing of any franchise fee obligations and other procedures, the understanding of which the Town reasonably deems necessary for reviewing reports and records. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.7) 
Sec. 5-1-345. - Payment on termination. 
    If this agreement terminates for any reason and is not renewed, the Grantee shall file with the Town, within ninety (90) calendar days of the date of the termination, a statement, certified by an independent certified public accountant, showing the gross revenues received by the Grantee since the end of the previous year. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.8) 
Sec. 5-1-350. - Rates and charges. 
    The Town may regulate rates for the provision of cable services and equipment as expressly permitted by federal or state law. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.9) 
Sec. 5-1-355. - Filing of rates and charges. 
(a)  Throughout the term of this agreement, the Grantee shall maintain on file with the Town a complete schedule of applicable rates and charges for cable services provided under this agreement. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the Grantee to file rates and charges under temporary reductions or waivers of rates and charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns. As used in this Section, no rate or charge shall be considered temporary if subscribers have the ability over a period greater than six (6) consecutive months (or such other period as may be approved by the Town) to purchase cable services at such rate or charge. 
(b)  Upon written request of the Town, the Grantee shall provide a complete schedule of current rates and charges for leased access channels, or portions of such channels, provided by the Grantee. The schedule shall include a description of the price, terms and conditions established by the Grantee for leased access channels. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.10) 
Sec. 5-1-360. - Renewal of agreement. 
(a)  The Town and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Town that relate to the renewal of the Grantee's agreement shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of federal or state law. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626(a), the Town agrees to notify the Grantee of all of its assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs and interests, as well as the past performance of the Grantee under the then-current agreement term. The Town further agrees that such assessments shall be provided to the Grantee promptly so that the Grantee has adequate time to submit a proposal under Section 626(b) of the Cable Act and complete renewal of the agreement prior to expiration of its term. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Division, the Grantee and the Town agree that, at any time during the term of the then-current agreement, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the Town and the Grantee may agree to undertake and finalize informal negotiations regarding renewal of the then-current agreement, and the Town may grant a renewal thereof. 
(d)  The Grantee and the Town consider the terms set forth in this Division to be consistent with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.11) 
Sec. 5-1-365. - Conditions of sale. 
(a)  If a renewal or extension of the Grantee's agreement is denied or the agreement is lawfully terminated, and the Town either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at the price determined pursuant to the provisions set forth in Section 627 of the Cable Act. 
(b)  The Grantee and the Town agree that, in the case of a final determination of a lawful revocation of the agreement, the Grantee shall be given at least twelve (12) months to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. Furthermore, the Grantee shall be authorized to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior agreement during this period. If, at the end of that time, the Grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system that is reasonably acceptable to the Town, the Grantee and the Town may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law. It is further agreed that the Grantee's continued operation of the cable system during the twelve-month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver or an extinguishment of any rights of either the Town or the Grantee. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.13) 
Sec. 5-1-370. - Transfer of agreement. 
    The Grantee's right, title or interest in the agreement shall not be sold, transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with the Grantee, without the prior consent of the Town, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation or by assignment of any rights, title or interest of the Grantee in the agreement or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a request for transfer, which shall include a completed FCC Form 394 and all required exhibits, the Town shall notify the Grantee in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the Town has not taken action on the Grantee's completed request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, consent by the Town shall be deemed given. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.14) 
Sec. 5-1-375. - Franchise amendment procedure. 
    Either party may at any time seek an amendment of this franchise by so notifying the other party in writing. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice, the Town and the Grantee shall meet to discuss the proposed amendment. If the parties reach a mutual agreement upon the suggested amendment, such amendment shall be submitted to the Town Board for approval. If approved by the Town Board and the Grantee, then such amendment shall be deemed part of this franchise. If mutual agreement is not reached, there shall be no amendment. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.15; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-1-380. - Confidentiality. 
    The Town agrees to treat as confidential any books or records that constitute proprietary or confidential information under federal or state law, to the extent the Grantee makes the Town aware of such confidentiality. The Grantee shall be responsible for clearly and conspicuously marking the word "Confidential" on each page that contains confidential or proprietary information, and shall provide a brief written explanation as to why such information is confidential under state or federal law. If the Town believes it must release any such confidential books and records in the course of enforcing this franchise, or for any other reason, it shall advise the Grantee a minimum of five (5) days in advance so that the Grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. If the Town receives a demand from any person for disclosure of any information designated by the Grantee as confidential, the Town shall, so far as consistent with applicable law and open records policies and procedures adopted by the Town, advise the Grantee and provide the Grantee with a copy of any written request by the party demanding access to such information within a reasonable time. Until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the Town agrees that, to the extent permitted by state and federal law, it shall deny access to any of the Grantee's books and records marked confidential as set forth above to any person. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 4.16) 
Sec. 5-1-385. - Customer service standards. 
    The Grantee shall comply with customer service standards as adopted by the Town and incorporated into this agreement as Appendix 5-A. The Grantee reserves the right to challenge any customer service standard that it believes is inconsistent with applicable law or its contractual rights under this agreement. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 5.1) 
Sec. 5-1-390. - Subscriber privacy. 
    The Grantee shall fully comply with any provisions regarding the privacy rights of subscribers contained in federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 5.2) 
Sec. 5-1-395. - Subscriber contracts. 
    The Grantee shall not enter into a contract with any subscriber that is in conflict with the terms of this agreement or any exhibit hereto, or the requirements of any applicable customer service standard. Upon request, the Grantee will provide to the Town a sample of the subscriber contract or service agreement then in use. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 5.3) 
Sec. 5-1-400. - Advance notice to Town. 
    The Grantee shall use reasonable efforts to furnish any notices provided to subscribers or the media in the normal course of business to the Town in advance. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 5.4) 
Division 4 - Technical Standards 

Sec. 5-1-410. - Subscriber network. 
(a)  The Grantee's cable system shall be two-way capable and provide a bandwidth of at least 750 MHz. The Grantee shall at all times offer a minimum of seventy (70) channels of digital and/or analog programming services. 
(b)  All closed-captioning programming received by the cable system shall include the closed-caption signal so long as the closed-caption signal is provided consistent with FCC standards. All local signals received in stereo or with secondary audio tracks (broadcast and access) are retransmitted in those same formats. 
(c)  The Grantee shall take prompt corrective action if it finds that any facilities or equipment on the cable system are not operating as expected, or if it finds that facilities and equipment do not comply with the requirements of this agreement or applicable law. 
(d)  The Grantee's construction decisions shall be based solely upon legitimate engineering decisions and shall not take into consideration the income level of any particular community within the service area. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 6.1) 
Sec. 5-1-415. - Standby power. 
    The Grantee shall maintain standby power system supplies, rated for at least two (2) hours duration, throughout the trunk and distribution networks. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 6.2) 
Sec. 5-1-420. - Technical performance. 
    The technical performance of the cable system shall meet or exceed all applicable technical standards, as they may be amended from time to time, regardless of the transmission technology utilized. The Town shall have the full authority permitted by applicable law to enforce compliance with these technical standards. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 6.3) 
Sec. 5-1-425. - Cable system performance testing. 
(a)  The Grantee shall, at the Grantee's expense, perform the following tests on its cable system: 
(1)  All tests required by the FCC; and 
(2)  All other tests reasonably necessary to determine compliance with technical standards adopted by the FCC at any time during the term of this agreement. 
(b)  At present, required tests include: 
(1)  Cumulative leakage index testing of any new construction; 
(2)  Semi-annual compliance and proof of performance tests in conformance with generally accepted industry guidelines; 
(3)  Tests in response to subscriber complaints; 
(4)  Periodic monitoring tests, at intervals not to exceed six (6) months, of subscriber (field) test points, the headend and the condition of standby power supplies; and 
(5)  Cumulative leakage index tests, at least annually, designed to ensure that one hundred percent (100%) of the Grantee's cable system has been ground-tested or air-tested for signal leakage in accordance with FCC standards. 
(c)  The Grantee shall maintain written records of all results of its cable system tests, performed by or for the Grantee, in accordance with applicable law. Copies of such test results will be provided to the Town upon written request. 
(d)  If the FCC no longer requires proof of performance tests for the Grantee's cable system during the term of this agreement, the Grantee agrees that it shall continue to conduct proof of performance tests on the cable system in accordance with the standards that were in place on the effective date, or any generally applicable standards later adopted, at least once a year, and provide written results of such tests to the Town upon written request. 
(e)  If the Town notifies the Grantee that it wishes to have a representative present during its semi-annual testing of the cable system, the Grantee shall cooperate in scheduling its testing so that the representative can be present. Notwithstanding the above, all technical performance tests may be witnessed by representatives of the Town. 
(f)  The Grantee shall be required to promptly take such corrective measures as are necessary to correct any performance deficiencies fully and to prevent their recurrence as far as possible. The Grantee's failure to correct deficiencies identified through this testing process shall be a material violation of this agreement. Sites shall be re-tested following correction. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 6.4) 
Sec. 5-1-430. - Additional tests. 
    Where there exists other evidence that, in the reasonable judgment of the Town, casts doubt upon the reliability or technical quality of cable service, the Town shall have the right and authority to require the Grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system. The Grantee shall reasonably cooperate with the Town in performing such testing and shall prepare the results and a report, if requested, within thirty (30) days after testing. Such report shall include the following information: 
(1)  The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special tests; 
(2)  The cable system component tested; 
(3)  The equipment used and procedures employed in testing; 
(4)  The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved; and 
(5)  Any other information pertinent to said tests and analysis which may be required. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 6.5) 
Division 5 - Duties of Grantee 

Sec. 5-1-510. - Review of books. 
    The Grantee agrees that the Town, upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the Grantee, may review such of its books and records at the Grantee's business office, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this agreement. Such notice shall specifically reference the section of the agreement that is under review, so that the Grantee may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by the Town. Alternatively, if the books and records are not easily accessible at the local office of the Grantee, the Grantee may, at its sole option, choose to pay the reasonable travel costs of the Town's representative to view the books and records at the appropriate location. The Grantee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for agreement compliance purposes longer than three (3) years. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the Grantee shall not be required to disclose information that is proprietary or confidential in nature pursuant to federal or state law. The Town agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Grantee as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The Grantee shall not be required to provide subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act. The Grantee shall reimburse the Town for all reasonable costs and attorneys' fees incurred in any legal proceedings pursued under this Section to protect the confidentiality of the Grantee's records. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 7.1) 
Sec. 5-1-515. - Annual reports. 
    Within thirty (30) days of a written request, but no more often than annually, the Grantee shall submit to the Town a written report, in a form reasonably acceptable to the Town, which shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, a summary of the previous year's activities in the development of the cable system. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 7.2) 
Sec. 5-1-520. - Complaint file and reports. 
(a)  The Grantee shall keep an accurate and comprehensive file of any and all complaints it receives regarding the cable system in the service area and the Grantee's actions in response to those complaints. Such files shall be kept in a manner consistent with the privacy rights of subscribers. These files shall remain open to the Town and the public during normal business hours. Within thirty (30) days of written notice, the Grantee shall provide to the Town a summary which shall include information concerning escalated customer complaints received by the Grantee from the Town within the time period specified in the Town's request, but no greater than a one-year period. 
(b)  A log of all service interruptions shall be maintained and provided to the Town upon written request. 
(c)  The Grantee shall provide the Town such other information as is reasonably requested by the Town, provided that the Grantee is given thirty (30) days' prior written notice of such request before the beginning of the applicable six-month period. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 7.3) 
Sec. 5-1-525. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  The Grantee shall, at no cost to the Town, procure and maintain, during the entire term of this agreement, the following coverage and limits of insurance: 
(1)  Workers' compensation (including occupational disease), and employer's liability insurance in accordance with any applicable workers' compensation laws on all owners, employees, servants and/or agents connected with or engaged in the performance of the Grantee's obligations hereunder. 
(2)  Commercial general liability insurance with personal injury and property damage limits at a combined single limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. 
(3)  Automobile liability insurance on all automobiles and vehicles, whether owned or hired, with personal injury and property damage limits at a combined single limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident. 
(b)  The Grantee's liability insurance must establish the Town as an "additional insured." A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the Town stating that the policy or policies shall not be canceled or materially changed so as to be out of compliance with these requirements without thirty (30) days' written notice first provided to the Town, via certified mail, and ten (10) days' notice for nonpayment of premium. If the insurance is canceled or materially altered so as to be out of compliance with the requirements of this Section within the term of this franchise, the Grantee shall provide replacement coverage. The Grantee agrees to maintain continuous uninterrupted insurance coverage, in at least the amounts required, for the duration of this franchise. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 8.1) 
Sec. 5-1-530. - Indemnification. 
    The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save, hold harmless and defend the Town, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), or any other damages which arise out of the Grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of its cable system, provided that the Town shall give the Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Town within ten (10) days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this Article. If the Town determines that it is necessary for it to employ separate counsel, the costs for such separate counsel shall be the responsibility of the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 8.2) 
Sec. 5-1-535. - Indemnification generally. 
(a)  General indemnification. The Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold the Town, its officers, officials, boards, commissions and employees, harmless from any action or claim for injury, damage, loss, liability, cost or expense, including court and appeal costs and attorneys' fees or expenses, arising from any casualty or accident to person or property, including, without limitation, copyright infringement, defamation and all other damages in any way arising out of, or by reason of, any construction, excavation, operation, maintenance, reconstruction or any other act done under this franchise, by or for the Grantee, its agents or its employees, or by reason of any neglect or omission of the Grantee. The Grantee shall reasonably consult and cooperate with the Town while conducting its defense of the Town. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall not indemnify the Town for any damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the Town. 
(b)  Indemnification for relocation. The Grantee shall indemnify the Town for any damages, claims, additional costs or expenses assessed against, or payable by, the Town arising out of, or resulting from, the Grantee's failure to remove, adjust or relocate any of its facilities in the right-of-way in a timely manner in accordance with any relocation lawfully required by the Town. 
(c)  Additional circumstances. The Grantee shall also indemnify, defend and hold the Town harmless for any claim for injury, damage, loss, liability, cost or expense, including court and appeal costs and attorneys' fees or expenses in any way arising out of: 
(1)  The lawful actions of the Town in granting this franchise to the extent such actions are consistent with this franchise and applicable law; or 
(2)  Damages arising out of any failure by the Grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees or licensors of programs to be delivered by the cable system, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this franchise. 
(d)  Procedures and defense. If a claim or action arises, the Town or any other indemnified party shall promptly tender the defense of the claim to the Grantee, which defense shall be at the Grantee's expense. The Town may participate in the defense of a claim in which it is named, at its own cost. The Grantee may not agree to any settlement of claims affecting the Town without the Town's prior written approval. 
(e)  Nonwaiver. The fact that the Grantee carries out any activities under this franchise through independent contractors shall not constitute an avoidance of or defense to the Grantee's duty of defense and indemnification under this Section. 
(f)  Expenses. If separate representation to fully protect the interests of both parties is necessary, such as arising from a conflict of interest between the Town and the counsel selected by the Grantee to represent the Town,after all reasonable measures have been taken to prevent the necessity of hiring separate counsel for the Town, then the Grantee shall pay all reasonable legal expenses incurred by the Town in defending itself with regard to any action, suit or proceeding indemnified by the Grantee. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 8.3) 
Division 6 - Programming 

Sec. 5-1-610. - Broad programming categories. 
    The Grantee shall provide or enable the provision of at least the following initial broad categories of programming to the extent such categories are reasonably available: 
(1)  Educational programming; 
(2)  Colorado news, weather and information; 
(3)  Sports; 
(4)  General entertainment (including movies); 
(5)  Children/family-oriented programming; 
(6)  Arts, culture and performing arts; 
(7)  Science/documentary; and 
(8)  National news, weather and information. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 9.1) 
Sec. 5-1-615. - Deletion or reduction of broad programming categories. 
(a)  The Grantee shall not delete or so limit as to effectively delete any broad category of programming within its control without the prior written consent of the Town. 
(b)  In the event of a modification proceeding under federal law, the mix and quality of cable services required by this franchise on the effective date of this agreement shall be deemed the mix and quality of cable services required after such modification. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 9.2) 
Sec. 5-1-620. - Parental control device. 
    Upon request by any subscriber, the Grantee shall provide by sale or lease a parental control or lockout device, traps or filters to enable a subscriber to prohibit viewing of a particular cable service during periods selected by the subscriber. The Grantee shall inform its subscribers of the availability of the lockout device at the time of their initial subscription and periodically thereafter. Any device offered shall be at a rate, if any, in compliance with applicable law. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 9.3) 
Sec. 5-1-625. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  The Grantee shall use reasonable efforts so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored. For the purposes of this Section, uninterrupted does not include short-term outages of the cable system for maintenance or testing. 
(b)  In the event of a change of the Grantee, or in the event a new cable operator acquires the cable system in accordance with this agreement, the Grantee shall reasonably cooperate with the Town, new franchisee or cable operator in maintaining continuity of cable service to all subscribers. During any transition period, the Grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the cable system. 
(c)  Failure of the Grantee to operate the cable system for four (4) consecutive days without prior approval of the Town or without just cause may be considered a material violation of this agreement. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 9.4) 
Sec. 5-1-630. - Services for the disabled. 
    The Grantee shall comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 9.5) 
Sec. 5-1-635. - PEG access. 
    The Grantee shall continue to provide to the Town one (1) downstream government access channel on the cable system for government access programming. It is intended that this access channel will be used for the provision of programming to the Town subscribers of education and government access programming by the Town and the educational institutions within the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 9.6) 
Sec. 5-1-640. - Capital access contribution. 
(a)  The Grantee shall not provide a PEG capital contribution to the Town as of the effective date. However, during the term of this agreement as set forth in Section 5-1-30 herein, the Town, upon ninety (90) days' advance written notice, may direct the Grantee to collect and provide to the Town up to fifty cents ($0.50) per month per residential subscriber for PEG access capital (the "capital access contribution"), which the Town shall use for access equipment in accordance with applicable law. The Town understands that, pursuant to federal law, the Grantee intends to collect the capital access contribution from residential subscribers as a separate line item on subscriber bills in addition to the price for cable service. The Grantee shall not be responsible for collecting or paying the capital access contribution with respect to gratis accounts. 
(b)  Each payment shall be due and payable no later than forty-five (45) days following the end of the quarter from when the capital access contribution takes effect. The Town may adjust the amount of the capital access contribution on an annual basis (up to the maximum amount specified in this Section), provided that the Grantee is given ninety (90) days' advance written notice. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 9.7) 
Sec. 5-1-645. - Advance access contribution. 
(a)  At any time within the first ten (10) years of this franchise, upon six (6) months' written notice to the Grantee, the Town may direct the Grantee to provide an advance of the capital access contribution (the "advance access contribution") in the form of a one-time payment calculated at fifty cents ($0.50) per month per residential subscriber multiplied by twenty-four (24) months. The number of residential subscribers used to calculate the amount of the advance access contribution shall be based on the number of residential subscribers existing as of the date the Grantee receives written notice of the Town's intent to receive the advance access contribution. 
(b)  The Town shall only use the advance access contribution for access equipment for capital expenditures associated with PEG access equipment in accordance with applicable law. The Grantee shall be entitled to recover the advance access contribution from residential subscribers pursuant to federal law, at a rate of fifty cents ($0.50) per month per residential subscriber, during which time the Grantee shall have no further programming production or studio obligations to the Town. 
(c)  During such time as the Grantee is recovering the advance access contribution from residential subscribers, the Grantee's obligation to make any quarterly access payments described in Section 5-1-640 above shall be suspended. The Grantee shall notify the Town when the advance access contribution has been fully recovered from subscribers. At that time, the Town, by written request, may direct the Grantee to collect and provide the capital access contribution in the manner as it is described in Section 5-1-640. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 9.8) 
Division 7 - Enforcement and Termination of Agreement 

Sec. 5-1-710. - Notice of violation. 
    In the event that the Town believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of this agreement, the Town shall informally discuss the matter with the Grantee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the Town shall notify the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 10.1) 
Sec. 5-1-715. - Right to cure or respond. 
    The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in Section 5-1-710 above to: 
(1)  Respond to the Town, in writing, contesting the assertion of noncompliance; 
(2)  Cure such default; or 
(3)  In the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Town of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 10.2) 
Sec. 5-1-720. - Public hearing. 
    In the event that the Grantee fails to respond to the notice described in Section 5-1-710 above pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5-1-715, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within thirty (30) days or the date projected pursuant to Paragraph 5-1-715(3) above, or if the projected completion date identified pursuant to Paragraph 5-1-715(3) above is not acceptable to the Town, if it intends to continue its investigation into the default, then the Town shall schedule a public hearing. The Town shall provide the Grantee at least ten (10) days' prior written notice of such hearing, which specifies the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and provide to the Grantee the opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 10.3) 
Sec. 5-1-725. - Enforcement. 
    In the event the Town, after the hearing set forth in Section 5-1-720 above, determines that the Grantee is in default of any provision of the agreement, the Town may: 
(1)  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; 
(2)  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or 
(3)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of this agreement, seek to revoke this agreement in accordance with Section 5-1-730 below. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 10.4) 
Sec. 5-1-730. - Revocation. 
(a)  Should the Town seek to revoke this agreement after following the procedures set forth in Sections 5-1-710 through 5-1-725 above, the Town shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the Town has not received a satisfactory response from the Grantee, it may then seek termination of this agreement at a public hearing. The Town shall cause to be served upon the Grantee, at least sixty (60) days prior to such public hearing, a written notice specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to revoke this agreement. 
(b)  At the designated hearing, the Town shall give the Grantee an opportunity for full participation, including the right to be represented by legal counsel, to introduce evidence, to question witnesses and to state its position on the matter, after which it shall determine whether or not this agreement shall be revoked. The Grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court . Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the determination of the Town. 
(c)  The hearing shall be recorded electronically, consistent with the Town's recording of other quasi-judicial hearings. The Grantee shall have the option to obtain a copy of the recording in order to create a written transcript or to have a court reporter present to transcribe the hearing, at the Grantee's cost. 
(d)  The Town may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action that it deems appropriate to enforce the Town's rights under this agreement in lieu of revocation of this agreement. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 10.5) 
Sec. 5-1-735. - Force majeure. 
(a)  The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provisions of this agreement, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of the Grantee to anticipate and control. This provision includes work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their utility poles to which the Grantee's cable system is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. The Grantee has an affirmative duty to notify the Town, in writing, of any delays caused by other parties, the reasonable steps the Grantee is taking to resolve the delays, the time period in which the delays are expected to be eliminated, and reasonable updates regarding these issues as new information becomes available to the Grantee. 
(b)  Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the Town's intention to subject the Grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of this agreement for violations of this agreement where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the subscribers within the service area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship to the Grantee which outweigh the benefit to be derived by the Town and/or subscribers. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 10.6) 
Sec. 5-1-740. - No monetary recourse against Town. 
    The Grantee shall not have any monetary recourse against the Town or its officers, officials, boards, commissions or employees for any loss, costs, expenses or damages arising out of any provision or requirement of this agreement or the enforcement thereof, in accordance with the provisions of applicable federal, state and local law. The rights of the Town under this agreement are in addition to, and shall not be read to limit, any immunities the Town may enjoy under federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 10.7) 
Division 8 - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 5-1-810. - Actions of parties. 
    In any action by the Town or the Grantee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.1) 
Sec. 5-1-815. - Entire agreement. 
    This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the Grantee and the Town. Amendments to this agreement shall be mutually agreed to in writing by the parties. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.2) 
Sec. 5-1-820. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    In connection with the performance of work under this agreement, the Grantee agrees not to refuse to hire, discharge, promote, demote or discriminate in matters of compensation against any person otherwise qualified, solely because of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age, military status, sexual orientation, marital status or physical or mental disability. Throughout the term of this agreement, the Grantee shall fully comply with all equal employment or nondiscrimination provisions and requirements of federal, state and local laws and, in particular, FCC rules and regulations relating thereto, and will require its contractors and subcontractors to comply with same. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.3) 
Sec. 5-1-825. - Notice. 
(a)  Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response required by this agreement to be served upon the Town or the Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party when placed in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope: 
(1)  Upon receipt when hand-delivered with a receipt or acknowledgment; 
(2)  Upon receipt when sent by certified mail; or 
(3)  Within five (5) business days after having been posted in the regular mail. 
(b)  The notices or responses to the Town shall be addressed as follows: 
Town of Windsor 
301 Walnut Street 
Windsor, Colorado 80550 
(c)  The notices or responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
Comcast of Colorado IV, LLC 
Attn: General Manager/Government Affairs 
434 Kimbark 
Longmont, CO 80501 
    with a copy to: 
Comcast of Colorado 
Attn: Government Affairs 
8000 East Iliff 
Denver, CO 80231 
(d)  The Town and the Grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other in the manner provided for in this Section. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.4) 
Sec. 5-1-830. - Descriptive headings. 
    The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.5) 
Sec. 5-1-835. - Costs to be borne by Grantee. 
    Costs to be borne by the Grantee shall include all costs of publication of this agreement. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.6) 
Sec. 5-1-840. - Severability. 
    If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of this agreement, or any renewal or renewals thereof. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.7) 
Sec. 5-1-845. - Waiver. 
    The failure of the Town at any time to require performance by the Grantee of any provision hereof shall in no way affect the right of the Town hereafter to enforce the same. Nor shall the waiver by the Town of any breach of any provision hereof be taken or held to be a waiver of any succeeding breach of such provision, or as a waiver of the provision itself or any other provision. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.8) 
Sec. 5-1-850. - Reasonableness of consent or approval. 
    Whenever under this agreement reasonableness is the standard for the granting or denial of the consent or approval of either party hereto, such party shall be entitled to consider public and governmental policy and moral and ethical standards, as well as business and economic considerations. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.9) 
Sec. 5-1-855. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this agreement is ___________________, 2005, pursuant to the provisions of applicable law. 
(Ord. 2005-1224 11.10) 
ARTICLE II - Gas and Electric Franchise 

Sec. 5-2-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this Section. When not inconsistent with context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word shall is mandatory and may is permissive. Words not defined in this Section shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    Board or Town Board refers to and is the legislative body of the Town. 
    Company refers to and is Public Service Company of Colorado, and its successors and assigns, but does not include its affiliates, subsidiaries or any other entity in which it has an ownership interest. 
    Distribution facilities refers to and is only that portion of the Company's electric system which delivers electric energy from the substation breakers to the point-of-delivery of the customer, including all devices connected to that system, as well as that portion of the Company's gas system which delivers gas from the down side of the regulator station to the point-of-delivery of the customer, including all devices connected to that system. 
    Facilities refer to and are all facilities reasonably necessary to provide gas and electricity into, within and through the Town and include plants, works, systems, substations, transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment, pipes, mains, conduit, transformers, underground lines, gas compressors, meters, wires, cables and poles. 
    Gas or natural gas refers to and is such gaseous fuels as natural, artificial, synthetic, liquefied natural, liquefied petroleum, manufactured or any mixture thereof. 
    Public easements refer to and are public and dedicated easements created and available for use by investor-owned, or other public utilities for their facilities. 
    Public Utilities Commission or PUC refers to and is the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado or other authority succeeding to the regulatory powers of the Public Utilities Commission. 
    Residents refers to and includes all persons, businesses, industry, governmental agencies and any other entity whatsoever presently located or to be hereinafter located, in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the Town. 
    Revenues refer to and are those amounts of money which the Company receives from its customers within the Town from the sale of gas under rates authorized by the Public Utilities Commission as well as from the transportation of gas to its customers within the Town and represents amounts billed under such rates as adjusted for refunds, the net write-off of uncollective accounts, corrections or other regulatory adjustments. 
    Streets and other public places refer to and are streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes and other public places in the Town. 
    Town refers to and is the municipal corporation designated as the Town of Windsor, Weld County, Colorado. 
(Prior code 5-31; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-20. - Grant of franchise. 
    The Town hereby grants to Public Service Company, for the period specified in and subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, a nonexclusive right to furnish, sell and distribute gas and electricity to the Town and to all residents of the Town. Subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, the Town also hereby grants to the Company a nonexclusive right to acquire, construct, install, locate, maintain, operate and extend into, within and through the Town all facilities reasonably necessary to furnish, sell and distribute gas and electricity within and through the Town, and a nonexclusive right to make reasonable use of the streets and other public places and public easements as may be necessary to carry out the terms of this franchise. These rights shall extend to all areas of the Town as it is now constituted and to additional areas as the Town may increase in size by annexation or otherwise. 
(Prior code 5-32; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-30. - Street lighting service. 
    The rights granted in this franchise encompass the nonexclusive franchise to provide street lighting service to the Town, and the provisions of this franchise apply with full and equal force to the street lighting service provided by the Company. Wherever reference is made to the sale of electricity or to the provision of electric service in this franchise, these references shall be deemed to include the provision of street lighting service. Wherever reference is made to Company facilities, equipment, system or plant in this franchise, this reference shall be deemed to include Company-owned street lighting facilities, equipment, system and plant. 
(Prior Code 5-33; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-40. - Term of franchise. 
    This franchise shall take effect on October 26, 1996. The term of this franchise shall be for twenty-five (25) years, beginning with said effective date of this franchise and expiring on October 26, 2021. 
(Prior code 5-34; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-50. - Franchise fee. 
    In consideration for the grant of this franchise, the Company shall pay the Town a sum equal to three percent (3%) of all revenues received from the sale and transportation of gas and from the sale of electricity within the Town, excluding revenues received from the Town for the sale of gas and electricity to the Town. 
(Prior code 5-35; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-60. - Payment schedule. 
(a)  For the franchise fee owed on revenues received after the effective date of this franchise, payment shall be made in monthly installments not more than thirty (30) days following the close of the month for which payment is to be made. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the portions of the months at the beginning and end of the term of this franchise. All payments shall be made to the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk, or other authorized representatives, shall have access to the books of the Company for the purpose of auditing or checking to ascertain that the franchise fee has been correctly computed and paid. 
(b)  In the event an error by the Company results in an overpayment of the franchise fee to the Town and said overpayment is in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00), credit for the overpayment shall be spread over the same period the error was undiscovered. If the overpayment is two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less, credit shall be taken against the next payment. 
(Prior code 5-36; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-70. - Change of franchise fee and other franchise terms. 
(a)  Once during each calendar year of the franchise term, the Town Board, upon giving thirty (30) days' notice to the Company of its intention to do so, may review and change the consideration the Town may be entitled to receive as a part of the franchise; provided, however, the Board may only change the consideration to be received by the Town under the terms of this franchise to the equivalent of the consideration paid by the Company to any city or town in the State in which the Company supplies gas and electric service under franchise. 
(b)  The Company shall, upon request, report to the Town within sixty (60) days of the execution of a subsequent franchise or of any change of franchise in other municipalities that could have a significant financial impact on the consideration to be paid by the Company to the Town hereunder. If the Town Board decides the consideration shall be so changed, it shall provide for such change by ordinance; provided, however, that any change in the franchise fee is then allowed to be surcharged by the Company; and provided further, that the consideration is not higher than the highest consideration paid by the Company to any municipality within the State. For purposes of this Section, consideration means the franchise fee established in Section 5-2-50, the undergrounding program established in Section 5-2-310, and also includes any other provision which is of similar significant financial benefit to the Town. 
(Prior code 5-37; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-80. - Franchise fee payment in lieu of other fees. 
    Payment of the franchise fee by the Company is accepted by the Town in lieu of any occupancy tax, license tax, permit charge, inspection fee, or similar tax on the privilege of doing business or in connection with the physical operation thereof, but does not exempt the Company from any lawful taxation upon its property or any other tax not related to the franchise or the physical operation thereof and does not exempt the Company from payment of head taxes or other fees or taxes assessed generally upon businesses. 
(Prior code 5-38; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-90. - Supply of gas and electricity. 
    The Company shall take all reasonable and necessary steps to provide an adequate supply of gas and electricity to its customers at the lowest reasonable cost consistent with long-term reliable supplies. If the supply of gas or electricity to its customers should be interrupted, the Company shall take all necessary and reasonable actions to restore such supply within the shortest practicable time. 
(Prior code 5-39; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-100. - Restoration of service. 
    In the event the Company's electric or gas system, or any part thereof, is partially or wholly destroyed or incapacitated, the Company shall use due diligence to restore its system to satisfactory service within the shortest practicable time. 
(Prior code 5-40; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-110. - Obligations regarding Company facilities. 
    The Company shall install, maintain, repair, renovate and replace its facilities with due diligence in a good and workmanlike manner, and the Company's facilities will be of sufficient quality and durability to provide adequate and efficient gas and electric service to the Town and its residents. Company facilities shall not interfere with the Town's water mains, sewer mains or other municipal use of streets and other public places. The Company shall erect and maintain its facilities in such a way so as to minimize interference with trees and other natural features. Company facilities shall be installed in public easements so as to cause a minimal amount of interference with such property. 
(Prior code 5-41; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-120. - Excavation and construction. 
    All excavation and construction work done by the Company shall be done in a timely and expeditious manner which minimizes the inconvenience to the public and individuals. All public and private property whose use conforms to restrictions in public easements disturbed by Company excavation or construction activities shall be restored by the Company at its expense to substantially its former condition. 
(Prior code 5-42; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-130. - Relocation of Company facilities. 
(a)  Any relocation of the Company's facilities in any street or other public place required, caused or occasioned by any Town project shall be at the cost of the Company. Relocation shall be completed within a reasonable time from the date when the Town makes its request, such time to be established by the Company as soon as possible after the Town's request. The Company shall be granted an extension of time of completion equivalent to any delay caused by conditions not under its control provided that the Company proceeds with due diligence at all times. 
(b)  Relocated underground facilities shall be underground. Relocated aboveground facilities shall be above ground unless the Town either agrees to pay the additional cost of moving them underground or requests that such additional cost be paid out of available funds under Section 5-2-310. 
(Prior code 5-43; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-140. - Service to new areas. 
    If the boundaries of the Town are expanded during the term of this franchise, the Company shall extend service to residents in the expanded area at the earliest practicable time and in accordance with the Company's extension policy. Service to the expanded area shall be in accordance with the terms of this Article, including payment of franchise fees. 
(Prior code 5-44; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-150. - Town not required to advance funds. 
    Upon receipt of the Town's authorization for billing and construction, the Company shall extend its facilities to provide gas to the Town for municipal uses within the Town limits or for any major municipal facility outside the Town limits, and within the Company certificated service area, without requiring the Town to advance funds prior to construction. 
(Prior code 5-45; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-160. - Technological improvements. 
    The Company shall generally introduce and install, as soon as practicable, gas and electrical energy technological advances in its equipment and service within the Town when such advances are technically and economically feasible and are safe and beneficial to the Town and its residents. Upon request by the Town, the Company shall review and promptly report advances which have occurred in the gas industry that have been incorporated into the Company's operations in the Town in the previous year or will be so incorporated in the six (6) months following the Town's request. 
(Prior code 5-46; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-170. - Town regulation. 
    The Town expressly reserves, and the Company expressly recognizes, the Town's right and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, ordinances and rules and regulations as may by the Town be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(Prior code 5-47; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-180. - Compliance with Town requirements. 
    The Company will comply with all Town requirements regarding curb and pavement cuts, excavating, digging and related construction activities. If requested by the Town, the Company shall submit copies of reports of annual and long-term planning for capital improvement projects with descriptions of required street cuts, excavation, digging and related construction activities within thirty (30) days after issuance. Except for emergencies, the Town may require that all installations be coordinated with the Town's street improvement programs. The Director of Engineering shall be the Town's agent for inspection and for compliance with Town ordinances and regulations on any such projects. 
(Prior code 5-48; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-190. - Town review of construction and design. 
    Prior to construction of any significant gas facilities above ground or, for electrical energy, any transmission lines or generating plant, building, substation or similar structures within the Town, if requested by the Town, the Company shall furnish to the Town the plans for such facilities. In addition, the Company shall assess and report on the impact of such proposed construction on the Town environment. Such plans and reports may be reviewed by the Town to ascertain, inter alia, (1) that all applicable laws including building and zoning codes and air and water pollution regulations are complied with, (2) that aesthetic and good planning principles have been given due consideration, and (3) that adverse impact on the environment has been minimized. 
(Prior code 5-49; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-200. - Compliance with PUC regulations. 
    The gas and electrical energy which the Company distributes shall conform with the standards promulgated by the Public Utilities Commission in the Rules Regulating the Service of Gas and Electric Utilities and with the tariff provisions of the Company setting standards, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Prior code 5-50; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-210. - Compliance with air and water pollution laws. 
    The Company shall use its best efforts to take measures which will result in its facilities meeting the standards required by applicable federal and state air and water pollution laws. Upon the Town's request, the Company will provide the Town with a status report of such measures. 
(Prior code 5-51; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-220. - Inspection. 
    The Town shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times any portion of the Company's system used to serve the Town and its residents. The Town shall also have access to Company records for the purpose of determining Company compliance with this franchise. The Company agrees to cooperate with the Town in conducting the inspection and to correct any discrepancies affecting the Town's interest in a prompt and efficient manner. 
(Prior code 5-52; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-230. - Public Utilities Commission regulation. 
    The Town and the Company recognize that the lawful provisions of the Company's tariffs on file and in effect with the Public Utilities Commission which are consistent with the restrictions and limitations of Article XXXV of the Colorado Constitution regarding the rights of municipalities to franchise are controlling over any inconsistent provision in this franchise dealing with the same subject matter. In the opinion of the Company, no provision of this franchise is inconsistent with any of the currently effective provisions of the Company's tariffs. 
(Prior code 5-53; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-240. - Reports on Company operations. 
    The Company shall submit reasonable and necessary reports containing or based on information readily obtainable from the Company's books and records as the Town may request with respect to the operations of the Company under this franchise and provide the Town with a list of real property within the Town which is owned by the Company. 
(Prior code 5-54; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-250. - Copies of tariffs, all PUC filings. 
    The Company shall keep on file in the nearest Company office all tariffs, rules, regulations and policies approved by the Public Utilities Commission relating to service by the Company to the Town and its residents. Upon request by the Town, the Company shall provide the Town with copies of filings affecting said service which it makes with the PUC. 
(Prior code 5-55; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-260. - Town use. 
    The Town shall have the right to use, for the purpose of stringing wires, all poles and suitable overhead structures constructed by the Company within the Town, which use shall not include the distribution or transmission of electricity. Such use by the Town will be without cost. The Company will allow others holding a franchise, except for gas or electric service, from the Town to so utilize such poles and suitable overhead structures upon reasonable terms and conditions to be agreed upon by the Company and such holder of a franchise from the Town; provided, however, that the Company shall assume no liability nor shall it be put to any additional expense in connection therewith, and the use of said poles and structures by the Town or others holding a franchise from the Town shall be in such a manner as not to constitute a safety hazard or to interfere unnecessarily with the Company's use of same. 
(Prior code 5-56; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-270. - Underground conduit. 
    If the Company installs new electric underground conduit or opens a trench or replaces such conduit, the Company shall provide adequate advance notice to permit additional installation of similar conduit and pull wire for the Town. If the Town wants additional similar conduit and pull wire installed, it will so notify the Company and provide similar conduit and pull wire at its expense to the Company which will install it without further expense to the Town, provided that such action by the Town will not unnecessarily interfere with the Company's facilities or delay the accomplishment of the project. 
(Prior code 5-57; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-280. - Town held harmless. 
    The Company shall indemnify, defend and save the Town harmless from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature arising out of the operations of the Company within the Town pursuant to this franchise and the securing of and the exercise by the Company of the franchise rights granted in this Article and shall pay all reasonable expenses arising therefrom. The Town will provide prompt written notice to the Company of the pendency of any claim or action against the Town arising out of the exercise by the Company of its franchise rights. The Company will be permitted, at its own expense, to appear and defend or to assist in defense of such claim. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, the Company shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the Town harmless to the extent any claim, demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent act or failure to act of the Town or any of its officers or employees. 
(Prior code 5-58; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-290. - Payment of expenses incurred by Town in relation to franchise ordinance. 
    At the Town's option, the Company shall pay in advance or reimburse the Town for expenses incurred in publication of notices and ordinances and for photocopying of documents arising out of the negotiations or process for obtaining the franchise. 
(Prior code 5-59; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-300. - Underground electrical distribution lines in new areas. 
    The Company will place newly constructed electrical distribution lines underground to serve new residential subdivision areas in accordance with the Company's tariffs and Town subdivision regulations. 
(Prior code 5-60; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-310. - Overhead conversion at expense of Company. 
(a)  As and when requested by the Town, the Company will spend one percent (1%) of the preceding calendar year's electric revenues to move electric distribution facilities located in streets and other public places in the Town underground, provided that the undergrounding shall extend for a minimum distance of one (1) block or seven hundred fifty (750) feet, or as may be mutually agreed to by the parties. 
(b)  Any unexpended portion of the one percent (1%) of electric revenue may be carried over to succeeding years and, in addition, upon request by the Town, the Company shall anticipate amounts to be available for up to three (3) years in advance. Any amounts advanced shall be credited against amounts to be expended in succeeding years until such advances are eliminated. No relocation expenses which the Company is required to expend pursuant to Section 5-2-130 shall be charged to this allocation. 
(c)  Funds to be expended pursuant to this Section shall not be used in any project or situation for which and to the extent that the Town has received federal or state funds for the purpose of undergrounding utilities. Funds to be expended pursuant to this Section may be used for "matching" purposes with state or federal moneys. 
(d)  If the Public Utilities Commission authorizes a system-wide program or programs of undergrounding electric distribution facilities, the Company will allocate to the program of undergrounding in the Town such amount as is authorized by the Public Utilities Commission, but in no case less than one percent (1%) of annual electric revenues. 
(e)  In addition to the provisions of this Section, the Town may require additional facilities to be moved underground at the Town's expense. 
(f)  The Town acknowledges that the establishment of this undergrounding fund creates no vested right in the Town to the undergrounding moneys. Further, if such moneys are not expended pursuant to the conditions hereof, the fund is not convertible to cash or available for any other purposes. 
(Prior code 5-61; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-320. - Review of undergrounding program. 
    Representatives of both the Town and the Company shall meet periodically to review the Company's undergrounding program. This review shall include: 
(1)  Undergrounding programs, including conversions and replacements which have been accomplished or are underway by the Company, together with the Company's plans for additional undergrounding; 
(2)  Undergrounding projects anticipated by the Town. 
    Such meetings shall be held to achieve a continuing program for the orderly undergrounding of electrical lines in the Town. 
(Prior code 5-62; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-330. - Cooperation with other utilities. 
    When undertaking a project of undergrounding, the Town and the Company shall work with other utilities or companies which have their lines overhead to attempt to have all lines undergrounded as part of the same project. When other utilities or companies are placing their lines underground, the Company shall cooperate with these utilities and companies and undertake to underground Company facilities as part of the same project where feasible. The Company shall not be required to pay the costs of any other utility in connection with work under this Section. 
(Prior code 5-63; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-340. - Consent of Town required. 
    The Company shall not transfer or assign any rights under this franchise to a third party, excepting only corporate reorganizations of the Company not including a third party, unless the Town shall approve in writing such transfer or assignment. Approval of the transfer or assignment shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Prior code 5-64; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-350. - Transfer fee. 
    In order that the Town may share in the value this franchise adds to the Company's operation, any such transfer or assignment of rights under this franchise requiring the approval of the Town shall be subject to the conditions that the transferee shall promptly pay to the Town a pro rata share of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), which pro rata amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) shall be calculated by multiplying one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) times a fraction of which the then population of the Town is the numerator and the then population of the Town and County of Denver is the denominator. Such transfer fee shall not be recovered from the Town or from the Town residents or property owners through gas rates of customers or by surcharge by the transferee or the Company. 
(Prior code 5-65; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-360. - Town's right to purchase or condemn. 
    The right of the Town to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility works or ways, and the rights of the Company in connection therewith, as provided by the Colorado Constitution and state statutes, are hereby expressly reserved. 
(Prior code 5-66; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-370. - Continued cooperation by Company. 
    In the event the Town exercises its option to purchase or condemn, the Company agrees that, at the Town's request, it will continue to supply any service it supplies under this franchise, for the duration of the term of this franchise pursuant to terms and conditions negotiated for such continued operation. 
(Prior code 5-67; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-380. - Limitations on Company removal. 
    In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term or the Company terminates any service provided herein for any reason whatsoever, and the Town has not purchased or condemned the system and has not provided for alternative gas or electrical service, the Company shall have no right to remove said system pending resolution of the disposition of the system. The Company further agrees it will not withhold any temporary services necessary to protect the public and shall be entitled only to monetary compensation in no greater amount than it would have been entitled to were such services provided during the term of this franchise. Only upon receipt of written notice from the Town stating that the Town has adequate alternative gas and electrical energy sources to provide for the people of the Town shall the Company be entitled to remove any or all of said systems in use under the terms of this franchise. 
(Prior code 5-68; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-390. - Transportation of gas. 
    The Town expressly reserves the right to obtain or produce gas. The Company shall transport natural gas purchased by the Town for use in the Town facilities pursuant to separate contracts with the Town. The Company agrees to transport gas made available for sale on terms and conditions comparable to other contracts entered into contemporaneously by the Company with similarly situated customers. 
(Prior code 5-69; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-400. - Company to purchase. 
    The Town expressly reserves the right to engage in the production of electricity. The Company agrees to negotiate for the purchase of Town-generated power in accordance with its tariffs and applicable Public Utilities Commission rules and regulations. 
(Prior code 5-70; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-410. - Forfeiture. 
    Both the Company and the Town recognize there may be circumstances whereby compliance with the provisions of this franchise is impossible or is delayed because of circumstances beyond the Company's control. In those instances, the Company shall use its best efforts to comply in a timely manner and to the extent possible. If the Company fails to perform any of the terms and conditions of this franchise and such failure is within the Company's control, the Town, acting by and through the Town Board, may determine, after hearing, that such failure is of a substantial nature. Upon receiving notice of such determination, the Company shall have a reasonable time in which to remedy the violations. If during said reasonable time corrective actions have not been successfully taken, the Town, acting by and through the Town Board, shall determine whether any or all rights and privileges granted the Company under this Article shall be forfeited. 
(Prior code 5-71; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-420. - Judicial review. 
    Any such declaration of forfeiture shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law. 
(Prior code 5-72; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-430. - Other legal remedies. 
    Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict any legal rights that the Town or the Company may possess arising from any alleged violation of this franchise. 
(Prior code 5-73; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-440. - Continued obligations. 
    Upon forfeiture, the Company shall continue to provide service to the Town and its residents in accordance with the terms hereof until the Town makes alternative arrangements for such service. If the Company fails to provide continued service, it shall be liable for damages to the Town. 
(Prior code 5-74; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-450. - Amendments to franchise. 
    At any time during the term of this franchise, the Town, through the Town Board, or the Company may propose amendments to this franchise by giving thirty (30) days' written notice to the other of the proposed amendment desired, and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will negotiate within a reasonable time in good faith in an effort to agree on mutually satisfactory amendments. The word amendment as used in this Section does not include a change authorized in Section 5-2-70. 
(Prior code 5-75; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-460. - Successors and assigns. 
    The rights, privileges, franchises and obligations granted and contained in this Article shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the Company, its successors and assigns. 
(Prior code 5-76; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-470. - Third parties. 
    Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to provide rights to third parties. 
(Prior code 5-77; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-480. - Representatives. 
    Both parties shall designate from time to time in writing representatives for the Company and the Town who will be the persons to whom notices shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this Article. Notice shall be in writing and forwarded by certified mail or hand delivery to the persons and addresses as hereinafter stated, unless the persons and addresses are changed at the written request of either party, delivered in person or by certified mail. Until any such change shall hereafter be made, notices shall be sent to the Town Manager and to the Company's Fort Collins Operations Manager. Currently the addresses are as follows: 
(1)  For the Town of Windsor: 
Town Manager 
301 Walnut Street 
Windsor, Colorado 80550 
(2)  For the Company: 
Operations Manager 
1901 E. Horsetooth Road 
Fort Collins, Colorado 80525 
(Prior code 5-78; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-490. - Severability. 
    Should any one (1) or more provisions of this franchise be determined to be illegal or unenforceable, all other provisions nevertheless shall remain effective; provided, however, that the parties shall forthwith enter into good faith negotiations and proceed with due diligence to draft a term that will achieve the original intent of the parties hereunder. 
(Prior code 5-79; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-500. - Entire agreement. 
    This franchise constitutes the entire agreement of the parties. There have been no representations made other than those contained in this franchise. 
(Prior code 5-80; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-510. - Town Board approval. 
    This grant of franchise shall not become effective unless approved by a majority vote of the Town Board. 
(Prior code 5-81; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-2-520. - Company approval. 
    The Company shall file with the Town Clerk its written acceptance of this franchise and of all of its terms and provisions within ten (10) days after the adoption of this franchise by the Town Board. The acceptance shall be in form and content approved by the Town Attorney. If the Company shall fail to timely file its written acceptance as herein provided, this franchise shall be and become null and void. 
(Prior code 5-82; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE III - Electric Franchise 

Sec. 5-3-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this Section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word shall is mandatory, and may is permissive. Words not defined in this Section shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    Association refers to and is Poudre Valley Rural Electric Association, Inc., and its successors and assigns, but does not include its affiliates, subsidiaries or any other entity in which it has an ownership interest. 
    Board or Town Board refers to and is the legislative body of the Town. 
    Distribution facilities refers to and is only that portion of the Association's electric system which delivers electric energy from the substation breakers to the point-of-delivery of the customer, including all devices connected to that system. 
    Facilities refers to and is all facilities reasonably necessary to provide electricity into, within and through the Town, and includes plants, works, systems, substations, transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment, mains, conduit, transformers, underground lines, meters, wires, cables and poles. 
    Public easements refers to and is public and dedicated easements created and available for use by investor-owned, cooperative or other public utilities for their facilities. 
    Public Utilities Commission or PUC refers to and is the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado, or other authority, including the Board of Directors of the Association, succeeding to the regulatory powers of the Public Utilities Commission. 
    Residents refers to and includes all persons, businesses, industry, governmental agencies and any other entity whatsoever, presently located or to be hereinafter located, in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the Town. 
    Revenues refers to and is those amounts of money which the Association receives from its customers within the Town from the sale of electricity under rates authorized by the Association's Board of Directors to its customers within the Town, and represents amounts billed under such rates as adjusted for refunds, the net write-off of uncollectible accounts, correction or other regulatory adjustments. 
    Streets and other public places refers to and is streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes and other public places in said Town. 
    Town refers to and is the municipal corporation designated as the Town of Windsor, Weld and Larimer Counties, Colorado, and includes the territory as currently is or may in the future be included within the boundaries of the Town of Windsor. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-20. - Grant of franchise. 
    The Town hereby grants to the Association, for the period specified in and subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, a nonexclusive right to furnish, sell and distribute electricity to the Town and to all residents of the Town within the Association's certificated area. Subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this franchise, the Town also hereby grants to the Association a nonexclusive right to acquire, construct, install, locate, maintain, operate and extend into, within and through the Town and within the Association's certificated area, all facilities reasonably necessary to furnish, sell and distribute electricity within and through the Town and a nonexclusive right to make reasonable use of the streets and other public places and public easements as may be necessary to carry out the terms of this franchise. These rights shall extend to all areas of the Town within the Association's certificated area as it is now constituted and to additional areas within the Association's certificated area as the Town may increase in size by annexation or otherwise. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-30. - Street lighting service. 
    The rights granted in this franchise encompass the nonexclusive franchise to provide street lighting service to the Town, and the provisions of this franchise apply with full and equal force to the street lighting service provided by the Association. Wherever reference is made to the sale of electricity or to the provision of electric service in this franchise, these references shall be deemed to include the provision of street lighting service. Wherever reference is made to Association facilities, equipment, systems or plants in this franchise, this reference shall be deemed to include Association-owned street lighting facilities, equipment, systems and plants. The foregoing notwithstanding and in addition to the rights afforded to the parties through the provisions of Sections 5-3-360 and 5-3-370 of this Article, it is understood and agreed that, during the term of this franchise, the Town may elect to assume ownership of all or a portion of street lighting facilities located in the Town. Upon such election, the Town and the Association shall, in good faith, negotiate the price and terms of purchase for such facilities. Should the Town and the Association be unable to reach agreement by negotiation, the price and terms of the purchase shall be submitted to binding arbitration under the arbitration rules then in effect for the American Arbitration Association. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise limit the rights of the parties to agree on an alternate methodology for the resolution of any such dispute. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-40. - Term of franchise. 
    This franchise shall take effect in accordance with the provisions of the Town Home Rule Charter. The term of this franchise shall begin with said effective date and continue for a period of twenty-five (25) years. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-50. - Franchise fee. 
    In consideration for the grant of this franchise, the Association shall pay the Town a sum equal to three percent (3%) of all revenues received from the sale of electricity within the Town, excluding all revenues received from the Town for street lighting service furnished to it. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-60. - Payment schedule. 
(a)  For the franchise fee owed on revenues received after the effective date of this franchise, payment shall be made in monthly installments not more than thirty (30) days following the close of the month for which payment is to be made. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the portions of the months at the beginning and end of the term of this franchise. All payments shall be made to the Town's Finance Director. The Town Manager or other authorized representatives of the Town shall have access to the books of the Association for the purpose of auditing or checking to ascertain that the franchise fee has been correctly computed and paid. 
(b)  In the event an error by the Association results in an overpayment of the franchise fee to the Town and said overpayment is in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00), credit for the overpayment shall be spread over the same period the error was undiscovered. If the overpayment is two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less, credit shall be taken against the next payment. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-70. - Change of franchise fee and other franchise terms. 
(a)  Once during each calendar year of the franchise term, the Town Board, upon giving thirty (30) days' notice to the Association of its intention to do so, may review and change the consideration the Town may be entitled to receive as a part of the franchise; provided, however, that the Town Board may only change the consideration to be received by the Town under the terms of this franchise to the equivalent of the consideration paid by the Association to any city or town in the State in which the Association supplies electric service under franchise. 
(b)  The Association shall report to the Town within sixty (60) days of the execution of a subsequent franchise or of any change of franchise in other municipalities that could have a significant financial impact on the consideration to be paid by the Association to the Town hereunder. If the Town Board decides that the consideration shall be so changed, it shall provide for such change by ordinance; provided, however, that any change in the franchise fee is then allowed to be surcharged by the Association; and provided further that the consideration is not higher than the highest consideration paid by the Association to any municipality within the State. For purposes of this Section, consideration means the franchise fee established in Section 5-3-50 above; the undergrounding program established in Section 5-3-310 of this Article; and also includes any other provision which is of similar significant financial benefit to the Town. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-80. - Franchise fee payment in lieu of other fees. 
    Payment of the franchise fee by the Association is accepted by the Town in lieu of any occupancy tax, license tax, permit charge, inspection fee or similar tax on the privilege of doing business or in connection with the physical operation thereof, but does not exempt the Association from any lawful taxation upon its property or any other tax not related to the franchise or the physical operation thereof, and does not exempt the Association from payment of head taxes or other fees or taxes assessed generally upon businesses. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-90. - Supply of electricity. 
    The Association shall take all reasonable and necessary steps to provide an adequate supply of electricity to its customers at the lowest reasonable cost consistent with long-term reliable supplies. If the supply of electricity to its customers should be interrupted, the Association shall take all necessary and reasonable actions to restore such supply within the shortest practicable time. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-100. - Restoration of service. 
    In the event the Association's electric system, or any part thereof, is partially or wholly destroyed or incapacitated, the Association shall use due diligence to restore the system to satisfactory service within the shortest practicable time. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-110. - Obligations regarding Association facilities. 
    The Association shall install, maintain, repair, renovate and replace its facilities with due diligence in a good and workmanlike manner, and the Association's facilities will be of sufficient quality and durability to provide adequate and efficient electric service to the Town and its residents. Association facilities shall not interfere with the Town's water mains, sewer mains or other municipal use of streets and other public places. The Association shall erect and maintain its facilities in such a way so as to minimize interference with trees and other natural features. Association facilities shall be installed in public easements so as to cause a minimal amount of interference with such property. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-120. - Excavation and construction. 
    All excavation and construction work done by the Association shall be done in a timely and expeditious manner which minimizes the inconvenience to the public and individuals. All public and private property whose use conforms to restrictions in public easements disturbed by Association excavation or construction activities shall be restored by the Association at its expense to substantially its former condition. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-130. - Relocation of Association facilities. 
(a)  Any relocation of the Association's facilities in any street or other public place required, caused or occasioned by any Town project shall be at the cost of the Association. Relocation shall be completed within a reasonable time from the date when the Town makes its request, such time to be established by the Association as soon as possible after the Town's request. The Association shall be granted an extension of time of completion equivalent to any delay caused by conditions not under its control, provided that the Association proceeds with due diligence at all times. 
(b)  Relocated underground facilities shall be underground. Relocated aboveground facilities shall be aboveground unless the Town either agrees to pay the additional cost of moving them underground or requests that such additional cost be paid out of available funds under Section 5-3-310 of this Article pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-140. - Service to new areas. 
    If the boundaries of the Town are expanded during the term of this franchise, the Association shall extend service to residents in the expanded area at the earliest practicable time and in accordance with the Association's extension policy in areas certificated to the Association. Service to the expanded area shall be in accordance with the terms of this franchise agreement, including payment of franchise fees. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-150. - Town not required to advance funds. 
    Upon receipt of the Town's authorization for billing and construction, the Association shall extend its facilities to provide electric service to the Town for municipal uses within the Town limits or for any major municipal facility outside the Town limits, and within the Association's certificated service area, without requiring the Town to advance funds prior to construction. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-160. - Technological improvements. 
    The Association shall generally introduce and install, as soon as practicable, electrical energy technological advances in its equipment and service within the Town when such advances are technically and economically feasible and are safe and beneficial to the Town and its residents. Upon request by the Town, the Association shall review and promptly report advances which have occurred in the electric utility industry that have been incorporated into the Association's operations in the Town in the previous year or will be so incorporated in the six (6) months following the Town's request. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-170. - Town regulation. 
    The Town expressly reserves, and the Association expressly recognizes, the Town's right and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, ordinances, rules and regulations as may by the Town be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-180. - Compliance with Town requirements. 
    The Association will comply with all Town requirements regarding curb and pavement cuts, excavating, digging and related construction activities. If requested by the Town, the Association shall submit to the Town copies of reports of annual and long-term planning for capital improvement projects with descriptions of required street cuts, excavation, digging and related construction activities within thirty (30) days after issuance. Except for emergencies, the Town may require that all installations be coordinated with the Town's street improvement programs. The Town's Director of Engineering shall be the Town's agent for inspection and for compliance with Town ordinances and regulations on any such projects. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-190. - Town review of construction and design. 
    Prior to construction of any significant facilities above ground or, for electrical energy, any transmission lines or generating plant, building, substation or similar structure within the Town, the Association shall furnish to the Town the plans for such facilities. In addition, the Association shall assess and report on the impact of such proposed construction on the Town environment. Such plans and reports may be reviewed by the Town to ascertain, without limitation: 
(1)  That all applicable laws, including building and zoning codes and air and water pollution regulations, are complied with; 
(2)  That aesthetic and good planning principles have been given due consideration; and 
(3)  That adverse impact on the environment has been minimized. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-200. - Compliance with standards. 
    The electrical energy which the Association distributes shall conform with the standards adopted by the Association's Board of Directors, as the same may be amended from time to time. A copy of such standards shall be available for inspection at the Association's offices and through the Association's website. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-210. - Compliance with air and water pollution laws. 
    The Association shall use its best efforts to take measures which will result in its facilities meeting the standards required by applicable federal and state air and water pollution laws. Upon the Town's request, the Association will provide the Town with a status report of such measures. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-220. - Inspection. 
    The Town shall have the right to inspect, at all reasonable times, any portion of the Association's system used to serve the Town and its residents. The Town shall also have access to Association records for the purpose of determining Association compliance with this franchise. The Association agrees to cooperate with the Town in conducting the inspection and to correct any discrepancies affecting the Town's interest in a prompt and efficient manner. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-230. - Tariff provisions. 
    The Town and the Association recognize that the lawful provisions of the Association's tariffs are consistent with the restrictions and limitations of Article XXV of the Colorado Constitution regarding the rights of municipalities to franchise and are controlling over any inconsistent provision in this franchise dealing with the same subject matter. In the opinion of the Association, no provision of this franchise is inconsistent with any of the currently effective provisions of the Association's tariffs. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-240. - Reports on Association operations. 
    The Association shall submit reasonable and necessary reports containing or based on information readily obtainable from the Association's books and records as the Town may request with respect to the operations of the Association under this franchise, and shall provide the Town with a list of real property within the Town which is owned by the Association. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-250. - Copies of tariffs. 
    The Association shall keep on file in the Association's office all tariffs, rules, regulations and policies filed with the Public Utilities Commission relating to service by the Association to the Town and its residents. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-260. - Town's use of Association facilities. 
    The Town shall have the right, for the purpose of stringing wires, to use all poles and suitable overhead structures constructed by the Association within the Town, which use shall not include the distribution or transmission of electricity. Such use by the Town will be without cost. The Association will allow others holding a franchise, except electric service, from the Town to so utilize such poles and suitable overhead structures upon reasonable terms and conditions to be agreed upon by the Association and such holder of a franchise from the Town; provided, however, that the Association shall assume no liability nor shall it be put to any additional expense in connection therewith, and the use of said poles and structures by the Town or others holding a franchise from the Town shall be in such a manner as not to constitute a safety hazard or to interfere unnecessarily with the Association's use of the same. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-270. - Underground conduit. 
    If the Association installs new electric underground conduit, opens a trench or replaces such conduit, the Association shall provide adequate advance notice to permit additional installations of similar conduit and pull wire for the Town. If the Town wants additional similar conduit and pull wire installed, it will so notify the Association and provide similar conduit and pull wire at its expense to the Association, which will install it without further expense to the Town, provided that such action by the Town will not unnecessarily interfere with the Association's facilities or delay the accomplishment of the project. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-280. - Town held harmless. 
    The Association shall indemnify, defend and save the Town harmless from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature arising out of the operations of the Association within the Town pursuant to this franchise and the securing of and the exercise by the Association of the franchise rights granted in this franchise, and shall pay all reasonable expenses arising therefrom. The Town will provide prompt written notice to the Association of the pendency of any claim or action against the Town arising out of the exercise by the Association of its franchise rights. The Association will be permitted, at its own expense, to appear and defend or to assist in defense of such claim. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, the Association shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the Town harmless to the extent any claim, demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent act or failure to act of the Town or any of its officers or employees. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-290. - Payment of expenses incurred by Town in relation to ordinance. 
    At the Town's option, the Association shall pay in advance or reimburse the Town for expenses incurred in publication of notices and ordinances and for photocopying of documents arising out of the negotiations or process for obtaining the franchise. The Association shall also be responsible for attorney fees. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-300. - Underground electrical distribution lines in new areas. 
    The Association will place newly constructed electrical distribution lines underground to serve new residential subdivision areas in accordance with the Association's tariffs and the Town's subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-310. - Overhead conversion at expense of Association. 
(a)  As and when requested by the Town, the Association will spend one percent (1%) of the preceding calendar year's electric revenues to move electric distribution facilities located in streets and other public places in the Town underground, provided that the undergrounding shall extend for a minimum distance of one (1) block or seven hundred fifty (750) feet, or as may be mutually agreed to by the parties. 
(b)  Any unexpended portion of the one percent (1%) of electric revenue may be carried over to succeeding years, and, in addition, upon request by the Town, the Association shall anticipate amounts to be available for up to three (3) years in advance. Any amounts advanced shall be credited against amounts to be expended in succeeding years until such advances are eliminated. No relocation expenses which the Association is required to expend pursuant to Section 5-3-130 of this Article shall be charged to this allocation. 
(c)  Funds to be expended pursuant to this Section shall not be used in any project or situation for which and to the extent that the Town has received federal or state funds for the purpose of undergrounding utilities. Funds to be expended pursuant to this Section may be used for "matching" purposes with state or federal monies. 
(d)  In addition to the provisions of this Section, the Town may require additional facilities to be moved underground at the Town's expense, pursuant to state law. 
(e)  The Town acknowledges that the establishment of this undergrounding fund creates no vested right in the Town to the undergrounding monies. Further, if such monies are not expended pursuant to the conditions hereof, the fund is not convertible to cash or available for any other purposes. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-320. - Review of undergrounding program. 
    Representatives of both the Town and the Association shall meet periodically to review the Association's undergrounding program. This review shall include: 
(1)  Underground programs, including conversions and replacements which have been accomplished or are underway by the Association, together with the Association's plans for additional undergrounding; and 
(2)  Undergrounding projects anticipated by the Town. 
Such meetings shall be held to achieve a continuing program for the orderly undergrounding of electrical lines in the Town. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-330. - Cooperation with other utilities. 
    When undertaking a project of undergrounding, the Town and the Association shall work with other utilities or companies which have their lines overhead to attempt to have all lines undergrounded as part of the same project. When other utilities or companies are placing their lines underground, the Association shall cooperate with these utilities and companies and undertake to underground Association facilities as part of the same project where feasible. The Association shall not be required to pay the costs of any other utility in connection with work under this Section. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-340. - Consent of Town required for transfer. 
    The Association shall not transfer or assign any rights under this franchise to a third party, excepting only corporate reorganizations of the Association not including a third party, unless the Town shall approve in writing such transfer or assignment. Approval of the transfer or assignment shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-350. - Transfer fee. 
    Inasmuch as the Association is a consumer-owned electric cooperative, the approval of the transfer or assignment of rights under this franchise shall be without a transfer fee, except that the Association shall pay the full amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the Town as a result of any such transfer. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-360. - Town's right to purchase or condemn. 
    The right of the Town to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility works or ways, and the rights of the Association in connection therewith, as provided by the Colorado Constitution and statutes, are hereby expressly reserved. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-370. - Continued cooperation by Association. 
    In the event the Town exercises its option to purchase or condemn, the Association agrees that, at the Town's request, it will continue to supply any service it supplies under this franchise for the duration of the term of this franchise, pursuant to terms and conditions negotiated for such continued operation. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-380. - Removal of Association facilities at end of franchise. 
    In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term or the Association terminates any service provided herein for any reason whatsoever, and the Town has not purchased or condemned the system and has not provided for alternative electrical service, the Association shall have no right to remove said system pending resolution of the disposition of the system. The Association further agrees that it will not withhold any temporary services necessary to protect the public and shall be entitled only to monetary compensation in no greater amount than it would have been entitled to were such services provided during the term of this franchise. Only upon receipt of written notice from the Town stating that the Town has adequate alternative electrical energy sources to provide for the people of the Town shall the Association be entitled to remove any or all of said systems in use under the terms of this franchise. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-390. - Association to purchase power. 
    The Town expressly reserves the right to engage in the production of electricity. The Association agrees to negotiate for the purchase of Town-generated power in accordance with its tariffs. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-400. - Forfeiture. 
(a)  Both the Association and the Town recognize that there may be circumstances whereby compliance with the provisions of this franchise is impossible or is delayed because of circumstances beyond the Association's control. In those instances, the Association shall use its best efforts to comply in a timely manner and to the extent possible. If the Association fails to perform any of the terms and conditions of this franchise and such failure is within the Association's control, the Town, acting by and through its Town Board, may determine, after hearing, that such failure is of a substantial nature. Upon receiving notice of such determination, the Association shall have a reasonable time in which to remedy the violations. If, during said reasonable time, corrective actions have not been successfully taken, the Town, acting by and through its Town Board, shall determine whether any or all rights and privileges granted to the Association under this franchise shall be forfeited. 
(b)  Any such declaration of forfeiture shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-410. - Other legal remedies. 
    Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict any legal rights that the Town or the Association may possess arising from any alleged violation of this franchise. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-420. - Continued obligation. 
    Upon forfeiture, the Association shall continue to provide service to the Town and its residents in accordance with the terms hereof until the Town makes alternative arrangements for such service. If the Association fails to provide continued service, it shall be liable for damages to the Town. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-430. - Amendments to franchise. 
    At any time during the term of this franchise, the Town, through its Town Board, or the Association may propose amendments to this franchise by giving thirty (30) days' written notice to the other of the proposed amendments desired, and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will negotiate within a reasonable time in good faith in an effort to agree on mutually satisfactory amendments. The word amendment, as used in this Section, does not include a change authorized in Section 5-3-70 of this Article. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-440. - Successors and assigns. 
    The rights, privileges, franchises and obligations granted and contained in this franchise shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the Association, its successors and assigns. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-450. - Third parties. 
    Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to provide rights to third parties. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-460. - Representatives. 
    Both parties shall designate from time to time, in writing, representatives for the Association and the Town who will be the persons to whom notices shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this franchise. Notice shall be in writing and forwarded by certified mail or hand delivery to the persons and addresses as hereinafter stated, unless the persons and addresses are changed at the written request of either party, delivered in person or by certified mail. Until any such change shall hereafter be made, notices shall be sent to the Mayor and to the Association's Chief Executive Officer. Currently the addresses are as follows: 
For the Town of Windsor: 
Mayor 
Town of Windsor 
301 Walnut Street 
Windsor, CO 80550-1229 
For the Association: 
Chief Executive Officer 
Poudre Valley Rural Electric Assn., Inc. 
P.O. Box 272550 
Ft. Collins, CO 80527-2550 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-470. - Severability. 
    Should any one (1) or more provisions of this franchise be determined to be illegal or unenforceable, all other provisions nevertheless shall remain effective; provided, however, that the parties shall forthwith enter into good faith negotiations and proceed with due diligence to draft a term that will achieve the original intent of the parties hereunder. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
Sec. 5-3-480. - Entire agreement. 
    This franchise constitutes the entire agreement of the parties. There have been no representations made other than those contained in this franchise. 
(Ord. 2009-1340 1-3) 
ARTICLE IV - Gas Franchise 

Sec. 5-4-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this franchise, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this Article. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word shall is mandatory and may is permissive. Words not defined in this Article shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    Board or Town Board refers to and is the legislative body of the Town of Windsor. 
    Company refers to and is Atmos Energy, a division of Atmos Energy Corporation, a Texas and Virginia corporation, and its successors and assigns. 
    Distribution facilities refer to and are only those facilities owned by the Company that are reasonably necessary to provide gas within the Town. 
    Emergency refers to ruptures and leakage of pipelines, explosions, fires and similar instances where immediate action is necessary to prevent loss of life or significant damage to underground facilities and advance notice of proposed excavation is impracticable under the circumstances. 
    Facilities refer to and are all facilities owned by the Company reasonably necessary to provide gas into, within and through the Town and include plants, works, systems, lines, equipment, pipes, mains, underground links, gas compressors and meters. 
    Gas or natural gas refers to and is such gaseous fuels as natural, artificial, synthetic, liquefied natural, liquefied petroleum, manufactured or any mixture thereof. 
    Public easements refer to and are public and dedicated easements. 
    PUC refers to and is the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado or other authority succeeding to the regulatory powers of the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
    Residents refers to and includes all persons, businesses, industries, governmental agencies, and any other entity whatsoever, presently located or to be hereinafter located, in whole or in part, within the territorial boundaries of the Town of Windsor. 
    Revenues refer to and are those amounts of money which the Company receives from its customers within the Town for the sale of gas under rates, temporary or permanent, authorized by the PUC and represents amounts billed under such rates as adjusted for refunds, the net write-off of uncollectible accounts, corrections or other regulatory adjustments. 
    Streets and other public places refer to and are streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes, easements, public ways and other public places in said Town. 
    Town refers to and is the Town of Windsor, Weld County, Colorado, and includes the territory as currently is or may in the future be included within the boundaries of the Town of Windsor. 
(Prior code 5-111; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-20. - Grant of franchise. 
    The Town hereby grants to the Company, for the period specified and subject to the conditions, terms and provisions contained in this Article, the right to furnish, transport, sell and distribute gas to the Town and to all persons, businesses and industries within the Town, the right to acquire, construct, install, locate, maintain, operate and extend into, within and through the Town all facilities reasonably necessary to provide gas to the Town and to all persons, businesses and industries within the Town and in the territory adjacent thereto; and the right to make reasonable use of all streets and other public places as may be necessary to carry out the terms of the franchise. 
(Prior code 5-112; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-30. - Nonexclusive franchise. 
    The franchise granted by this Article shall be nonexclusive. The rights, duties and obligations of the parties relate to the territory granted to the Company by the PUC within its certificate of public convenience and necessity which is also included within the Town as it currently exists or may hereafter by brought within the incorporated area of the Town, so far as legally permissible. 
(Prior code 5-113; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-40. - Term of franchise. 
    The term of this franchise shall be twenty (20) years, beginning April 1, 2004, and expiring March 31, 2024. 
(Prior code 5-114; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-50. - Franchise fee. 
    In consideration for the grant of this franchise, the Company shall collect and remit to the Town a sum equal to three percent (3%) of the revenues derived annually from the sale of gas within the Town, excluding the amount received from the Town itself for gas service furnished it. 
(Prior code 5-115; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-60. - Payment schedule. 
    For the franchise fee owed on revenues received after the effective date of this franchise, payment shall be made in quarterly installments no later than thirty (30) days following the close of the quarter for which payment is to be collected. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the portions of the quarter, at the beginning and end of the term of this franchise. All payments shall be made to the Town of Windsor. The Town Clerk, or other authorized representatives, shall, upon reasonable advance notice, have access to the Company's accounting records for the purpose of auditing or checking to ascertain that the franchise fees have been correctly computed and paid. In the event an error by the Company results in an overpayment of the franchise fee to the Town and said overpayment is in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00), credit for the overpayment shall be spread over the same period the effort was undiscovered. If the overpayment is two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less, credit shall be taken against the next payment. 
(Prior code 5-116; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-70. - Franchise fee payment in lieu of other fees. 
    Payment of the franchise fee by the Company is accepted by the Town in lieu of any occupancy tax, license tax, permit charge, inspection fee or similar tax, assessment or excise upon the pipes, mains, meters or other personal property of the Company or on the privilege of doing business or in connection with the physical operation thereof, but does not exempt the Company from any lawful taxation upon its real property or any other tax not related to the franchise or the physical operation thereof. 
(Prior code 5-117; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-80. - Change of franchise fee and other franchise terms. 
    Once during each calendar year of the franchise, the Town, upon giving thirty (30) days' notice to the Company, may review and change the franchise fee that the Town may be entitled to receive as a part of the franchise; provided, however, that the Town may only change the franchise fee amount such as to cause the Town to receive a franchise fee under this franchise equivalent to the franchise fee that the Company may pay to any other city or town in any other franchise under which the Company renders gas service in Colorado. 
(Prior code 5-118; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-90. - Contract obligation. 
    If the franchise fee specified in this Article is declared illegal, unconstitutional or void for any reason by any court of proper authority, the Company is contractually bound to pay the Town an amount that would be, as near as practicable, equivalent to the amount which would have been paid by the Company as a franchise fee hereunder. 
(Prior code 5-119; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-100. - Supply of gas. 
    The Company shall take all reasonable and necessary steps to provide an adequate supply of gas to its customers at the lowest reasonable cost consistent with long-term reliable supplies. If the supply of gas to its customers should be interrupted, the Company shall take all necessary and reasonable actions to restore such supply within the shortest practicable time. 
(Prior code 5-120; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-110. - Restoration of service. 
    In the event the Company's gas system, or any part thereof, is partially or wholly destroyed or incapacitated, the Company shall use due diligence to restore its system to satisfactory service within the shortest practicable time. 
(Prior code 5-121; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-120. - Obligations regarding Company facilities. 
    The Company shall install, maintain, repair, renovate and replace its facilities with due diligence in a good and workmanlike manner, and the Company's facilities will be of sufficient quality and durability to provide adequate and efficient gas service to the Town and its residents. Company facilities shall not interfere with the Town's water mains, sewer mains or other municipal use of streets and other public places. The Company shall erect and maintain its facilities in such a way so as to minimize interference with trees and other natural features. Company facilities shall, to the extent practicable, be installed in public easements and so as to cause a minimal amount of interference with such property. 
(Prior code 5-122; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-130. - Excavation and construction. 
    All excavation and construction work done by the Company shall be done in a timely and expeditious manner which minimizes the inconvenience to the public and individuals. All public and private property whose use conforms to restrictions in public easements disturbed by Company excavation or construction activities shall be restored by the Company at its expense to substantially its former condition. 
(Prior code 5-123; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-140. - Relocation of Company facilities. 
    Any relocation of the Company's facilities in any street or other public place required, caused or occasioned by any Town project shall be at the cost of the Company. Relocation shall be completed within a reasonable time from the date when the Town makes its request, such time to be established by the Company as soon as possible after the Town's request. The Company shall be granted an extension of time of completion equivalent to any delay caused by conditions not under its control, provided that the Company proceeds with due diligence at all times. 
(Prior code 5-124; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-150. - Service to new areas. 
    If during the term of this franchise the boundaries of the Town are expanded, the Company, within its certificated area, may extend service to the newly incorporated areas in accordance with the Company's main extension policy then in effect under the Company's tariffs on file with the PUC. Service to annexed areas shall be in accordance with the terms of this franchise, including payment of the franchise fee. 
(Prior code 5-125; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-160. - Town not required to advance funds. 
    Upon receipt of the Town's authorization for billing and construction, the Company shall extend its facilities to provide gas to the Town for municipal uses within the Town limits and within the Company certificated service area, without requiring the Town to advance funds prior to construction. 
(Prior code 5-126; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-170. - Technological improvements. 
    The Company shall generally introduce and install, as soon as practicable, gas technological advances in its equipment and service within the Town when such advances are technically and economically feasible and are safe and beneficial to the Town and its residents. Upon request by the Town, the Company shall review and promptly report advances which have occurred in the gas industry that have been incorporated into the Company's operations in the Town in the previous year or will be so incorporated in the six (6) months following the Town's request. 
(Prior code 5-127; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-180. - Town regulation. 
    The Town expressly reserves, and the Company expressly recognizes, the Town's right and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, such charter provisions, ordinances and rules and regulations as the Town may deem necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(Prior code 5-128; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-190. - Compliance with Town requirements. 
    Except in instances of emergency, the Company will comply with all Town requirements and obtain any permits required regarding curb and pavement cuts, excavating, digging and related construction activities. Except in instances of emergency, the Town may require that all installations be coordinated with the Town's capital improvement programs. 
(Prior code 5-129; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-200. - Town review of construction and design. 
    Prior to construction of any significant gas facilities above ground within the Town, if requested by the Town, the Company shall furnish to the Town the plans for such facilities. In addition, the Company shall assess and report on the impact of such proposed construction on the Town environment. Such plans and reports may be reviewed by the Town to ascertain, inter alia, (1) that all applicable laws including building and zoning codes and air and water pollution regulations are complied with, (2) that aesthetic and good planning principles have been given due consideration and (3) that adverse impact on the environment has been minimized. The Town shall not require the Company to meet standards higher than those required to meet federal, state or local laws. 
(Prior code 5-130; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-210. - Compliance with PUC regulations. 
    The natural gas which the Company distributes shall conform with the standards promulgated by the PUC in the Rules Regulating the Service of Gas Utilities and with the tariff provisions of the Company setting standards, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Prior code 5-131; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-220. - Inspection. 
    The Town shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times any portion of the Company's system used to serve the Town and its residents. The Town shall also have access to Company records for the purpose of determining Company compliance with this franchise. The Company agrees to cooperate with the Town in conducting the inspection and to correct any discrepancies affecting the Town's interest in a prompt and efficient manner. 
(Prior code 5-132; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-230. - Public Utilities Commission regulation. 
    The Town and the Company recognize that the lawful provisions of the Company's tariffs on file and in effect with the PUC which are consistent with the restrictions and limitations of Article XXXV of the Colorado Constitution regarding the rights of municipalities to franchise are controlling over any inconsistent provision in this franchise dealing with the same subject matter. In the opinion of the Company, no provision of this franchise is inconsistent with any of the currently effective provisions of the Company's tariffs. 
(Prior code 5-133; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-240. - Reports on Company operations. 
    Upon reasonable notice, the Company shall submit reasonable and necessary reports containing or based on information readily obtainable from the Company's books and records as the Town may request with respect to the operations of the Company under this franchise, and provide the Town with a list of real property within the Town which is owned by the Company. The Town will ensure the confidentiality of information which, in the Company's reasonable discretion, it deems to be confidential and proprietary, to the extent provided by law. The Company understands that the Town is subject to the Colorado Public Records Statute. 
(Prior code 5-134; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-250. - Copies of tariffs, all PUC filings. 
    The Company shall keep on file, in the nearest Company office, all tariffs, rules, regulations and policies approved by the PUC relating to service by the Company to the Town and its residents. Upon request by the Town, the Company shall provide the Town with copies of filings affecting said service which it makes with the PUC. Company tariffs are also located on the Company website: atmosenergy.com. 
(Prior code 5-135; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-260. - Town held harmless. 
    The Company shall indemnify, defend and save the Town harmless from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature arising out of the operations of the Company within the Town pursuant to this franchise and the securing of and the exercise by the Company of the franchise rights granted in this Article, and shall pay all reasonable expenses arising therefrom. The Town will provide prompt written notice to the Company of the pendency of any claim or action against the Town arising out of the exercise by the Company of its franchise rights. The Company will be permitted, at its own expense, to appear and defend or to assist in defense of such claim. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, the Company shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the Town harmless to the extent any claim, demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent act or failure to act of the Town or any of its officers or employees. 
(Prior code 5-136; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-270. - Payment of expenses incurred by Town in relation to ordinance. 
    At the Town's option, the Company shall pay in advance or reimburse the Town for expenses incurred in publication of notices and ordinances and for photocopying of documents arising out of the negotiations or process for obtaining the franchise. 
(Prior code 5-137; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-280. - Consent of Town required. 
    The Company shall not transfer or assign any rights under this franchise to a third party unless the Town shall approve such transfer or assignment. Approval of the transfer or assignment shall not be unreasonably withheld by the Town. A corporate merger, consolidation or reorganization involving the Company shall not constitute a transfer or assignment for purposes hereof. 
(Prior code 5-138; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-290. - Transfer fee. 
    In the event of a sale, transfer or assignment of rights under this franchise, excepting only a corporate reorganization of the Company, the transferee shall be required to promptly pay to the Town a transfer fee equivalent to the amount of the last annual franchise fee amount paid by the Company pursuant to Section 5-4-50 of this Article. The charging or collecting of such transfer fee is conclusively deemed to be reasonable. 
(Prior code 5-139; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-300. - Town's right to purchase or condemn. 
    The right of the Town to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility works or ways, and the rights of the Company in connection therewith, as provided by the Colorado Constitution and Statutes, are hereby expressly reserved. 
(Prior code 5-140; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-310. - Continued cooperation by Company. 
    In the event the Town exercises its option to purchase or condemn, the Company agrees that, at the Town's request, it will continue to supply any service it supplies under this franchise, for the duration of the term of this franchise pursuant to terms and conditions negotiated for such continued operation. 
(Prior code 141; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-320. - Limitations on Company removal. 
    In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term or the Company terminates any service provided herein for any reason whatsoever, and the Town has not purchased or condemned the system and has not provided for alternative gas or electrical service, the Company shall have no right to remove said system pending resolution of the disposition of the system. The Company further agrees it will not withhold any temporary services necessary to protect the public and shall be entitled only to monetary compensation in no greater amount than it would have been entitled to were such services provided during the term of this franchise. Only upon receipt of written notice from the Town stating that the Town has adequate alternative gas sources to provide for the people of the Town shall the Company be entitled to remove any or all of said systems in use under the terms of this franchise. 
(Prior code 5-142; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-330. - Transportation of gas. 
    The Town expressly reserves the right to obtain or produce gas. The Company shall transport natural gas purchased by the Town for use in the Town facilities pursuant to separate contracts with the Town. The Company agrees to transport gas made available for sale on terms and conditions comparable to other contracts entered into contemporaneously by the Company with similarly situated customers. 
(Prior code 5-143; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-340. - Forfeiture. 
    Both the Company and the Town recognize that there may be circumstances whereby compliance with the provisions of this franchise is impossible or is delayed because of circumstances beyond the Company's control. In this instance, the Company shall use its best efforts to comply in a timely manner and to the extent possible. In the event of a substantial breach by the Company of any material provision of this franchise, the Town, acting by and through its Board, may terminate the franchise and rights granted to the Company hereunder; provided, however, that such termination shall not be effective unless and until the procedures described below have been followed: 
(1)  The Town must deliver to the Company, by certified mail or hand-delivery, a written notice. Such notice must (i) fairly and fully set forth in detail each of the alleged acts or omissions of the Company that the Town contends constitutes a substantial breach of any material provision hereof; (ii) designate which of the terms and conditions hereof the Town contends the Company breached; and (iii) specify the date, time and place at which a public hearing will be held by the governing body of the Town for the purpose of determining whether the allegations contained in the notice did, in fact, occur; provided, however, that the date of such hearing may not be less than fifteen (15) days after the date of such notice. 
(2)  Within ten (10) days following the adjournment of the public hearing described in Paragraph (1) above, the Town must deliver to the Company, by certified mail, a written notice setting forth (i) the acts and omissions of the Company described in the first notice that the governing body of the Town determines to have in fact occurred; and (ii) the specific terms and conditions of this franchise listed in the first notice that the governing body of the Town determines to have in fact been breached by such acts or omissions of the Company. 
(3)  The Town shall permit the Company the opportunity to substantially correct and cure all the breaches hereof set forth in the written notice described in Paragraph (2) above, provided that such breaches are amenable to cure, within thirty (30) days after the Company's receipt of such notice before termination occurs. 
(Prior code 5-144; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-350. - Judicial review. 
    Any such declaration of forfeiture shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law. 
(Prior code 5-145; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-360. - Other legal remedies. 
    Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict any legal rights that the Town or the Company may possess arising from any alleged violation of this franchise. 
(Prior code 5-146; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-370. - Continued obligations. 
    Upon forfeiture, the Company shall continue to provide service to the Town and its residents in accordance with the terms hereof until the Town makes alternative arrangements for such service. If the Company fails to provide continued service, it shall be liable for damages to the Town. 
(Prior code 5-147; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-380. - Force majeure. 
    Notwithstanding anything expressly or impliedly to the contrary contained herein, in the event the Company is prevented, wholly or partially, from complying with any obligation or undertaking contained herein by reason of any event of force majeure, then, while so prevented, compliance with such obligations or undertakings shall be suspended, and the time during which the Company is so prevented shall not be counted against the Company for any reason. The term force majeure , as used herein, shall mean any cause not reasonably within Company control and includes, but is not limited to, acts of God, strikes, lockouts, wars, riots, orders or decrees of any lawfully constituted federal, state or local body, contagions or contaminations hazardous to human life or health, fires, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakages or accidents to machinery or lines of pipe, inability to obtain or the delay in obtaining rights-of-way, materials, supplies or labor permits, temporary failure of gas supply, or necessary repair, maintenance or replacement of facilities used in the performance of the obligations contained in this franchise. 
(Prior code 5-148; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-390. - Amendments to franchise. 
    At any time during the term of this franchise, the Town, through its Town Board, or the Company may propose amendments to this franchise by giving thirty (30) days' written notice to the other of the proposed amendments desired and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will negotiate within a reasonable time in good faith in an effort to agree on mutually satisfactory amendments. The word amendments as used in this Section does not include a change authorized in Section 5-4-70. 
(Prior code 5-149; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-400. - Successors and assigns. 
    The rights, privileges, franchises and obligations granted and contained in this franchise shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon Atmos Energy, its successors and assigns. 
(Prior code 5-150; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-410. - Third parties. 
    Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to provide rights to third parties. 
(Prior code 5-151; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-420. - Representatives. 
    Both parities shall designate from time to time in writing representatives for the Company and the Town who will be the persons to whom notices shall be sent regarding any action to be taken under this franchise. Notice shall be in writing and forwarded by certified mail or hand delivery to the persons and addresses as hereinafter stated, unless the persons and addresses are changed at the written request of either party, delivered in person or by certified mail. Until any such change shall hereafter be made, notices shall be sent to the Town Manager and to the Company's Greeley Public Affairs Manager. Currently the addresses are as follows: 
    For the Town of Windsor: 
Town Manager 
301 Walnut Street 
Windsor, Colorado 80550 
    For the Company: 
Vice President of Operations 
1200 11th Avenue 
Greeley, Colorado 80631 
(Prior code 5-152; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-430. - Severability. 
    Should any one (1) or more provisions of this franchise be determined to be illegal or unenforceable, all other provisions nevertheless shall remain effective; provided, however, that the parties shall forthwith enter into good faith negotiations and proceed with due diligence to draft a term that will achieve the original intent of the parties hereunder. 
(Prior code 5-153; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-440. - Entire agreement. 
    This franchise constitutes the entire agreement of the parties. There have been no representations made other than those contained in this franchise. 
(Prior code 5-154; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-450. - Town Board approval. 
    This grant of franchise shall not become effective unless approved by the Town Board. 
(Prior code 5-155; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-4-460. - Company approval. 
    The Company shall file with the Town Clerk its written acceptance of this franchise and of all of its terms and provisions within ten (10) days after the adoption of this franchise by the Town Board. The acceptance shall be in form and content approved by the Town Attorney. If the Company shall fail to timely file its written acceptance as herein provided, this franchise shall be and become null and void. 
(Prior code 5-156; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE V - Telephone Utilities Tax 

Sec. 5-5-10. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied on and against each telephone utility company operating within the Town a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the Town and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the Town. The amount of the tax levied hereby shall be: 
(1)  For the portion of 1979 remaining after the date on which the tax begins to accrue as provided in Section 5-5-20: two dollars and ten cents ($2.10) per telephone account for which local exchange telephone service is provided within the corporate limits of the Town on said date. 
(2)  For each subsequent calendar year: four dollars and twenty cents ($4.20) per telephone account for which local exchange telephone service is provided within the corporate limits of the Town on the anniversary of the date on which the tax begins to accrue as provided in Section 5-5-20. 
(Prior code 5-171; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-5-20. - Installment payment. 
    The tax levied by this Article shall begin to accrue on July 1, 1979, and shall be due and payable in six (6) equal monthly installments for the remaining portion of 1979, each such installment to be paid on the last business day of each calendar month. 
(Prior code 5-172; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-5-30. - Filing of statement. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the date on which the tax begins to accrue as provided in Section 5-5-20, each telephone utility company subject to this Article shall file with the Director of Finance, in such form as the Director of Finance may require, a statement showing the total telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the corporate limits of the Town on said date. Such statement shall be filed within thirty (30) days after each anniversary of the date on which the tax begins to accrue, showing such accounts on the anniversary date. 
(Prior code 5-173; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532 10) 
Sec. 5-5-40. - Failure to pay. 
    If any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same, together with an addition of ten percent (10%) of the amount of taxes due, shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the Town. The Town Attorney, upon direction of the Town Board, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect said debt. 
(Prior code 5-174; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-5-50. - Violations and penalties. 
    If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this Article shall fail, neglect or refuse to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in Section 5-5-30, said officer, agent, manager or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), provided that each day after said statement shall become delinquent, during which said officer, agent, manager or person shall so fail, neglect or refuse to make and file such statement, shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 2010-1392 6) 
Sec. 5-5-60. - Inspection of records. 
    The Town, its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the telephone utility companies which are subject to the provisions of this Article, and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. 
(Prior code 5-176; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-5-70. - Construal of provisions. 
    The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this Article shall be construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the Town. 
(Prior code 5-177; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-5-80. - Tax in lieu of other taxes or services. 
    The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other occupation taxes or taxes on the privilege of doing business in the Town, on any telephone utility company, subject to the provisions of this Article and, in addition, shall be in lieu of any free service furnished to the Town by any said telephone utility. 
(Prior code 5-178; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VI - Emergency Telephone Service Charge 

Sec. 5-6-10. - Charge imposed,collected. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed, pursuant to state law , upon all telephone exchange access facilities within that portion of the Town, located within the County, an emergency telephone charge in an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the tariff rates as approved by the Public Utilities Commission, or fifty cents ($.50), whichever is less. Upon recommendation of the Weld Emergency Telephone Service Authority, the Town Board may, by resolution, raise or lower the emergency telephone charge, but in no event shall such charge exceed the amount of two percent (2%) of the tariff as approved by the Public Utilities Commission. 
(b)  Telephone service suppliers providing telephone service in the Town are hereby authorized to collect the emergency telephone charge imposed by this Article in accordance with state law , and to provide those funds to the Weld Emergency Telephone Service Authority as provided in the Intergovernmental Agreement. 
(Prior code 5-191; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VII - Franchises Generally 

Sec. 5-7-10. - Application for franchise authority. 
    Any entity which proposes to utilize or continue utilizing Town streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way and other public ways or places, through the construction, use, operation or placement of facilities, pipes, wires, poles or other objects and apparatus of a fixed or permanent nature, and any entity which proposes to transfer or sell its franchise, plant or system, or merge with another, or to transfer, lease or permit the use of any rights under a franchise to another, shall be required to give notice in writing to the Town Manager of its intention and request to seek an initial award of a franchise, the renewal of an existing franchise, or the transfer or sale of a franchise. The notice shall hereinafter be referred to as Application for Franchise Authority , and the entity giving such notice shall hereinafter be referred to as Applicant . The Application for Franchise Authority shall set forth the Applicant's request and the date by which the Applicant desires the franchise or the transfer or sale of a franchise to become effective, and shall be delivered to the Town Manager not less than four (4) months prior to the date the Applicant desires the franchise or renewal of a franchise or the transfer or sale of a franchise to become effective. 
(Prior code 5-201; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-7-20. - Bond required. 
    There is hereby imposed upon the Applicant the duty to reimburse the Town for all costs and expenses incurred by the Town in negotiating and approving an initial grant or any renewal of a franchise, in investigating the reasonableness of any transfer or sale of a franchise, and in the process of approving or disapproving a franchise or a transfer or sale of a franchise, including but not limited to, Town staff time and expenses, expert and consulting fees and studies, legal fees, public hearings and elections, if any, which costs shall hereinafter be referred to as Town's costs . The Applicant shall at the time of filing an Application for Franchise Authority post with the Town a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other form of security acceptable to the Town Manager as security for the payment of the Town's costs, such cash bond to be hereinafter referred to as security bond . The amount of the security bond shall be determined by the Town Manager based upon the nature and purpose of the request made in the Application for Franchise Authority and an estimate of the Town's costs. The security bond shall not be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) if an election is not required, and not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) if an election is required. The Town Board may waive the requirements of a security bond, in whole or in part, in its sole discretion. Failure to post the required security bond may result in a denial of the request made in the Application for Franchise Authority. 
(Prior code 5-202; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-7-30. - Town to maintain account of expenses. 
    During franchise negotiations, and during the investigation and approval or disapproval process for a franchise or authority to sell or transfer a franchise, the Town shall maintain an account of all expenses incurred, including but not limited to, staff time and expenses, consulting fees, legal fees, and administrative and other expenses. 
(Prior code 5-203; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-7-40. - Billing statements. 
    The Town shall mail to the Applicant periodic billing statements for all the Town's costs. Said statements shall be billed to the address designated by the Applicant in its Application for Franchise Authority. Said billing statements may be mailed to the Applicant at thirty-day intervals and will itemize the Town's costs to date of billing. Failure of the Town to mail to the Applicant a billing statement at any thirty-day interval shall not be deemed a waiver by the Town of its right to reimbursement of all or any portion of the Town's costs. 
(Prior code 5-204; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-7-50. - Failure to pay. 
    The Applicant shall pay all of the Town's costs within thirty (30) days of the date the Town mails the billing statement. Failure to pay the Town's costs set forth in any billing statement within thirty (30) days of mailing shall constitute a denial of the Applicant's request made in the Application for Franchise Authority and forfeiture of that amount of Applicant's security bond equal to Town's costs set forth in the billing statement. The Applicant shall remain responsible for and shall reimburse all Town's costs that exceed the amount of the security bond. 
(Prior code 5-205; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-7-60. - Filing of protest. 
    In the event the Applicant disputes the reasonableness of the Town's costs, it may seek review of the billing statement by filing a protest with the Town Board within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the billing statement. The filing of any such protest shall be conditioned upon the Applicant paying the disputed sums due under protest. After reasonable notice to the Applicant, a hearing shall be held before the Town Board at a regularly scheduled meeting, and at such hearing, the Applicant may present evidence regarding the reasonableness of the billing charges. The Applicant shall bear the burden of proof at said hearing. At the hearing, evidence may be received in the form of documents, exhibits and witness testimony. The Town Board shall ensure the fair and efficient conduct of the hearing, but shall not be bound by the Colorado Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be open to the public. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Town Board may approve, reject or modify the billing charges addressed by the Applicant's protest. 
(Prior code 5-206; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-7-70. - Return of remainder of security bond. 
    Within thirty (30) days after full payment of the Town's costs by the Applicant, the Town shall return the remaining portion, if any, of the Applicant's security bond. 
(Prior code 5-207; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-7-80. - Costs not to be surcharged. 
    Neither the Applicant's nor the Town's costs shall be surcharged against or otherwise charged solely to the Town or residents of the Town. 
(Prior code 5-208; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 5-7-90. - Applicant to pay legal fees. 
    Any Applicant or entity challenging the validity, legality or constitutionality of this Article shall, if unsuccessful, reimburse the Town for all costs incurred in such litigation, including reasonable expert witness and attorney fees. 
(Prior code 5-209; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
APPENDIX 5-A - CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS 

Section 1. - POLICY. 
    The Cable Operator should be permitted the option and autonomy to first resolve citizen complaints without delay and interference from the Franchising Authority. 
    Where a given complaint is not addressed by the Cable Operator to the citizen's satisfaction, the Franchising Authority may intervene, if requested to do so by the citizen. In addition, where a pattern of unremedied complaints or noncompliance with these Standards is identified, the Franchising Authority may prescribe a cure and establish a thirty-day deadline for implementation of the cure. If the noncompliance is not cured within thirty (30) days, monetary sanctions may be imposed to encourage compliance. 
    These Standards are intended to be of general application; however, the Cable Operator shall be relieved of any obligations hereunder if it is unable to perform due to a region-wide natural emergency or in the event of force majeure affecting a significant portion of the franchise area. The Cable Operator is free to exceed these Standards to the benefit of its Customers and such shall be considered performance for the purposes of these Standards. 
Section 2. - DEFINITIONS. 
    When used in these Customer Service Standards (the "Standards"), the following words, phrases and terms shall have the meanings given below. 
    2.1 Cable Operator shall mean any Person who provides Cable Services and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such Cable System or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a Cable System. 
    2.2 Customer shall mean any person who receives service of any sort from the Cable Operator. 
    2.3 Customer Service Representative (or CSR ) shall mean any person employed by the Cable Operator to assist, or provide service to, customers, whether by answering public telephone lines, writing service or installation orders, answering customers' questions, receiving and processing payments or performing other customer service-related tasks. 
    2.4 Franchising Authority shall mean the Town of Windsor acting by and through the Board or its designee, and/or the Grantor. 
    2.5 Normal business hours shall mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the Town of Windsor are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one (1) night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
    2.6 Normal operating conditions shall mean those service conditions that are within the control of the Cable Operator. Those conditions that are not within the control of the Cable Operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the Cable Operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance of the cable system. 
    2.7 Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more cable channels. 
    2.8 Town of Windsor is the Town of Windsor, Colorado, a body politic and corporate under the laws of the State of Colorado, and all of the area within its boundaries, as such may change from time to time. 
Section 3. - CUSTOMER SERVICE. 
3.1  Courtesy. All employees of the Cable Operator shall be courteous, knowledgeable and helpful and shall provide effective and satisfactory service in all contacts with customers. 
3.2.  Accessibility; cable system office hours and telephone availability. 
(A)  The Cable Operator shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its Subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
(1)  Trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
(2)  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(B)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(C)  The Cable Operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards set forth above, unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(D)  Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time. 
(E)  Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. 
3.3.  Responsiveness; installations, outages and service calls. 
(A)  Under normal operating conditions, each of the following five (5) standards will be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installation will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system. 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the Cable Operator, the Cable Operator will begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The Cable Operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(3)  The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. The Cable Operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. 
(4)  The Cable Operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(5)  If the Cable Operator's representative is running late for an appointmentwith a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(B)  The Cable Operator shall provide clear television reception that meets or exceeds technical standards established by the United States Federal Communications Commission (the "FCC"). The Cable Operator shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions shall be preceded by notice and, to the extent reasonably possible, shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system, preferably between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(C)  The Cable Operator's customer service representative shall have the authority to provide credit for interrupted service, to waive fees, to schedule service appointments and to change billing cycles, where appropriate. Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the customer service representative shall be referred to the appropriate supervisor, who shall contact the customer by the end of the next business day and shall attempt to resolve the problem within forty-eight (48) hours or within such other time frame as is acceptable to the customer and the Cable Operator. 
(D)  Billings, refunds and credits. 
(1)  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the Cable Operator must respond to a written complaint from a customer within thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or the return of the equipment supplied by the Cable Operator if service is terminated. 
(3)  Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(E)  Treatment of Private Property. 
(1)  The Cable Operator shall keep tree trimming to a minimum. Trees and shrubs or other landscaping that are damaged by the Cable Operator or any employee or agent of the Cable Operator during installation or construction shall be restored to their prior condition or replaced. Trees and shrubs shall not be removed without the prior permission of the owner or legal tenant of the property on which they are located. This provision shall be in addition to, and shall not supersede, any requirement in the franchise agreement. 
(2)  The Cable Operator shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the property owner, restore any property to as good condition as before the work causing such disturbance was initiated. The Cable Operator shall repair, replace or compensate a property owner for any damage resulting from the Cable Operator's installation, construction, service or repair activities. 
(3)  Except in the case of an emergency involving public safety or service interruption to a large number of subscribers, the Cable Operator shall give reasonable notice to property owners or legal tenants prior to entering upon private premises, and the notice shall specify the work to be performed; provided that, in the case of construction operations, such notice shall be delivered or provided at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to entry. Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing access or entry to private property or any other property, where such right to access or entry is not otherwise provided by law. For the installation of pedestals or other major construction or installation projects, property owners and residents shall also be notified in writing at least one (1) week in advance. In the case of an emergency, the Cable Operator shall attempt to contact the property owner or legal tenant in person, and shall leave a door hanger notice in the event personal contact is not made. 
(4)  The Cable Operator personnel shall clean all areas surrounding any work site and ensure that all cable materials have been disposed of properly. 
3.4.  Services for customers with disabilities. The Cable Operator will use reasonable good faith efforts to meet the special needs of customers with disabilities. 
3.5.  Notification to subscribers. 
(A)  The Cable Operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
(1)  Products and services offered; 
(2)  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
(3)  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
(4)  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
(5)  Channel positions programming carried on the system; and 
(6)  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office. 
(B)  Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the Cable Operator. In addition, the Cable Operator shall notify subscribers at least thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by Subsection 3.5(A) above. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the Cable Operator shall not be required to provide prior notice of any rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee or any other fee, tax, assessment or change of any kind imposed by any federal agency, state, or franchising authority on the transaction between the Cable Operator and the subscriber. 
(C)  All officers, agents, and employees of the Cable Operator or its contractors or subcontractors who are in personal contact with cable customers shall wear on their outer clothing identification cards bearing their name and photograph. The Cable Operator shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the Cable Operator shall be clearly visually identified to the public as working for the Cable Operator. All CSRs shall identify themselves orally to callers immediately following the greeting during each telephone contact with the public. 
3.6.  Customer privacy. 
(A)  The Cable Operator shall not monitor cable television signals to determine the individual viewing patterns or practices of any customer without prior written consent from that customer, except as otherwise permitted by the Cable Franchise Agreement. 
(B)  The Cable Operator shall not sell or otherwise make available customer lists or other personally identifiable customer information without prior written customer consent, except as otherwise permitted by the Cable Franchise Agreement. The Cable Operator is permitted to disclose such information if such disclosure is necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by the Cable Operator to its customers. 
3.7  Safety. The Cable Operator shall install and locate its facilities, cable system and equipment in compliance with all federal, state, local and company safety standards, and in such manner as shall not unduly interfere with or endanger persons or property. Whenever the Cable Operator receives notice that an unsafe condition exists with respect to its equipment, the Cable Operator shall investigate such condition immediately, and shall take such measures as are necessary to remove or eliminate any unsafe condition. 
Section 4. - COMPLAINT PROCEDURE. 
4.1  Complaints to the Cable Operator. 
(A)  The Cable Operator shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving customer complaints and crediting customer accounts, and shall publicize such procedures through printed documents at the Cable Operator's sole expense. 
(B)  Said written procedures shall prescribe a simple manner in which any customer may submit a complaint by telephone or in writing to the Cable Operator that it has violated any provision of these Customer Service Standards, any terms or conditions of the customer's contract with the Cable Operator, or reasonable business practices. 
(C)  At the conclusion of the Cable Operator's investigation of a customer complaint, but no more than thirty (30) calendar days after receiving the complaint, the Cable Operator shall notify the customer of the results of its investigation and its proposed action or credit. 
(D)  The Cable Operator shall also notify the customer of the customer's right to file a complaint with the Franchising Authority in the event the customer is dissatisfied with the Cable Operator's decision, and shall thoroughly explain the necessary procedures for filing such complaint with the Franchising Authority. 
(E)  The Cable Operator's complaint procedures shall be filed with and approved by the Franchising Authority prior to implementation. 
4.2  Complaints to the Franchising Authority. 
(A)  Any customer who is dissatisfied with any proposed decision of the Cable Operator or who has not received a decision within the thirty-day period as required shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the Franchising Authority or its designee. 
(B)  The customer may initiate the review by filing a written complaint together with the Cable Operator's written decision, if any, with the Franchise Authority. 
(C)  The customer shall make such filing and notification within thirty (30) days of receipt of the Cable Operator's decision or, if no decision has been provided, within forty (40) days after filing the original complaint with the Cable Operator. The customer shall notify the Cable Operator that a complaint has been filed with the Franchise Authority by mailing a copy of the complaint to the Cable Operator by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(D)  The Cable Operator shall file a written response to the complaint with the Franchise Authority within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a copy of the complaint from the customer. 
(E)  If the Franchising Authority or its designee decides that further evidence is warranted, the Franchising Authority or its designee may require the Cable Operator and the customer to submit, within ten (10) days of notice thereof, a written statement of the facts and arguments in support of their respective positions. 
(F)  The Cable Operator and the customer shall produce any additional evidence, including any reports from the Cable Operator, which the Franchising Authority or its designee may deem necessary to an understanding and determination of the complaint. 
(G)  The Franchising Authority or its designee shall issue a determination within fifteen (15) days after examining the materials submitted, setting forth its basis for the determination. 
(H)  The Franchising Authority or its designee may extend these time limits for reasonable cause and may intercede and attempt to negotiate an informal resolution. 
(I)  If the Franchising Authority or its designee determines that the customer's complaint is valid and that the Cable Operator did not provide the complaining customer with the proper solution and/or credit, the Franchising Authority or its designee may reverse any decision of the Cable Operator in the matter and/or require the Cable Operator to grant a specific solution as determined by the Franchising Authority or its designee in its sole discretion, and/or any credit provided for in these Standards. If the Franchising Authority or its designee finds that the customer's complaint has no validity, the complaint shall be dismissed with no further action being taken. 
4.3  Overall quality of service. The Franchising Authority may evaluate the overall quality of customer service provided by the Cable Operator to customers: 
(A)  In conjunction with any performance review provided for in the franchise agreement; and 
(B)  At any other time, at its sole discretion, based on the number of customer complaints received by the Cable Operator and the Franchising Authority, and the Cable Operator's response to those complaints. 
4.4  Noncompliance with Customer Service Standards. Noncompliance with any provision of these Standards is a violation of these Standards. 
Section 5. - MISCELLANEOUS. 
5.1  Severability. Should any section, subsection, paragraph, term or provision of these Standards be determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction with regard thereto, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, term or provision of these Standards, each of the latter of which shall remain in full force and effect. 
5.2  Nonwaiver. Failure to enforce any provision of these Standards shall not operate as a waiver of the obligations or responsibilities of the Cable Operator under said provision, or any other provision of these Standards. 
(Ord. 2005-1224) 
CHAPTER 6 - Business Regulations[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2017-1532 ,  11, adopted April 10, 2017, amended the title of Ch. 6 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6 was titled, "Business Licenses and Regulations." 

ARTICLE I - Alcoholic Beverages 

Sec. 6-1-10. - Delegation of Local Licensing Authority duties to Town Board appointee. 
    The Town of Windsor Local Licensing Authority ("authority"), for all purposes under the Colorado Liquor and Beer Codes, Title 44, C.R.S., shall be appointed by resolution of the Town Board from time to time. The Authority may assign the administrative portion of its functions under this article to the Town Clerk. 
(1)  Adoption of Administrative Procedures. The authority, with the assistance of the Town Clerk, may adopt such administrative procedures, rules and regulations as necessary or convenient to implement the provisions of this Article. All such procedures, rules and regulations shall be consistent with state liquor laws. 
(2)  Town Clerk Administrative Authority. Subject to the applicant's right of appeal to the authority, the Town Clerk is authorized to act as the Local Licensing Authority, process and issue the following administrative applications: 
a.  Special events permits pursuant to Section 44-5-101, et seq., C.R.S., provided that the applicant has no pending actions, is not the subject of any official investigation, or had any permit or liquor violations, adjudications or stipulations within the preceding year, and there are no persons filing a written objection to said permit; 
b.  Annual Colorado Liquor Code and Colorado Beer Code license renewals, provided that the licensee has no pending actions, is not the subject of any official investigation, or had any adjudicated violations or stipulations within the preceding year, concerning provisions of the Colorado Liquor or Beer Codes and associated regulations or local ordinances; 
c.  Changes in shareholders, officers, directors or trade names of a licensee, provided that any investigation conducted by the Town does not reveal information that may reasonably form the basis of a determination that the applicant is not qualified to hold the respective license; 
d.  Changes in registered manager of a licensee, provided that any investigation conducted by the Town does not reveal information that may reasonably form the basis of a determination that the proposed manager is not qualified to hold the position; 
e.  The issuance of temporary permits pursuant to and in compliance with the provisions of Section 44-3-303, C.R.S.; 
f.  The issuance and renewal of tastings permits as authorized by and pursuant to Article 3, Title 44, C.R.S.; 
(3)  Town Clerk Discretion. The Town Clerk may refer any licensing determination authorized under this section to the Local Licensing Authority if, in the Clerk's sole discretion, the matter should be presented to the Local Licensing Authority. 
(Ord. 2018-1576 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  1, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed and reenacted  6-1-10 to read as herein set out. Former  6-1-10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2013-1456; Ord. 2016-1524 ,  1; and Ord. 2017-1540 ,  1. 
Sec. 6-1-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings, respectively: 
    Administrative application means an application for a local liquor license or permit that may be granted or denied administratively by the Town Clerk. 
    Fermented malt beverage means beer and any other beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product or any combination thereof in water containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume. 
    Malt liquor includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination thereof, in water containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume. 
    Medicinal liquor means any liquor sold by a duly licensed pharmacist or drugstore solely on a bona fide doctor's prescription. 
    Operator means a person licensed by law to sell fermented malt beverages, and malt, vinous and spirituous liquors, other than medicinal liquors, for beverage purposes at retail and who is engaged at any time during the calendar year in such operation within the Town. 
    Person includes persons, partnerships, associations, organizations or corporations. 
    Special Event Permit means a permit authorizing the sale, by the drink only, of fermented malt beverages, or of malt, spirituous or vinous liquors to qualified organizations and political candidates at a location and for the duration of time specified on the issued permit. 
    Spirituous liquor means any alcohol beverage obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes among other things: brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, powdered alcohol, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. Any liquid or solid containing beer or wine in combination with any other liquor, except as above provided shall not be construed to be fermented malt or malt or vinous liquor but shall be construed to be spirituous liquor. 
    Town Clerk means the Town Clerk for the Town of Windsor or such person as may be designated by the Town Clerk to perform functions and duties required by this Article. 
    Vinous liquor includes wine and fortified wines that contain not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) and not more than twenty-one percent (21%) alcohol by volume and shall be construed to mean an alcohol beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural produce containing sugar. 
(Ord. 2018-1576 2) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  2, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed and reenacted  6-1-20 to read as herein set out. Former  6-1-20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2013-1456; Ord. 2016-1524 ,  2. 
Sec. 6-1-30. - Applicability. 
    In addition to any of the rules or laws which may be applicable, these rules shall govern all proceedings before the Town Board. If any of the rules contained herein shall conflict with any provisions of the laws of the State or the rules of the State Licensing Authority pertaining to the Colorado Liquor Code or to rules pertaining to the licensing or sale of fermented malt beverages, the provisions of state law or the rules of the State Licensing Authority shall govern. 
(Ord. 2013-1456) 
Sec. 6-1-40. - Application for liquor license; fee. 
(a)  All applications for liquor licenses and for fermented malt beverage licenses shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Any person applying for such license shall file the state license application form which shall be filled out and completed in all material details. Incomplete application forms shall be rejected. All license forms shall be filled out by typewriter or printed in ink, and all other information or exhibits submitted shall be typewritten or printed in ink, except plans and specifications which may be required. 
(b)  At the time of submitting the application, the applicant shall pay an application fee to the Town. Such fee shall be used to defray the expense incurred by the Town for the review, investigation, supplies, posting and publication of premises and all other services of personnel of the Town which pertain to the application. Such application fee shall apply only to applications for new licenses and to applications for the transfer of ownership of an existing license or for transfer of the location of an existing license. Such application fee shall be set by resolution of the Town Board. 
(Ord. 2013-1456) 
Sec. 6-1-50. - Classification. 
    The business of selling at retail any fermented malt beverage, malt liquor, vinous or spirituous liquor, other than medicinal liquors, for beverage purposes within the Town is hereby defined and separately classified as such occupation for the purposes of this Article, as follows: 
(1)  Class "A" Operators. All operators who are licensed to sell beer, wine and spirituous liquors for consumption on the premises, either at hotels or restaurants, shall be Class "A" Operators. 
(2)  Class "B" Operators. All operators licensed as retail liquor stores to sell, in original containers, malt, vinous or spirituous liquors for consumption off the premises shall be Class "B" Operators. 
(3)  Class "C" Operators. All operators licensed to sell only fermented malt beverages and who sell the same for consumption on the premises are Class "C" Operators. 
(4)  Class "D" Operators. All operators licensed to sell only fermented malt beverages and who sell the same solely in the original package or container for consumption off the premises shall be Class "D" Operators. 
(5)  Class "E" Operators. All operators licensed to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink only to members of clubs and their guests within the premises of said club shall be Class "E" Operators. 
(6)  Class "F" Operators. All hotel and restaurant licensees, beer and wine licensees, tavern licensees, club licensees and arts licensees obtaining a special license to sell, serve or distribute malt, vinous and spirituous liquors by the drink after the hour of 8:00 p.m. and until midnight on Sundays and Christmas, an Extended Hours License shall be a Class "F" Operator. 
(Ord. 2018-1576 3) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  3, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed and reenacted  6-1-50 to read as herein set out. Former  6-1-50 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2013-1456. 
Sec. 6-1-60. - Optional premises licenses. 
(a)  Authority. The Local Licensing Authority shall have the power to issue optional premises licenses and optional premises for hotel and restaurant licenses in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code, Section 44-3-301, et seq., and Section 44-3-415, C.R.S., and the provisions of this Section. The provisions of this Section shall be considered in addition to all other standards applicable to the issuance of licenses under this Article and under the Colorado Liquor Code. 
(b)  Definitions. In addition to the definitions set forth in Section 6-1-20 of this Article, the following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Section. 
    Optional premises means 
(1)  The premises specified in an application for a hotel and restaurant license under this Article with related outdoor sports and recreational facilities for the convenience of its guests or the general public located on or adjacent to the hotel or restaurant within which the operator is authorized to sell or serve alcohol beverages, in accordance with the provisions of this Article and at the discretion of the state and local licensing authorities; or 
(2)  The premises specified in an application for an optional premises license located on an applicant's outdoor sports and recreational facility. 
    The optional premises license and the optional premises for hotel and restaurant license shall be collectively referred to as an optional premises license unless otherwise specified herein. 
    Outdoor sports and recreational facility means a facility that charges a fee for the use of such facility. 
(c)  Eligible facilities. An optional premises license may only be considered for premises which are located upon an outdoor sports and recreational facility as defined herein. 
(d)  Size of eligible facilities. There shall be no minimum size requirement for the outdoor sports and recreational facilities which may be eligible for the approval of an optional premises license. However, the authority may consider the size of the particular outdoor sports and recreational facility in relation to the number of optional premises requested for the facility. 
(e)  Number of optional premises per facility. There shall be no restrictions on the number of optional premises which any one (1) licensee may have on an outdoor sports and recreational facility. However, any applicant requesting approval of more than one (1) optional premises on an outdoor sports and recreational facility shall demonstrate the need for each optional premises in relationship to the outdoor sports and recreational facility and its guests. 
(f)  Information required on application. When submitting a request for the approval of an optional premises license, an applicant shall comply with all application requirements set forth in Section 6-1-40 of this Article. In addition, the applicant for an optional premises license shall submit the following information: 
(1)  A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports and recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of each optional premises requested; 
(2)  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises when in use; and 
(3)  A description of the provisions which have been made for storing alcohol beverages in a secured area on or off the optional premises for future use on the optional premises. 
(g)  Processing of applications. An application for a new optional premises license shall be processed in the same manner as any other new license application under this Article. An application for an optional premises license filed in connection with an existing hotel and restaurant license shall be processed in the same manner as an application to modify or expand the licensed premises. 
(h)  Discretion of Local Licensing Authority. Any decision by the Local Licensing Authority to grant, deny or renew an optional premises license under this Section shall be discretionary. 
(i)  Notice of operation. Pursuant to Section 44-3-310, C.R.S., no alcohol beverages may be served on the optional premises unless the operator has provided written notice to the Local Licensing Authority and the state licensing authority forty-eight (48) hours prior to serving alcohol beverages on the optional premises. The notice must contain the specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used. There shall be no limitation on the number of days which an operator may specify in each notice; however, no notice may specify any date of use which is beyond the current license period. 
(j)  Compliance with Article required. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit the violation of any other provision of this Article under circumstances not specified in this Section. 
(Ord. 2018-1576 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  4, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed  6-1-60, which pertained to tax discrimination and derived from Ord. 2013-1456.  5 of the same ordinance enacted a new  6-1-60 to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 6-1-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  4, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed  6-1-70, which pertained to assessment of tax; rate and derived from Ord. 2013-1456. 
Sec. 6-1-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  4, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed  6-1-70, which pertained to payment of tax and derived from Ord. 2013-1456. 
Sec. 6-1-90. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  4, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed  6-1-90, which pertained to delinquency and derived from Ord. 2013-1456. 
Sec. 6-1-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  4, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed  6-1-100, which pertained to civil action for collection and derived from Ord. 2013-1456. 
Sec. 6-1-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1576 ,  4, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed  6-1-110, which pertained to optional premises licenses and derived from Ord. 2013-1456; and Ord. 2016-1524 ,  3. 
ARTICLE II - Special Event Permits 

Sec. 6-2-10. - Purpose. 
    This Article establishes standards for the issuance of permits for special events in the Town. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Coordinator means the Chief of Police or designee. 
    Permit or special event permit means a permit issued for a special event. 
    Permittee means any person or organization issued a special event permit by the Coordinator. 
    Special event means a parade, athletic contest or other outdoor event requiring temporary closure of streets, roads, highways, sidewalks or bike and pedestrian lanes or paths that are normally open to the public, or the changing, restricting or adapting of the normal traffic uses of any street, road or highway in the Town. 
    Street or highway has the same meaning as defined in the Model Traffic Code and other ordinances appearing in this Code, and shall include bike and pedestrian lanes or paths. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-30. - Permit required. 
    Any person or organization desiring to conduct a special event shall first obtain a permit from the Coordinator. A permit shall not be required for a special event that occurs exclusively within Town natural areas or recreation areas, or that does not involve the closure of any streets, roads, highways, sidewalks or bike and pedestrian lanes or paths that are normally open to the public. Funeral processions shall not be considered special events. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 3; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-40. - Application procedure and fee. 
(a)  Any person or organization desiring to conduct a special event shall apply for a special event permit by verified application with the Coordinator, on a form supplied by the Coordinator. Applications must be submitted not less than forty-five (45) business days nor more than one (1) year before the special event date. 
(b)  If the permittee is not an organization qualified for exemption from the payment of Town sales and use taxes, the application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by the Town Manager. The fee shall cover, but shall not exceed, the full cost of processing and investigating such special event permit application, and the cost of administering the special event permit program. 
(c)  Within ten (10) business days after receiving a completed application and fee, if applicable, the Coordinator shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for the reasons specified in Section 6-2-50 below. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 4; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-50. - Grounds for denial of application. 
    The Coordinator shall approve an application for a special event permit unless he or she determines from consideration of the application and other pertinent information that: 
(1)  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the permittee, is found to be false in any material detail, 
(2)  The permittee fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information or documents required; 
(3)  Another special event permit or application has been received prior in time, or has already been approved, to hold another special event at the same time and place requested by the permittee, or so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion; 
(4)  The time, route or size of the special event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic on or contiguous to the event site or route or will disrupt the use of a street or highway at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion; 
(5)  The size, nature or location of the special event will present a substantial risk to the health or safety of the public, participants in the event or other persons; 
(6)  The location of the special event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the Town streets or a previously granted encroachment permit; 
(7)  The special event will occur at a time when a school is in session on a route or at a location adjacent to the school or class thereof, and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class; 
(8)  The special event involves the use of hazardous, combustible or flammable materials which could create a fire hazard; or 
(9)  The special event will violate an ordinance or statute. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 5; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-60. - Permit conditions and requirements. 
    The Coordinator may condition the issuance of a special event permit by imposing conditions and requirements, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Approval of any other jurisdiction in addition to the Town that may be part of the proposed special event. 
(2)  Approval of the special event by the Town's Public Works and Parks and Recreation Departments. 
(3)  Submission of a traffic control plan to be approved by the Coordinator and the Town Engineer. 
(4)  All required traffic control shall be done at the permittee's expense. 
(5)  A written operational plan regarding the management of the special event. 
(6)  Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the special event to only a portion of a street or highway. 
(7)  Requirements for the use of traffic cones, barricades or other traffic-control devices to be provided, placed and removed by the permittee at its expense. 
(8)  Requirements for provision of first aid or sanitary facilities. 
(9)  Requirements for arrangement of supplemental fire protection and emergency medical services personnel to be present at the special event at the permittee's expense. 
(10)  Requirements for use of special event monitors and providing notice of permit conditions to event participants and affected property owners. 
(11)  Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles as may be required for fire safety by the Windsor-Severance Fire Protection District. 
(12)  Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup and restoration of Town property. 
(13)  Restrictions on the use of amplified sound. 
(14)  Requirements for public liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and/or property damage arising from the special event. The Coordinator shall determine whether to require such insurance and the amount of any required insurance. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 6; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-70. - Appeal procedure. 
    The permittee shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or a permit condition. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Town Manager's office, setting forth the grounds for the appeal within five (5) business days after mailing or personal delivery of a notice of denial or permit condition. The Town Manager shall hold a hearing no later than five (5) business days after the filing of the appeal and shall render his or her decision no later than one (1) business day after the hearing. In the event a notice of appeal is filed in accordance herewith but fewer than six (6) business days prior to the requested date for a special event for which a permit has been denied, the Town Manager shall hold a hearing and issue his or her decision no later than two (2) business days after the filing of the appeal. If the Town Manager determines that circumstances do not permit the completion of such hearing and decision at least one (1) full business day prior to the time and date for the initiation of a special event regarding which an appeal is pending, he or she shall notify the appealing permittee of said determination in writing and said permittee shall be entitled, but not required, to seek judicial review of the permit denial with no further administrative review. The Town Manager's decision shall be final, subject only to such judicial review as may be permitted by law. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 7; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-80. - Permit issuance. 
    If the Coordinator determines that a permit should be granted, he or she shall issue the special event permit once the permittee has agreed in writing to comply with all terms and conditions of this Article. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 8; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-90. - Indemnification. 
    Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the Coordinator shall require the permittee and authorized officer of the sponsoring organization (if any) to sign an agreement for the permittee to reimburse the Town for any cost incurred by it in repairing damage to Town property occurring in connection with the permitted special event and proximately caused by the actions of the permittee, its officers, employees or agents, or any person who was under the permittee's control. The agreement shall also provide that the permittee shall defend the Town against, and indemnify and hold the Town harmless from, any liability to any persons resulting from any damage or injury occurring in connection with the permitted special event and proximately caused by the actions of the permittee, its officers, employees or agents, or any person who was under the permittee's control. Persons who merely join in a special event are not considered by that reason alone to be "under the control" of the permittee. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 9; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-100. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  The permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions of the special event permit. 
(b)  The permittee shall ensure that the person leading a parade or other special event along a route, or the person in charge of any other special event, is familiar with all the provisions of the permit and carries the special event permit on his or her person for the duration of the event. 
(c)  Immediately following the completion of the special event, the permittee shall ensure that the area used for the event is cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 10; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-110. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The Coordinator may, at any time prior to a special event, revoke or terminate a permit that has been issued for the event if conditions change so that the permit application could have been denied in the first instance. 
(b)  The Coordinator may revoke or terminate the permit during the course of the special event if continuation of the event presents a clear and present danger to the participants or the public. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 11; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 6-2-120. - Violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a parade, athletic contest, or other special event or demonstration requiring a special event permit unless a permit has been issued for the event. It is unlawful for any person to participate in such a special event with the knowledge that the sponsor of the event has not been issued a permit. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or disrupt a lawful parade, athletic contest or other special event. 
(c)  The special event permit authorizes the permittee to conduct only such special event as is described in the permit in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee to knowingly violate the terms and conditions of the permit, or for any special event participant with knowledge of the permit to knowingly violate the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. 2005-1212 12; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE III - Business Licenses[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2017-1532 ,  12, adopted April 10, 2017, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III,  6-3-10-6-3-110, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2015-1503 ,  9. 

Sec. 6-3-10. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Employees means persons working within the Town for remuneration under the control and direction of an employer. 
    Engaged in business means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption. Engaged in business in the Town includes, but is not limited to, any of the following activities by a person: 
(a)  Directly, indirectly or by a subsidiary maintaining a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse or other place of business within the Town. 
(b)  Sending one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the Town to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service or assist in the use of its products or for demonstration or other reasons. 
(c)  Maintaining one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the Town. 
(d)  Making more than one (1) delivery into the Town within a twelve-month period. 
(e)  Mobile food vending as defined in Section 16-10-110(a). 
(Ord. 2017-1532  12) 
Sec. 6-3-20. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish any place of business in the Town, or engage in business within the Town, without first obtaining a license from the Town to conduct such business. Except as provided in subsection (b) below with respect to mobile food vendors, only one (1) general business license shall be required for any establishment operating as a single enterprise. Separate general business licenses shall be required for each location of an enterprise operating at more than one (1) location within the Town. Business licenses cannot be transferred upon a change of ownership. 
(b)  Mobile Food Vendors as defined in Section 16-10-110, shall not engage in business within the Town without first obtaining a license from the Town to conduct such business. Only one (1) general business license shall be required for any mobile food vendor operating as a single enterprise, regardless of the number of vending locations for such enterprise. Mobile Food Vendors must comply with the requirements of Section 6-3-40 and Section 16-10-110, in addition to any other applicable Code requirements. Each mobile food vending location must be reviewed by the Planning Department for verification of compliance with Section 16-10-110, to operate at each location. The business license requirements provided for in this Article shall not apply to federal, state or county offices, utility companies for which a franchise to operate has been granted pursuant to the provisions of the Home Rule Charter, or to the activity of telecommuting as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2017-1532 12; Ord. 2019-1588 3) 
Sec. 6-3-30. - Applications. 
    The application for every license required by and issued under the authority of the Town pursuant to this Article shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the person, firm or corporation seeking such license. 
(2)  The residence address of such applicant, of each of the individual members of such firm or of each of the directing officers of such corporation and its principal place of business. 
(3)  The street address, if any, where such business is to be carried on. 
(4)  The year for which such license is sought. 
(5)  Any other relevant information deemed to be necessary by the Director of Finance for the issuance of a business license. 
(Ord. 2017-1532  12) 
Sec. 6-3-40. - Mobile food vendors; insurance required. 
    Every mobile food vendor engaged in business within Town-owned streets, alleys, and rights-of-way shall continuously maintain a policy of Commercial General Liability insurance with a combined single limit of no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and policy of Products Liability insurance with a combined single limit of no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence. Each such policy of insurance shall name the Town as an Additional Insured. 
(Ord. 2017-1532  12) 
Sec. 6-3-50. - Issuance. 
    All licenses will be issued by the Director of Finance upon receipt of the following: 
(1)  A proper application containing all applicable information required by this Article, together with such additional information as the Director of Finance may deem necessary. 
(2)  Proof of payment to the Town of the annual fee. 
(3)  The fulfillment of all other specific requirements that may be imposed by the Town relating to the issuance of a business license, including satisfactory proof of the insurance required under Section 6-3-40 above. 
(Ord. 2017-1532  12) 
Sec. 6-3-60. - License fee. 
    The fee for the annual business license shall be ten dollars ($10.00), and such fee may be modified upon resolution appropriately adopted by the Town Board. No business license fee shall be charged for persons maintaining a valid sales tax license issued by the Town. 
(Ord. 2017-1532  12) 
Sec. 6-3-70. - Term. 
    All licenses shall be issued by the Director of Finance or designee on an annual basis, and shall expire twelve (12) months after issuance. 
Sec. 6-3-80. - Records. 
    The Director of Finance or designee shall keep a record of all business licenses issued, setting forth the name of every licensee and the registered place of business. 
Sec. 6-3-90. - Revocation and suspension. 
    Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Article may be revoked or suspended upon the violation of any federal, state or municipal laws, rules and ordinances applicable in the Town, provided that no license shall be revoked or suspended except by action of the Town Board upon a verified complaint from the Town Manager specifying such violation. Prior to revocation or suspension, the Town Board shall conduct a hearing thereon and the licensee shall be entitled to be present and represented by counsel at such hearing and to present evidence at such hearing. 
(Ord. 2017-1532  12) 
Sec. 6-3-100. - Inspections. 
    The Town shall be entitled at any time upon reasonable notice to the owner of any business to inspect the premises occupied by the business to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 2017-1532  12) 
Sec. 6-3-110. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. Each day of operation of a business in violation of this Article shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing, the Town shall be entitled to seek all other available relief at law or in equity with regard to violation of the provisions of this Article, including but not limited to injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 2017-1532  12) 
ARTICLE IV - Medical Marijuana 

Sec. 6-4-10. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them under Section 12-43.3.-104, C.R.S.: 
    Medical marijuana; and 
    Medical marijuana center. 
(b)  As used in this Article, medical marijuana cultivation facility shall mean any location wherein more than four hundred (400) cubic feet of space is devoted to the growing of marijuana plants at any time, or where more than twenty-four (24) mature marijuana plants are found within a single address at any time. 
(c)  As used in this Article, medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facility shall mean any location at which a business in which a medical marijuana-infused product, as defined by Section 12-43.3-104(9), C.R.S., is being manufactured, prepared, packaged, distributed or sold. 
(Ord. 2011-1397 2) 
Sec. 6-4-20. - Prohibition. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article 43.3 of Title 12 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, the operation of medical marijuana centers, medical marijuana cultivation facilities and medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facilities within the Town is prohibited. 
(b)  With respect to any medical marijuana centers, medical marijuana cultivation facilities and medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facilities in operation upon the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, each and every such medical marijuana center, medical marijuana cultivation facility and medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facility shall cease operations on or before 11:59 p.m. on May 15, 2011. 
(Ord. 2011-1397 2 
Sec. 6-4-30. - Enforcement, penalties and remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other criminal penalties, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate the requirements of this Article. Any person convicted of such misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine established pursuant to Section 1-4-20 of this Code for each such violation. Each person or legal entity who commits any such offense shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the offense is committed or continued by such person or legal entity and, upon conviction, shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The operation of a medical marijuana center, medical marijuana cultivation facility or medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facility in violation of the terms of this Article may be enjoined by the Town in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county in which such medical marijuana center, medical marijuana cultivation facility or medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facility is located. 
(c)  The operation of a medical marijuana center, medical marijuana cultivation facility or medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facility in violation of the terms of this Article is specifically determined to constitute a public nuisance, may be abated by the Town as a nuisance and may be enjoined by the Town in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county in which such medical marijuana center, medical marijuana cultivation facility or medical marijuana-infused product manufacturing facility is located. The provisions of Chapter 7, Article I of this Code shall apply to any nuisance declared pursuant to this Article and shall entitle the Town to any rights, remedies and powers provided therein with respect to the abatement of nuisances declared under this Article. 
(d)  The remedies set forth in this Section shall not be exclusive, shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 2011-1397 2) 
ARTICLE V - Entertainment Districts 

Sec. 6-5-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this Article is to authorize the creation of entertainment districts, and establish procedures, and guidelines, for the Local Licensing Authority to certify/decertify Promotional Associations, and regulate the establishment of Common Consumption Areas as provided for in C.R.S. 12-47-301(11), as amended. 
(Ord. 2017-1542 , 1) 
Sec. 6-5-20. - Application. 
    The provisions herein shall apply to all Entertainment Districts established under this Article. The Town Board shall review each application for an Entertainment District, and authorize its creation by Resolution, which shall be subject to annual review, and revocable at the will of the Town Board. 
(Ord. 2017-1542 , 1) 
Sec. 6-5-30. - Authority. 
    The Town Board shall expressly delegate to its Local Licensing Authority, all decisions relating to: certifying and decertifying Promotional Associations; designating the location, size, security and hours of operation of Common Consumption Areas; and the regulation of attached licensed premises to Common Consumption Areas, retaining for the Town Board's sole and absolute discretion, the authority to revoke an Entertainment District by Resolution. 
(Ord. 2017-1542 , 1) 
Sec. 6-5-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Common Consumption Area shall mean an area designed as a common area located within a designated Entertainment District and approved by the Local Licensing Authority that uses physical barriers to close the areas to motor vehicle traffic and limit pedestrian access. 
    Entertainment District shall mean an area within the Town of Windsor that is designated as an Entertainment District of a size no more than one hundred (100) acres and containing at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of premises licensed as a tavern, hotel and restaurant, brew pub, distillery, distillery pub, or vinter's restaurant, beer and wine licensee, manufacturer that operates a salesroom or beer wholesaler that operates a sales room, limited winery, or a lodging and entertainment facility licensee at the time the district is created. 
    Local licensing authority shall mean the individual(s) appointed by resolution by the Town Board from time to time who shall be responsible for all purposes under the Colorado Liquor Code, Section 12-47-101, et seq., C.R.S. The Local Licensing Authority reviews new and renewal applications for liquor licenses and Common Consumption Areas, as well as is responsible for certifying and decertifying Promotional Associations, conducts public hearings on new licenses, reviews alleged violations of state and local regulations, and, if necessary, conducts show cause hearings. 
    Promotional Association shall mean an association that is incorporated within Colorado that organizes and promotes entertainment activities within a Common Consumption Area and is organized or authorized by two (2) or more people who own or lease property within an Entertainment District. 
(Ord. 2017-1542 , 1) 
Sec. 6-5-50. - General Provisions. 
(a)  Entertainment Districts may be established by Town Board Resolution, from time to time, as determined to be in the best interest of the public and the specific geographic area to be served, subject to demonstration that the proposed district is consistent with the definition and purpose of an Entertainment District as set forth in this Article V. 
(b)  The Town Board may repeal and revoke an established Entertainment District, in its sole and absolute discretion, if the Town Board concludes the continued operation of the Entertainment District is no longer in the best interest of the public. 
(c)  Each Common Consumption Area shall be approved and each Promotional Association shall be certified by the local licensing Authority, consistent with its authority provided in Sections 6-1-10 and 6-5-30 of this Code and pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S.  12-47-301(11). 
(Ord. 2017-1542 , 1) 
Sec. 6-5-60. - Promotional Associations. 
(a)  Promotional Associations may be certified so long as the related Entertainment District is valid. The Town Board, pursuant to Section 6-5-30 above, retains the authority to revoke an Entertainment District, in its sole and absolute discretion. Should an Entertainment District become revoked during a certification period, the certification is no longer valid. 
(b)  Applications for certification of a Promotional Association shall be consistent with Section 12-47-301(11) C.R.S. and applicable provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code and Chapter 6 of the Windsor Municipal Code. Applications shall be submitted to the Town Clerk on forms prepared and furnished by the Town Clerk. The information required shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws and a list of all directors and officers of the Promotional Association. The board of directors shall include one (1) person from each licensed premises attached to the proposed Common Consumption Area to serve as director. 
(2)  A detailed map of the proposed Common Consumption Area including: 
a.  Location of physical barriers, entrances and exits; 
b.  Location of additional restrooms/sanitary facilities to be provided if necessary; 
c.  Location of attached licensed premises, including documentation showing possession of the Common Consumption Area; and 
d.  Identification of licensed premises that are adjacent but not to be attached to the Common Consumption Area; 
(3)  A detailed description of security arrangements within the Common Consumption Area; 
(4)  A list of the attached licensees listing the following information: liquor license number, a list of any past liquor violations, and a copy of any operational agreements; 
(5)  Documentation of the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood, the desires of the adult inhabitants as evidenced by petitions, remonstrances, or otherwise; 
(6)  A list of the dates and beginning and ending hours of operation of the Common Consumption Area; 
(7)  Payment of the application fee established pursuant to Section 6-5-70 below; and 
(8)  Any further information requested by the Local Licensing Authority. 
(c)  Upon Approval of a Certification by the Local Licensing Authority, the terms and conditions of the approval shall remain effective until and unless a revised or amended application is submitted to the Local Licensing Authority and approved using the same procedures applied to the original application. 
(d)  After certification, each Promotional Association shall abide by the following operational requirements in addition to any specific requirements imposed by the Town upon creation of the Entertainment District, or by the Local Licensing Authority upon certification of the Promotional Association: 
(1)  The size of the Common Consumption Area shall not exceed the area approved by the Local Licensing Authority for the particular Entertainment District and is wholly contained within the Entertainment District, and clearly delineated using physical barriers to close the area to motor vehicle traffic and limit pedestrian access; 
(2)  The Promotional Association may make such area smaller at any time, provided the new area is clearly delineated using physical barriers to close the area to motor vehicle traffic and limit pedestrian access. 
(3)  The Promotional Association shall provide an appropriate amount of security to ensure compliance with the liquor code and prevent a safety risk to the neighborhood and the general public patronizing the Entertainment District. All security within the Common Consumption Area or its attached licensed premises shall complete the server and seller training program established by the Director of the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Department of Revenue and be approved by the Chief of Police. 
(4)  The Promotional Association governing the Common Consumption Area shall obtain and maintain a properly endorsed general liability and liquor liability insurance policy that is reasonably acceptable to the Local Licensing Authority of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per incident and names the Town of Windsor, Colorado as an additional insured. 
(e)  The Local Licensing Authority has the power to refuse to certify, or to decertify a Promotional Association. After consideration of the merits of the application by the Local Licensing Authority, a Promotional Association may be decertified, or not certified if it: 
(1)  Fails to submit an annual report by January 31 of each year; 
(2)  Fails to establish that the licensed premises and Common Consumption Area can be operated without violating this Article, any provision of the Colorado Liquor Code or Regulations, or without creating a safety risk to the neighborhood; 
(3)  Fails to have at least two (2) licensed premises attached to the Common Consumption Area; 
(4)  Fails to obtain or maintain a properly endorsed general liability and liquor liability insurance policy that is reasonably acceptable to the Local Licensing Authority and names the city as an additional insured; 
(5)  Fails to demonstrate that the use is compatible with the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood or the desires of the adult inhabitants; or 
(6)  Is in violation of either C.R.S.  12-47-301(11) or 12-47-909, as may be amended from time to time, related to Common Consumption Area operations; 
(7)  The Local Licensing Authority may authorize the Town Clerk to decertify a Promotional Association pursuant to the provisions of this Article and applicable provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code, as amended. 
(f)  The Local Licensing Authority may authorize the Town Clerk to administratively certify or recertify a Promotional Association pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and applicable provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code, as amended. 
(g)  Applications for recertification of a Promotional Association must be made by January 31 of each year in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Section, upon applications furnished by the Town Clerk. Review of applications for certification, recertification or attachment shall be considered within sixty (60) days of receipt by the Town Clerk of the complete application and payment of application fees. The Local Licensing Authority shall review the application for compliance with this Chapter, Colorado liquor laws and any additional requirements imposed, and may either approve the application with or without conditions or deny the application. 
(Ord. 2017-1542 , 1) 
Sec. 6-5-70. - Application fees. 
    The application fee for certification of a Promotional Association shall be $500.00 for the initial application, and $100.00 for recertification applications, as amended from time to time by Town Board by resolution. 
(Ord. 2017-1542 , 1) 
CHAPTER 7 - Health, Sanitation and Animals 
ARTICLE I - Administration and Abatement of Nuisances 

Sec. 7-1-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Littering means the scattering, leaving or dropping of rubbish, trash or other matter (organic or mineral). 
    Rubbish means any type of debris, trash, waste and rejected or accumulated matter, including but not limited to large pieces of wood, large cardboard boxes or parts, large or heavy yard trimmings, discarded fence posts, crates, vehicle tires, scrap metal, bedsprings, water heaters, furniture (other than furniture specifically designed and intended for outdoor use), all other household goods or items and any other accumulation of items or materials not designed for outdoor decoration purposes or uses. 
    Trash means any worn-out, broken up, used or worthless matter or material and any refuse, rubbish, topping, twigs and leaves of trees. 
(Prior code 7-1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1317) 
Sec. 7-1-20. - Conditions constituting nuisances. 
    Whenever there shall be in or upon any lot or piece of ground within the Town limits any damaged merchandise, litter, trash, rubbish, garbage, dead animals, weeds, brush, trees or an accumulation of any junk of any type, or any conditions established as a nuisance by this Chapter, upon any private or public property, except in areas specifically zoned by Chapter 16 of this Code for said purposes or otherwise designated by the Town for such purposes, the existence of any such material or items shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Prior code 7-2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-1-30. - Nuisances prohibited. 
(a)  No person being the owner, agent or occupant of or having under his or her control any building, lot or premises or unimproved real estate within the Town limits shall maintain or allow any nuisance to be or remain therein. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any owner, agent or occupant of or having under his or her control any building, lot or premises or unimproved real estate within the Town limits to fail to maintain the property in a neat, tidy, methodical, systematic, clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of materials other than those ordinarily attendant upon the use for which the premises are legally intended. 
(Prior code 7-3; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-1-40. - Notice to owner; failure to comply; issuance of citation; procedure. 
(a)  Imminent or emergency matters. In the event a nuisance exists under this Article which presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Authorization. The Police Department may apply under oath to the Municipal Court for an ex parte order authorizing immediate abatement of the nuisance. The Municipal Judge is empowered to administratively issue ex parte orders for the immediate abatement of any nuisance which presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  Determination administrative. In conjunction with the application for an ex parte order under Paragraph (1) above, the Police Department may issue a citation to the property owner, the property occupant or both. Notwithstanding the issuance of a citation under this Subsection, the determination and issuance of an ex parte order shall remain an administrative matter except as provided below. 
(3)  Contents. Every ex parte order issued pursuant to this Subsection shall authorize the immediate abatement of any such nuisance and shall contain a finding by a preponderance of the evidence that a nuisance exists upon the subject property which presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, shall recite the facts supporting such a finding and shall be supported by sworn testimony or affidavit upon personal knowledge. 
(4)  Mailing and posting. The Municipal Court shall mail a copy of every ex parte order issued pursuant to this Subsection within twenty-four (24) hours of its issuance to the property owner address as maintained by the County Assessor's Office by first-class mail. The Municipal Court shall further direct the Police Department to post a copy of such ex parte order in a conspicuous location upon the premises. 
(5)  Right to hearing; no citation; administrative procedure. Every ex parte order issued pursuant to this Subsection shall contain a notice to the property owner that, upon written request, a hearing before the Municipal Court will be scheduled. Such property owner's request for hearing shall be in writing, shall contain the requestor's mailing address and shall be delivered to the Municipal Court within ten (10) days of the mailing specified in Paragraph (4) above. Upon receipt of the property owner's request for a hearing, the Municipal Court shall schedule a hearing and provide written notice of the same to the Town Prosecutor, who shall represent the Town in the matter. The Municipal Court shall also provide written notice of the hearing date and time to the requesting property owner by first-class mail to the address appearing on the request for hearing. Failure of the property owner to request a hearing as provided in this Subsection within ten (10) days of issuance the ex parte order shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the ex parte order authorized in this Section, and shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the Town's lien rights for nuisance abatement costs provided in Section 7-1-50 below. In cases in which a citation is issued to the property owner, the determination of guilt or innocence, and the amount, if any, of nuisance abatement costs to which the Town may be entitled, shall be determined as provided in Paragraph (6) below. At the administrative hearing, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  The Municipal Court shall determine whether, based on a preponderance of the evidence, a nuisance existed upon the subject property and, if so, whether the Town should have been authorized to enter upon the subject property for the purpose of abating the nuisance. The property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and present evidence on these questions. Upon a finding in the affirmative on both questions, the Municipal Court shall order determining that the entry and abatement was lawful, assessing the costs of nuisance abatement and authorizing the remedies available under Section 7-1-50 below. 
b.  In the event that the administrative hearing results in a finding that no nuisance constituting an imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare existed at the time the ex parte order was issued, the Municipal Court shall make such a finding and shall deny the Town any right to recover nuisance abatement costs incurred by the Town in conjunction with the matter. In this event, the Town shall have no lien rights. 
(6)  Right to hearing; citation issued; criminal procedure. In cases in which a citation has been issued to the property owner, the determination of a nuisance prohibited by this Article shall be made in conjunction with the usual and customary practices of the Municipal Court presiding in criminal matters. In the event of a conviction, or approval of a deferred sentence, arising out of any citation issued for a violation of this Article, as a condition of sentencing or deferral, the Municipal Court shall order the defendant to pay all costs incurred by the Town for abatement of the nuisance in addition to any other sentence or assessment of court costs. The standard of proof for determination of the amount of nuisance abatement costs shall be by a preponderance of the evidence as a sentencing matter. 
(7)  Determination final, lien rights, citation to owner. In cases in which a citation is issued to the property owner and a conviction, or deferred sentence, results, the Municipal Court's determination of nuisance abatement costs made in accordance with Paragraph (5) above shall be final and shall entitle the Town to enforcement of such sums as provided in Section 7-1-50 below, including the right to a lien for such sums. 
(8)  Determination final, lien rights, citation to occupants. In cases in which a citation is issued to the property occupants and a conviction, or deferred sentence, results, the Municipal Court's determination of nuisance abatement costs made in accordance with Paragraph (6) above shall be final and shall entitle the Town to enforcement of such sums as provided in Section 7-1-50 below. In such cases, the Town's enforcement remedies shall include the right to a lien for such sums. 
(b)  Non-emergency matters. For all cases in which a nuisance exists under this Article which is not alleged or found to be an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the procedures set forth in this Subsection shall be followed. 
(1)  Notice. The Town shall give notice to every person owning any lots, tracts or parcels of land within the Town, upon receiving notification from any source that a nuisance exists in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. Said notice shall direct the person to comply with the provisions of this Article within five (5) days after the date of such notice if the property owner resides within the Town, and seven (7) days if the property owner resides outside the Town. Every notice issued pursuant to this Subsection shall state that, if the work required is not done within the time specified, the Town shall cause the same to be done at the expense of the property owner. The notice required by this Subsection shall state that the cost of such work shall constitute a lien upon such property as provided in Section 7-1-50 below. 
(2)  Citation, notice without citation. The Police Department may (but shall not be required to) issue a citation to the property owner, the property occupant or both. In cases in which no citation is issued to the owner or occupant, or both, of the property, the notice given pursuant to Paragraph (1) above shall set forth a date and time certain at which the Police Department or Town Prosecutor will appear before the Municipal Court to obtain an order for entry into the property and abatement of the nuisance. In cases in which a citation is issued to the owner or occupant, or both, of the property, the return date on the citation shall serve as the date upon which the Police Department or Town Prosecutor will appear before the Municipal Court to obtain an order for entry into the property and abatement of the nuisance. 
(3)  Notice, service. Every notice issued pursuant to Paragraph (1) above shall be served by mailing a copy of the notice via first-class mail to the record owner of such property as maintained by the County Assessor's Office and by posting on the property in a conspicuous place. Service on one (1) owner of the property shall be deemed service on all owners. 
(4)  Authority to issue administrative orders, mailing and posting. The Municipal Judge is empowered to issue administrative orders for the abatement of any nuisance determined to exist under this Subsection after notice and an opportunity for hearing as described herein. Every such order shall be mailed by the Municipal Court within twenty-four (24) hours of its issuance to the property owner address maintained by the County Assessor's Office by first-class mail. At or prior to the time of nuisance abatement by the Town, a copy of the administrative order for nuisance abatement shall be posted on the property in a conspicuous place. 
(5)  Disposition of citation. In cases in which a citation has been issued to the property owner, the determination of a nuisance prohibited by this Article shall be made in conjunction with the usual and customary practices of the Municipal Court presiding in criminal matters. In the event of a conviction or approval of a deferred sentence arising out of any citation issued for a violation of this Article, the Municipal Court shall order that the Town may immediately enter into the property for the purpose of nuisance abatement. As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Court shall order the defendant to pay all costs which may be incurred by the Town for abatement of the nuisance in addition to any other sentence or assessment of court costs. 
(Ord. 2014-1476 1) 
Sec. 7-1-50. - Lien for nuisance abatement costs. 
(a)  Lien certification, administrative matters. In all cases in which the determination of nuisance abatement costs is made by the Municipal Court as an administrative matter, the Municipal Court shall issue a Certification of Nuisance Abatement Costs containing the amount of nuisance abatement costs determined as due and owing to the Town. Such Certification shall be mailed by the Municipal Court by first-class mail to both the owner of the property and to the property address if different from the owner's address. Such Certification may be recorded in the books and records of the County Clerk and Recorder as evidence of the principal amount due. 
(b)  Lien certification, disposition of citations. In all cases where the determination of nuisance abatement costs is made by the Municipal Court in the context of criminal sentencing, the Municipal Court shall issue a Certification of Nuisance Abatement Costs containing the amount of nuisance abatement costs determined as due and owing to the Town. Such Certification shall be mailed by the Municipal Court by first-class mail to both the owner of the property and to the property address if different from the owner's address. Such Certification may be recorded in the books and records of the County Clerk and Recorder as evidence of the principal amount due. 
(c)  Lien certification, enforcement of sentencing orders. In all cases where the Municipal Court has issued a sentencing order pursuant to Paragraph 7-1-40(b)(5) above, a representative of the Police Department shall certify under oath, in writing, the costs of nuisance abatement incurred by the Town in carrying out such order. Such Certification may be recorded in the books and records of the County Clerk and Recorder as evidence of the principal amount due. 
(d)  Lien perpetual. The amount of any nuisance abatement costs incurred by the Town pursuant to this Article shall constitute a perpetual lien on the property upon which nuisance abatement measures were undertaken in accordance with this Article. 
(e)  First and prior lien; rate of interest. The attachment of such lien is not dependent on the recording of written notice, and the lien is prior and superior to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances, whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. The lien remains attached to the property from the date the nuisance abatement costs are incurred until all nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date the costs were incurred, are paid. 
(f)  Owner responsibility; lien not affected by changes in ownership. The Town is not required to seek payment of nuisance abatement costs from any person other than the owner of the property. No change of ownership, occupancy or possession affects the application of this Section, and the failure of any owner to discover that property was purchased against which a lien for nuisance abatement costs exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full. 
(g)  Foreclosure rights. The Town may enforce its lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the lien. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid nuisance abatement costs and allowable court costs in the manner provided for foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(h)  Tax assessment rights. The lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to the treasurer of the county wherein the property is located for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected or by any other means provided by law. 
(i)  Civil suit. Unpaid nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at eight percent (8%) per annum and costs of collection, may also be collected by civil suit against the owner of the property, commenced at any time after the charges become due. 
(j)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies provided under this Section are cumulative and supplemental to each other. 
(Ord. 2014-1476 2) 
ARTICLE II - Specific Nuisances 

Sec. 7-2-10. - Abandoned containers, wells or cisterns. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his or her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside without first removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device. 
(Prior code 7-21; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-2-20. - Stagnant water. 
    The permitting of stagnant water on any lot or piece of ground within the Town limits is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and every owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground within the Town is hereby required to drain or fill up said lot or piece of ground whenever the same is necessary so as to prevent stagnant water or other nuisance accumulating thereon, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to permit or maintain any such nuisance. 
(Prior code 7-22; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-2-30. - Littering. 
    No person shall throw, deposit, scatter or leave upon any sidewalk, alley, street or other public place or on any private property any loose paper, rags, rubbish, waste materials, refuse, garbage, trash, debris or other foreign substances, nor shall any person owning or occupying any lot of ground allow or permit any such material which may be liable to be blown or scattered by the wind or otherwise to remain upon such lot or grounds. 
(Prior code 7-23; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-2-40. - False alarms. 
(a)  As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Alarm or alarm system shall mean any mechanical or electrical device or system which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or for the detection of fire or other hazard to life or property, or used for mechanically or electronically alerting others by an externally audible or visual signal to the commission of an unlawful act, whether installed inside or outside a building. 
    False alarm shall mean an alarm signal necessitating a response by the Police Department alone or in conjunction with other emergency agencies, where an emergency situation does not exist. False alarm shall not include alarms occasioned by natural or man-made disasters or power failures which are beyond the control of the owner or occupier of the premises. 
(b)  Excessive false alarms. False alarms shall be deemed excessive wherein more than three (3) of such alarms occur within any one-year (365-day) period. For each false alarm which exceeds the maximum allowable as set forth herein, to which the Police Department responds, the owner or occupant of the premises wherein the alarm originates shall be liable to the Town in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  Payment and collection of costs for excessive false alarms. Upon the occurrence of an excessive false alarm, written notice shall be given by the Police Department to the owner or occupant of the premises wherein the alarm originated. Said notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date and time of the false alarm; 
(2)  Confirmation that the alarm constituted an excessive false alarm as defined herein; and 
(3)  Assessment of a fifty-dollar charge for such alarm, requiring that said charge be paid in full to the Town Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the written notice. 
Said written notice shall be signed by the Chief of Police or any officer of the Police Department. 
(d)  Assessment of cost against property. In the event the owner or occupier of the premises wherein the excessive false alarm occurred fails to pay the fifty-dollar cost within ten (10) days, such cost may be assessed against the property. 
(Prior code 7-24; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1317) 
Sec. 7-2-50. - Sump pump discharge. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner to allow the discharge from any sump pump to drain upon or across a driveway, sidewalk, curb, gutter or street within the Town, if such discharge contributes to the accumulation of ice, algae, scum, bacteria, fungus or similar organic matter within any such driveway, sidewalk, curb, gutter or street in a manner which presents a risk of injury to pedestrians, bicyclists or the operator of any vehicle. 
(Ord. 2009-1361 1) 
Sec. 7-2-60. - Water system discharge. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner or water system operator to allow the discharge of water from any source (including but not limited to an irrigation system) to drain upon or across a driveway, sidewalk, curb, gutter or street within the Town, if such discharge contributes to the accumulation of ice, algae, scum, bacteria, fungus or similar organic matter within any such driveway, sidewalk, curb, gutter or street in a manner which presents a risk of injury to pedestrians, bicyclists or the operator of any vehicle. 
(Ord. 2009-1361 2) 
ARTICLE III - Weeds and Brush 

Sec. 7-3-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise: 
    Brush means any unsightly, useless, troublesome or injurious volunteer growth of bushes or shrubbery, which shall include all cuttings from said bushes and shrubbery. 
    Weed means any unsightly, useless, troublesome or injurious herbaceous plant including, but not limited to, those undesirable plants commonly known as tumbleweed ( salsola iberica ), puncture vine/goat head ( tribulus terrestris or cenchrus pauciflores ), field windweed ( convolvulus arvensis ), sandbur ( cenchrus longispinus ), leafy spurge ( euphorbia esula ), knapweed-diffuse ( centaurea diffusa ), knapweed-Russian ( centaurea repens ), knapweed-spotted ( centaurea maculosa ), Canadian thistle ( cirsium arvense ) and musk thistle ( cirsium arvense ). 
(Prior code 7-41; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-3-20. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    Any weeds or brush found growing in any lot or tract of land in the Town is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds or brush to grow or remain in any such place. 
(Prior code 7-42; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-3-30. - Duty of property owner to cut. 
    It shall be the duty of each and every person, corporation or association owning, occupying or possessing any lots, tracts or parcels of land within the Town to cut to the ground and remove all weeds and brush. 
(Prior code 7-43; Ord. 7-43; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-3-40. - Abatement of weed and brush nuisance. 
(a)  The Town shall give notice to every person owning any lots, tracts or parcels of land within the Town, upon receiving notification from any source that a weed and brush nuisance exists in violation of the provisions of this Article. Said notice shall direct the person to comply with the provisions of this Article within five (5) days after such notice if the property owner resides within the Town and within seven (7) days if the property owner resides outside the Town. Written notice to the owner shall not be required under the following circumstances: 
(1)  A law enforcement officer certifies in writing that, upon a date certain, he or she has verbally notified the owner by telephone or in person of a violation of this Article, of the need to remove any nuisance described herein and of the Town's right to undertake weed and brush abatement measures at the owner's expense; and 
(2)  The property is conspicuously posted with a written notice of a violation, which posted notice shall state that, if the work required is not done within the time specified therein, the Town may cause the same to be done at the expense of the property owner, and the Town may go upon and enter private premises in order to remove the weed and brush nuisance or cause for violation at said person's expense. 
(b)  Any notice given pursuant to this Article shall state that, if the work required is not done within the time specified, the Town may cause the same to be done at the expense of the property owner and, if said person owning said lots, tracts, parcels or any structure does not permit entry, the Town may, if necessary, go upon and enter private premises in order to remove the weed and brush nuisance or cause for violation at said person's expense. 
(c)  Except as provided in Section 7-3-50 below with respect to perfection of any lien, any written notice issued pursuant to this Section may be served by mailing via regular United States mail a copy of the notice to the record owner of such property. Service on one (1) owner of the property shall be deemed service on all owners. 
(d)  If any property owner shall fail to comply with the requirements of this Section after first being provided notice as provided herein and within the time limits as set forth in such notice, said failure shall be deemed consent that the Town may direct that the weed and brush nuisance or violation be abated, the Town may remove or cause to be removed said weed and brush nuisance or cause for violation, and the Town employees or contractors, acting upon behalf of the Town, shall have the right to go upon and enter private premises in order to remove the weed and brush nuisance or cause for violation at the owner's expense. 
(e)  The Town shall not be required to issue more than one (1) notice under Subsection (a) above during any one (1) calendar year under the following circumstances: the owner continues his or her failure to comply with this Article following the Town's abatement of such weed and brush nuisance pursuant to the prior notice. In the event of a continuing violation of this Article as provided in this Subsection, the Town shall have the continuing right to go upon and enter the premises in order to remove the weed and brush nuisance or cause for violation without further notice to the owner and at the owner's continued cost. 
(f)  Any work performed by the Town to abate a weed and brush nuisance under this Article shall be done at the expense of the owner of such lots, tracts or parcels of land, and the cost of such work shall constitute a lien upon such property as provided in Section 7-3-50 below. 
(Ord. 2008-1317) 
Sec. 7-3-50. - Lien for weed and brush nuisance abatement costs. 
(a)  The Chief of Police shall certify in writing the costs associated with weed and brush nuisance abatement measures undertaken pursuant to Section 7-3-40 above, and such certification shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to both the owner of the property and to the property address if different from the owner's address. The Chief of Police shall under oath swear in writing to the date and addressees of such mailing, and such sworn statement shall constitute proof of notice to the property owner for all intents and purposes hereunder. 
(b)  The owner of any property subject to a weed and brush nuisance abatement lien under this Article shall have the right to request a hearing before the Municipal Court. Such request shall be in writing, shall contain the requestor's mailing address and shall be delivered in person to the Police Department within ten (10) days of the mailing specified in Subsection (a) above. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Chief of Police shall schedule a hearing before the Municipal Court and provide written notice of the same to the requesting party by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address appearing on the request for hearing. Failure to request a hearing as provided in this Subsection shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the lien for weed and brush nuisance abatement measures established in this Article. 
(c)  If a hearing is timely requested by the property owner, the sole question at the hearing shall be the cost incurred by the Town for weed and brush nuisance abatement measures associated with the subject property. The Chief of Police shall present any evidence in support of the costs associated with the weed and brush nuisance abatement measures in question. The property owner shall have a right to present evidence and argument in opposition. The Municipal Judge shall determine all evidentiary questions and shall render a written order within thirty (30) days of the hearing containing findings and conclusions as to the amount of the lien. The written order shall be mailed to the property owner and a copy provided to the Chief of Police. 
(d)  Any lien established under this Section shall constitute a perpetual lien on the property upon which weed and brush nuisance abatement measures were undertaken in accordance with this Section. 
(e)  The attachment of such lien is not dependent on the recording of written notice, and the lien is prior and superior to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances, whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. The lien remains attached to the property from the date the weed and brush nuisance abatement costs are incurred until all such nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date the costs were incurred, are paid. 
(f)  The Town is not required to seek payment of weed and brush nuisance abatement costs from any person other than the owner of the property. No change of ownership, occupancy or possession affects the application of this Section, and the failure of any owner to discover that property was purchased against which a lien for weed and brush nuisance abatement costs exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full. 
(g)  The Town may enforce its lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the lien. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid weed and brush nuisance abatement costs and allowable court costs in the manner provided for foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(h)  The lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to the treasurer of the county wherein the property is located for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected or by any other means provided by law. 
(i)  Unpaid weed and brush nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at eight percent (8%) per annum and costs of collection, may also be collected by civil suit against the owner of the property, commenced at any time after the charges become due. 
(j)  The remedies provided under this Section are cumulative and supplemental to each other. 
(k)  This Section shall apply to all weed and brush nuisance abatement costs incurred by the Town on or after January 1, 2008. 
(Ord. 2008-1317) 
Sec. 7-3-60. - Removal from Town. 
    All weeds and brush cut in accordance with Section 7-3-30 hereof shall be, immediately upon being cut, removed from the Town or otherwise entirely destroyed by the owner or occupant of the lot upon which the weeds and brush have been cut. 
(Prior code 7-44; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1317) 
ARTICLE IV - Trees 

Sec. 7-4-10. - Cotton-bearing cottonwood trees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, plant, transplant, keep or maintain any cotton-bearing cottonwood trees in the Town. 
(b)  Excluded from the effect of the ordinance codified herein shall be all cotton-bearing cottonwood trees in existence as of October 28, 1991. Determination of the age of a cotton-bearing cottonwood tree for the purposes of enforcement of the ordinance codified herein shall be under the exclusive control of the Town Forester. 
(c)  For purposes of the enforcement of the ordinance codified herein, the Town declares cotton-bearing cottonwood trees to be a nuisance and subject to the provisions of this Code with regard to the abatement of nuisances. 
(d)  The Town Board finds that the lands adjoining the Poudre River in the Town provide a natural and historic habitat for native cotton-bearing cottonwood trees. The Board further finds that the preservation of this habitat is in the best interests of the Town and its citizens. The provisions of the ordinance codified herein shall not apply to any cotton-bearing cottonwood trees located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the banks of the Poudre River in the Town. 
(e)  The Town Board finds that the lands adjoining certain irrigation canals, lands containing wetlands and open space lands may likewise provide a natural and historic habitat for cotton-bearing cottonwood trees, and that the preservation of this habitat is also in the best interests of the Town and its citizens. The provisions of the ordinance codified herein shall not apply to any such areas which may be specifically designated by the Town Forester. Any such designations shall be appropriately posted by the Town Forester. 
(f)  Nothing in the ordinance codified herein shall prevent or supersede the powers of the Town as set forth in this Code to require the trimming or removal of cotton-bearing cottonwood trees which are subsequently declared to constitute a nuisance as dangerous or hazardous trees under the provisions of this Code. 
(Prior code 7-61; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-4-20. - Tree and plant diseases declared a public nuisance; abatement on private property. 
(a)  The existence of any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence that endangers the growth, health, life or well-being of trees or plants in the Town, or that is capable of causing an epidemic spread of communicable disease or insect infestation, shall be considered a public nuisance subject to abatement in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Upon the discovery of any such disease, pestilence or insect infestation, the Town Forester shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the property upon which such diseased tree or plant is situated, which notice shall require such property owner to eradicate, remove or otherwise control such condition in accordance with the nuisance abatement provisions of this Code. In the event the property owner fails to comply with the requirements of any such notice, the Town may enter upon the private property and abate the nuisance existing thereon in accordance with the nuisance abatement provisions of this Code. Assessment of any costs against the property for worked performed by the Town, or on the Town's behalf, shall likewise be done in accordance with the nuisance abatement provisions of this Code. 
(Prior code 7-62; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-4-30. - Permit required for planting, pruning or removing trees in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, prune, remove, destroy or cause to be planted, pruned, removed or destroyed, any tree, shrub or hedge in, over or upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the Town without having first obtained a written permit therefor from the Town. An approved landscape plan by the Planning Department shall be considered a permit. 
(Prior code 7-63; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-4-40. - Application required for planting, pruning or removing trees in public places. 
(a)  Any person desiring to plant, prune, remove, or destroy any tree, shrub or hedge in, over or upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the Town shall first make written application at the office of the Parks and Recreation Department. Such application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person doing the work, the kind or species of tree or shrub to be planted and the location of the planting, together with such other information as the Parks and Recreation Department may in its discretion require. The Parks and Recreation Department may attach such conditions as may be deemed advisable with regard to the performance of the work authorized by the permit. 
(b)  No fee shall be required for permits issued pursuant to this Section. 
(Prior code 7-64; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 7-4-50. - Duty of the Town to trim and maintain trees in public places. 
    It shall be the duty of the Town to trim, prune, remove or destroy any trees, shrubs or hedges in, over or upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the Town. 
(Prior code 7-65; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE V - Animals, Wild or Exotic Animals, and Fowl[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2017-1533 , adopted March 27, 2017, repealed the former Art. V,  7-5-10-7-5-30, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code  7-81, 7-82; Ord. 2006-1236,  1; Ord. 2008-1335,  1; and Ord. 2010-1387,  2. 

Sec. 7-5-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Animal or animals means any cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, hogs, pigs, swine or other hard-hoofed animals and rabbits. 
    Fowl means chickens, turkeys, pigeons and other domestic fowl. Fowl also includes all waterfowl, such as ducks, geese, swans, coots, and cranes and other migratory game birds. Canaries, parakeets and similar birds kept solely as pets are excluded from this term. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association. 
    Wild or exotic animal or animals means any animal whose possession requires a license from the Colorado Division of Parks and Wildlife, or any authorization by federal or state law, including, but not limited to: bears; any feline species other than ordinary domesticated house cats; skunks; poisonous or venomous amphibians or reptiles; raccoons; porcupines; rabbits, other than domestic rabbits; badgers or other similar species, except ferrets or minks; deer, elk, antelope; any wolf, coyote or fox; any species of nonhuman primate; and waterfowl. 
(Ord. 2017-1533 ) 
Sec. 7-5-20. - Keeping of animals, wild or exotic animals and fowl prohibited-Declaration of nuisance. 
    Except as otherwise specifically authorized in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, feed, maintain or allow to run or fly at will any animal or animals, wild or exotic animals or fowl within the Town. Keeping, harboring, feeding, maintaining or allowing to run or fly at will any animal or animals, wild or exotic animals or fowl within the Town, except as otherwise allowed and/or specifically authorized in this Code, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. For purposes of this section, nuisance shall mean a threat to health or safety, property damage, offensive odors, or any other condition that interferes with or disrupts another person in the conduct of lawful activities on such person's property. 
(Ord. 2017-1533 ) 
Sec. 7-5-30. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This Article shall not be applicable to the display of fowl or animals by entrants in any show or fair authorized by the Town, or to the temporary maintenance by a licensed veterinarian of animals or fowl during the time necessary for treatment. 
(b)  This Article shall not be applicable to any person engaged in operating a packinghouse or slaughterhouse, who is otherwise authorized by this Code and governed by applicable state regulations. The keeping of animals or domestic fowl in connection with the operation of such businesses shall not exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
(c)  This Article shall not be applicable to the keeping or maintaining of one (1) pet rabbit upon any lot in the Single-Family Residential SF-1 District zone, or to the keeping or maintaining of one (1) pet rabbit or other animal in the Estate Residential E District, as defined in Chapter 16 hereof. 
(d)  This Article shall not be applicable to feeding of songbirds or other backyard birds or squirrels. 
(e)  The keeping of chicken hens pursuant to Article IX of this Chapter shall be governed thereby. 
(f)  This Article shall not be applicable to any prohibited activity if such person holds a valid license for such activity from the appropriate county, state or federal authorities, such as the Colorado Division of Parks and Wildlife; or if keeping and or feeding the prohibited animal pursuant to a state wildlife rehabilitation license. 
(g)  Any person convicted of a violation of this Article shall be punished by either a fine, useful public service, attendance of an applicable class or any combination thereof, pursuant to Section 1-4-20 of this Code for each such violation. Each person who commits any such offense shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the offense is committed or continued by such person and, upon conviction, shall be punished accordingly. Nuisance abatement procedures deemed necessary by the Town shall be pursuant to Sections 7-1-40 and 7-1-50. 
(Ord. 2017-1533 ) 
ARTICLE VI - Dogs 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 7-6-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context indicates otherwise: 
    At-large, presumed-dangerous dog means any dog which is observed outside of a fence or other enclosure that restrains the dog to particular premises, and not under the control, by leash, of the owner or other authorized person capable of restraining the dog and which has been determined by law enforcement or code enforcement personnel to demonstrate tendencies that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the dog may attempt to bite or claw any person, may attempt to bite another animal or may, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approach any person in an apparent attitude of attack, whether or not the attack is consummated or is capable of being consummated. 
    Current certificate of rabies vaccination means a certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian establishing conferred immunity for a period of not less than twenty-four (24) months. 
    Dog means any animal of the canine species, regardless of sex. 
    Dog, neutered means any dog, whether male or female, which is incapable of reproduction because of surgery which has been performed on the reproductive organs of such dog. 
    Dog, stray means any dog found off the premises of its owner and not restrained by leash. 
    Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms and a single kitchen designed for or occupied as a unit by one (1) family for living and cooking purposes. 
    Impound means the confinement of a dog at an establishment the primary purpose of which is the confinement of dogs seized under the provisions of this Article or otherwise. 
    Kennel means any establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding, training, selling or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, not including veterinary hospitals, veterinary clinics, veterinary offices or pet shops. 
    Leash means a thong, cord, rope, chain or similar device which holds a dog in restraint and which is not more than six (6) feet in length. 
    Owner means every person who is in possession of or harboring any dog or who suffers any dog to remain about his or her premises for a period of ten (10) days. 
    Pound means an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized under the provisions of this Article or otherwise. 
    Presumed-dangerous dog means any dog which has been determined by law enforcement or code enforcement personnel to demonstrate tendencies that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the dog may attempt to bite or claw any person, may attempt to bite another animal or may in a vicious or terrorizing manner approach any person in an apparent attitude of attack, whether or not the attack is consummated or is capable of being consummated. 
    Rabies means a communicable disease of both wild and domestic animals transmittable to humans as defined by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment; and a specific infectious disease of certain animals, especially dogs and wolves, contracted by humans by direct inoculation, as by bite of an infected animal, and due to a filterable virus as defined in Dorland's Medical Dictionary . 
    Rabies vaccination means the inoculation of a dog with a live or killed rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian and conferring immunity for a period of not less than thirty-six (36) months. 
    Run at large means to be outside of a fence or other enclosure which restrains the dog to particular premises, and not under the control, by leash, of the owner or other authorized person capable of restraining the dog. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-20. - Identification tags required; contents. 
(a)  The owner of any dog over six (6) months of age within the Town shall provide each such dog with a collar or harness to which an identification tag shall be securely affixed. All dogs within the Town shall at all times wear such collar or harness with the identification tag for such dog securely affixed thereto. If any dog is found to be off the premises of its owner without its identification tag affixed as provided herein, the owner shall be presumed to have violated the provisions of this Article. This presumption shall be overcome under the following circumstances: 
(1)  During calendar year 2011 only, the dog in question is wearing a valid Town-issued dog license for the calendar year 2010; or 
(2)  The owner of the dog in question can demonstrate that the dog, although without the collar tag required under this Section, is capable of identification by means of an implanted identifying microchip containing current information as required in Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(b)  The identification tag required under this Section shall contain sufficient current information to enable the Town to contact the dog's owner directly. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-30. - Rabies vaccination. 
    All dogs within the Town over the age of six (6) months shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian, with a live or killed rabies vaccine. It shall be a violation of this Article for the owner of any dog over the age of six (6) months to allow such dog in the Town unless the dog has been so vaccinated. If any dog is found in the Town without a current rabies vaccination tag affixed to its collar or harness, the owner of such dog shall be presumed to have violated the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-40. - Confinement of dogs suspected to have rabies. 
(a)  If any dog is suspected of having rabies or has bitten any person, such dog shall be confined by leash, chain or cage on its owner's premises or at the Town dog pound or other facility authorized by the Town, and shall be placed under the observation of a licensed veterinarian or public health official, all at the expense of its owner, for a period of days equal to the confinement period required by the County Department of Public Health. If any dog has been bitten by a dog suspected of having rabies, it shall likewise be so confined and placed under such observation, at the expense of the owner of such dog, for a period of six (6) months. The owner of any dog so exposed to rabies shall report such fact to the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or Police Department. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall have the power, in his or her discretion, to have the dog suspected of having rabies, or of being exposed to rabies, removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary hospital, dog pound or other facility authorized by the Town, and there placed under observation for a period of up to six (6) months, at the expense of the owner, provided that the owner may elect in lieu thereof to have such dog destroyed. In the event the owner elects to have the dog destroyed before the end of the observation period, such owner shall cause appropriate samples of brain tissue from the destroyed dog to be submitted to a diagnostic laboratory to determine the existence of rabies. Such samples shall be taken by a licensed veterinarian and submitted to the diagnostic laboratory through the offices of the veterinarian. All expenses incurred in the collection, submission and testing of the sample shall be the responsibility of the owner. Failure to obey a lawful order of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer made pursuant hereto or failure to comply with any provision of this Section shall be a violation of this Article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, knowing or suspecting that said dog has rabies or has been bitten by a dog suspected of rabies, or for the owner of any dog with or without a current rabies vaccination, which dog has bitten any person, to allow such dog to be taken off his or her premises or beyond the limits of the Town without the written permission of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer. Every owner of a dog or other person, upon ascertaining that a dog has rabies, shall immediately notify the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or Police Department. Upon receiving such notice, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or Police Department shall forthwith remove such dog either to the Town dog pound or a veterinary hospital. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-50. - Powers of Ordinance Enforcement Officer. 
    The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall be specifically empowered to perform any of those duties specifically set forth in this Article. Nothing contained in this Code shall prohibit the Ordinance Enforcement Officer from assuming and performing other functions for the Town as directed by the Chief of Police or the Town Manager. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-60. - Running at large. 
(a)  Any person owning, keeping or supervising any dog in the Town shall prevent the animal from being off the premises of the owner, keeper or supervisor and beyond such person's control. 
(b)  It shall be presumed to be a violation of this Section to be at large unless a dog found off the premises of its owner, keeper or supervisor is: 
(1)  On a leash held by a person; or 
(2)  Within a vehicle or similarly physically confined and without access to pass-ersby. 
(c)  If a court of appropriate jurisdiction finds that the lack of control of the dog was made possible by forces and events outside the common experience of dog owners, keepers or supervisors and could not have been anticipated or prevented, the court may suspend all of the fine for the first offense and up to one-half (1/2) of the fine for the second and subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-70 - Disturbance of peace and quiet. 
    No owner of a dog in the Town shall permit such dog to disturb the peace and quiet of any family, individual or neighborhood by excessive barking or howling. Consistent barking or howling for longer than ten (10) minutes in duration shall be prima facie evidence of disturbing the peace. If any dog does so disturb the peace and quiet, its owner shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Article, provided that no such owner shall be charged in Municipal Court with a violation of this Section unless he or she or a member of his or her household over the age of eighteen (18) years has received a warning from the Town of a previous complaint at least once within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-80. - Impoundment. 
    The Ordinance Enforcement Officer and any police officer of the Town may apprehend any dog running at large in the Town or otherwise in violation of this Article and may impound such dog in the Town pound or other suitable place. A complete registry shall be maintained by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer, showing the breed, color and sex of each dog so impounded. In addition, the registry shall show the owner's name, address and telephone number, if such information is contained in an identification tag or implanted identifying microchip as provided under Section 7-6-20, or any Town-issued dog license found on the dog. Any other person in the Town shall have the power to impound any dog found at large on his or her property or on property subject to his or her control, provided that such person shall forthwith notify the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or Police Department of such impoundment. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-90. - Notice of impoundment. 
    Within twenty-four (24) hours after impoundment of any dog, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall contact, by telephone or in person, any known owner of such dog and notify such owner of the impoundment of such dog. A log shall be kept by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer showing all such contacts. If any owner cannot be notified in this manner, notice of impoundment shall be mailed by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer by regular mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the dog as shown on the dog identification tag or implanted identifying microchip, if any, affixed to the dog as required by Section 7-6-20. A log shall likewise be maintained by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer of all such notices mailed. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-100. - Release of impounded dogs. 
(a)  Impounded dogs shall be released to their owners upon payment of an amount equal to the total costs incurred by the Town for impoundment, including but not limited to boarding fees and transportation costs. Prior to such release, the owner shall also show proof of payment of any fines due because of the violation of the provisions of this Article or evidence of a citation for the owner to appear in Municipal Court to answer charges for violation of the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  In addition, if said dog does not have a current rabies vaccination tag, the owner shall present a current rabies vaccination certificate for such dog duly issued by a licensed veterinarian, or, in lieu thereof, the owner may place a cash deposit, established by resolution of the Town Board, with the Town, to be refunded to the owner upon presenting, within five (5) working days thereafter, proof of rabies vaccination. No dog held for observation on account of suspicion of rabies shall be released until the observation period is over. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-110. - Disposal of unclaimed dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or person in charge of the dog pound to keep any impounded dog for a period of at least seventy-two (72) hours after notice of impoundment is given to the owner of the dog as provided in this Article; provided that, in cases where notice was given by mail, the holding period shall be increased by twenty-four (24) hours, and in cases where no notice can be given to the owner because the dog is not wearing an identification tag or an implanted identifying microchip, the holding period shall be one hundred twenty (120) hours from the time of impoundment. If any dog is not reclaimed within such time, the owner's rights in said dog shall be terminated and the dog may be redeemed by any person upon paying the same fees and charges which would have been required from the owner to reclaim such dog, or the dog may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. The owner of any dog destroyed or otherwise disposed of under the provisions of this Section shall be responsible for all costs related to such action, and the Town is hereby empowered to collect such costs through all lawful means. 
(b)  The provisions of this Section shall be subject to all additional confinement periods provided for by this Code, where any dog is suspected of harboring rabies. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-120. - Trapping by Town authorized. 
    It shall be lawful for the Town to place approved, humane traps for the purpose of capturing stray dogs or other animals running at large on any property in the Town at the written request of the owner of such property. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-130. - Poisoning prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to poison any dog or to distribute poison in any manner whatsoever with the intent or for the purpose of poisoning any dog within the Town. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-140. - Residency of owner. 
    The requirements of Section 7-6-20 of this Article shall not apply to any dog brought into the Town by a nonresident for no longer than thirty (30) days. Except for the foregoing exception, this Article shall apply to all dogs within the Town regardless of the place of residence of the owner of such dog. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-150. - Interference with enforcement officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, injure or prevent the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or any police officer in the discharge of his or her duties pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-160. - Right of entry. 
    The Ordinance Enforcement Officer and any police officer are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises in the Town for the purpose of impounding dogs which they are authorized hereunder to impound or for any other purpose authorized under this Article. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-170. - Fine schedule. 
    Fines shall be set by resolution of the Town Board. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-180. - Removal of dog waste required. 
    The owner, keeper or person in control of any dog shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any feces deposited by such dog on any property, public or private, not owned or exclusively occupied by the owner or keeper. The owner or keeper of any dog shall also be responsible for the periodic removal of feces deposited by such animal on property owned or occupied by such owner or keeper so as to prevent the creation of a public nuisance within the meaning of Section 7-6-190 below. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-190. - Public nuisance prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her dog to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. For the purposes of this Section, a public nuisance includes a dog which is a safety or health hazard, which damages or destroys the property of another, or which creates offensive odors that materially interfere with or disrupt another person in the conduct of lawful activities. 
(b)  Except for kennels that are approved as conditional use grants pursuant to Paragraph 16-20-20(d)(1) of this Code, the harboring of more than four (4) dogs over the age of six (6) months upon any property within the Town shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Division 2 - Dangerous Dogs 

Sec. 7-6-310. - Impoundment of at-large, presumed-dangerous dog. 
(a)  Any law enforcement or code enforcement official may apprehend and impound any at-large, presumed-dangerous dog pursuant to the provisions of this Division, and shall release any at-large, presumed-dangerous dog only as provided herein. 
(b)  If the owner of any at-large, presumed-dangerous dog or any other person fails to permit law enforcement or code enforcement personnel to apprehend and impound any such at-large, presumed-dangerous dog, the owner shall be issued a citation pursuant to Section 7-6-100 of this Article, and the code enforcement or law enforcement official may forthwith apply ex parte to the Municipal Court for an order determining whether the dog is a presumed-dangerous dog and providing for measures necessary to assure the safety of the public with respect to such dog. Such measures shall include the immediate seizure and impoundment of such dog, and may include a requirement that the dog, when outside of the confinement called for in this Section, be leashed and muzzled. 
(c)  In the event that an owner or any other person violates or prevents the enforcement of an order entered by the Municipal Court for the seizure and impoundment of a presumed-dangerous dog, the Municipal Court may, upon application of the Municipal Prosecutor and an appropriate showing of necessity, enter an ex parte order requiring the immediate seizure and destruction of such dog pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-320. - Notification to owner of presumed-dangerous dog. 
(a)  Upon the apprehension and impoundment of any presumed-dangerous dog, law enforcement or code enforcement personnel shall, within twenty-four (24) hours, take reasonable steps to notify the dog's owner (if such owner can be ascertained) of the impoundment and the following conditions for release of the presumed-dangerous dog: 
(1)  Satisfaction of all requirements of Section 7-6-100 of this Article; 
(2)  If the owner of the presumed-dangerous dog is at the time of the dog's proposed release charged with any violation of Part 2 of Article 9 of Title 18, C.R.S., he or she shall deposit in advance an amount determined necessary for the continued impoundment of the presumed-dangerous dog pending the resolution of such charges pursuant to state law; and 
(3)  Compliance with the confinement requirements set forth in Section 7-6-330 below. 
(b)  Any portion of the deposit required under Paragraph (a)(2) above not necessary to pay actual impoundment fees under this Article or any other applicable Town ordinance shall be refunded following the conclusion of the criminal prosecution referenced in Paragraph (a)(2). 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-330. - Confinement requirements. 
    A presumed-dangerous dog shall not be released from impoundment until the financial requirements of Paragraph 7-6-320(a)(2) above have been met, and until its owner proves to the satisfaction of law enforcement or code enforcement personnel that reasonable measures are in place for the safe, secure and uninterrupted confinement of the presumed-dangerous dog, such that there remains no risk that a presumed-dangerous dog will escape confinement or run at large in the future. No presumed-dangerous dog will be released from impoundment until the requirements of this Section are met. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-340. - Escalation of fines. 
    The fines for the second or subsequent impoundment of a dog determined to be an at-large, presumed-dangerous dog shall be established and shall escalate upon a schedule adopted by the Town Board by resolution. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
Sec. 7-6-350. - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions of this Division shall be cumulative and shall not supersede any other provisions of this Article or any other state law with respect to the ownership of dogs considered dangerous. 
(Ord. 2011-1398 1) 
ARTICLE VII - Bees and Beekeeping 

Sec. 7-7-10. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
    Apiary shall mean a place where bee colonies are kept. 
    Bee shall mean any stage of the common domestic honey bee, A pis mellifera species. 
    Colony shall mean a hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood. 
    Hive shall mean a structure intended for the housing of a bee colony. 
    Tract shall mean a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership. 
    Undeveloped property shall mean any idle land that is not improved or actually in the process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church, park, school or governmental facilities or other structures or improvements intended for human use or occupancy, and the grounds maintained in association therewith. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively as a street or highway or property used for commercial agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-20. - General purpose; declaration of unlawful conduct. 
(a)  The general purpose of this Article is to establish certain requirements for sound beekeeping practices within the Town, which are intended to avoid problems which may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas. 
(b)  Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this Article, it shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any colony or colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others, or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-30. - Hives. 
    All bee colonies shall be kept in Langstroth-type hives with removable frames, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-40. - Fencing of flyways. 
    In each instance in which any colony is situated within twenty-five (25) feet of a public or private property line of the tract upon which the apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six (6) feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation or combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends ten (10) feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six (6) feet above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary. It is a defense to prosecution under this Section that the property adjoining the apiary tract in the vicinity of the apiary is undeveloped property for a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet from the property line of the apiary tract. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-50. - Water. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at all times to the bees so that the bees will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcocks, pet water bowls, birdbaths or other water sources where they may cause human, bird or domestic pet contact. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-60. - General maintenance. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials that might encourage robbing are left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-70. - Queen bees. 
    In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation, or exhibits an unusual disposition toward swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to re-queen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-80. - Colony densities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following number of colonies on any lot or tract within the Town, based upon the size or configuration of the lot or tract upon which the apiary is situated: 
(1)  One-quarter (1/4) acre or less tract or lot size - two (2) colonies. 
(2)  More than one-quarter (1/4) acre but less than one-half (1/2) acre tract or lot size - four (4) colonies. 
(3)  More than one-half (1/2) acre but less than one (1) acre tract or lot size - six (6) colonies. 
(4)  One (1) acre or larger tract or lot size - eight (8) colonies. 
(5)  Regardless of tract or lot size, where all hives are situated at least two hundred (200) feet in any direction from all property lines of the tract or lot on which the apiary is situated, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies. 
(b)  For each two (2) colonies authorized under the colony densities set forth in Subsection (a) above, there may be maintained upon the same tract or lot one (1) nucleus colony in a hive structure not exceeding one (1) standard nine-and-five-eighths-inch depth, ten-frame hive body, with no supers attached as required from time to time for management of swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an authorized colony within thirty (30) days after the date it is acquired. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-90. - Marking hives; presumption of beekeeping. 
(a)  In apiaries, the name and telephone number of the beekeeper shall be branded, painted or otherwise clearly marked upon the structure of at least two (2) hives and placed at opposite ends of the apiary. Instead of marking the hives, the beekeeper may conspicuously post a sign setting forth the name and telephone number of the beekeeper. It is a defense to prosecution under this Subsection that a colony is kept on the same tract or lot upon which the owner resides. 
(b)  Unless marked in accordance with Subsection (a) above, it shall be presumed for purposes of this Article that the beekeeper is the person who owns or otherwise has the present right of possession and control of the tract or lot upon which a hive is situated. The presumption may be rebutted by a written agreement authorizing another person to maintain the colony or colonies upon the tract or lot, setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the other person who is acting as the beekeeper. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-100. - Inspection. 
    The Town Manager shall have the right to inspect any apiary between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Where practicable, prior notice shall be given to the beekeeper who resides at the apiary or whose name is marked on the hives. Notice need not be in writing under this Section. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-110. - Declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  The keeping by any person of bee colonies in the Town not in strict compliance with this Article is declared to be a menace to the health and safety of the residents of the Town, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping, any swarm of bees or any colony residing in a standard or homemade hive which, by virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper, is hereby declared to be a menace to the health and safety of the residents of the Town, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Any bee colonies kept in the Town not in compliance with this Article or otherwise declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Section may be summarily destroyed or removed from the Town by the Town Manager. In each instance in which a bee colony is destroyed, all usable components of the hive structure that are not damaged or rendered unhealthy by the destruction of the bees shall, upon the beekeeper's request, be returned to the beekeeper, provided that the beekeeper agrees to bear all transportation expenses for their return. 
(b)  The Town Manager or the Chief of Police may pursue remedies pursuant to the applicable provisions of Article I of this Chapter with respect to any nuisance declared under this Article. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
Sec. 7-7-120. - Enforcement. 
    The Town Manager shall be charged with enforcement of this Article. 
(Ord. 2008-1335 2) 
ARTICLE VIII - Administration and Abatement of Stormwater Facilities Nuisances 

Sec. 7-8-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Facility owner means any person or entity being the owner, owner's agent or occupant of, or having under his or her control, any stormwater drainage facility within the Town. 
    Storm drainage facility means any spillway, orifice, outlet, rip rap, pond, spillway, easement of record, channel, outlet, inlet, trash rack or similar feature intended to carry or hold stormwater runoff following a rain or storm event. 
(Ord. 2009-1342 2) 
Sec. 7-8-20. - Conditions constituting storm drainage nuisances. 
    Whenever there shall be any damaged merchandise, litter, trash, rubbish, garbage, dead animals, grass, weeds, brush, trees or an accumulation of any debris of any type which has the effect of impairing or impeding the designed function of any storm drainage facility within the Town, the existence of any such material or items shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. 2009-1342 2) 
Sec. 7-8-30. - Nuisances prohibited. 
(a)  No facility owner shall maintain or allow any storm drainage nuisance to be or remain within any stormwater drainage facility within the Town. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any facility owner to fail to maintain said stormwater drainage facility in a methodical, systematic, clean and orderly condition sufficient to carry or detain stormwater as designed. 
(Ord. 2009-1342 2) 
Sec. 7-8-40. - Notice to owner; failure to comply. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection (e) below, the Town shall give notice to every facility owner that a stormwater nuisance exists in violation of the provisions of this Article. Said notice shall direct the facility owner to comply with the provisions of this Article within five (5) days after the date of such notice if the facility owner resides within the Town and seven (7) days if the facility owner resides outside the Town. 
(b)  Any notice given pursuant to this Article shall state that, if the work required is not done within the time specified, the Town shall cause the same to be done at the expense of the facility owner and that the Town may, at its sole election, go upon and enter private property in order to remove the stormwater nuisance at said facility owner's expense. The cost of such work to the Town shall constitute a lien upon such property as provided in Section 7-8-50 below. 
(c)  Except as provided in Section 7-8-50 below with respect to perfection of any lien, any written notice issued pursuant to this Section may be served by mailing a copy of the notice via regular United States mail to the facility owner as reflected in the records of the Town. In the event the storm drainage facility is within the ownership or control of more than one (1) facility owner, service as provided in this Subsection on one (1) facility owner shall be deemed service on all facility owners. 
(d)  If any facility owner shall fail to comply with the stormwater nuisance abatement requirements of the notice served pursuant to Subsection (a) above within the time limits as set forth in the notice, said failure shall be deemed consent of such facility owner: 
(1)  That the Town may direct that the stormwater nuisance be abated; 
(2)  That the Town shall remove or cause to be removed said stormwater nuisance; and 
(3)  That the Town employees or contractors acting on behalf of the Town shall have the right to go upon and enter private premises in order to remove the stormwater nuisance. 
(e)  Written notice to the facility owner shall not be required under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The Director of Public Works (or any person so authorized by the Director of Public Works) certifies in writing that, upon a date certain, he or she has verbally notified the facility owner (or, if the facility owner is an association or metropolitan district, a representative of such association or metropolitan district), by telephone or in person, of a violation of this Article, of the need to remove any stormwater nuisance described herein and of the Town's right to undertake stormwater nuisance abatement measures at the facility owner's expense; and 
(2)  The storm drainage facility is conspicuously posted with a written notice of a stormwater nuisance, which posted notice shall state that, if the work required is not done within the time specified therein, the Town may cause the same to be done at the expense of the facility owner and the Town may go upon and enter private property in order to remove the stormwater nuisance at said facility owner's expense. 
(Ord. 2009-1342 2) 
Sec. 7-8-50. - Lien for stormwater nuisance abatement costs. 
(a)  The Director of Public Works shall certify in writing the costs associated with stormwater nuisance abatement measures undertaken pursuant to Section 7-8-40 above, and such certification shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the facility owner at the address found in the Town's records. The Director of Public Works shall under oath swear in writing to the date and addressee(s) of such mailing, and such sworn statement shall constitute proof of notice to the facility owner for all intents and purposes hereunder. 
(b)  The facility owner subject to a stormwater nuisance abatement lien under this Article shall have the right to request a hearing before the Municipal Court. Such request shall be in writing, shall contain the requestor's mailing address and shall be delivered in person to the Director of Public Works within ten (10) days of the mailing specified in Subsection (a) above. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Director of Public Works shall schedule a hearing before the Municipal Court and provide written notice of the same to the requesting party by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address appearing on the request for hearing. Failure to request a hearing as provided in this Subsection shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the lien for stormwater nuisance abatement measures established in this Article. 
(c)  If a hearing is timely requested by the facility owner, the sole question at the hearing shall be the cost incurred by the Town for stormwater nuisance abatement measures associated with the subject storm drainage facility. The Director of Public Works shall present any evidence in support of the costs associated with the stormwater nuisance abatement measures in question. The facility owner shall have a right to present evidence and argument in opposition. The Municipal Judge shall determine all evidentiary questions and shall render a written order within thirty (30) days of the hearing containing findings and conclusions as to the amount of the lien. The written order shall be mailed to the facility owner and a copy provided to the Director of Public Works. 
(d)  Any lien established under this Section shall constitute a perpetual lien on the property upon which stormwater nuisance abatement measures were undertaken in accordance with this Article. 
(e)  The attachment of such lien is not dependent on the recording of written notice, and the lien is prior and superior to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances, whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. The lien remains attached to the property from the date the stormwater nuisance abatement costs are incurred until all stormwater nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date the costs were incurred, are paid. 
(f)  The Town is not required to seek payment of stormwater nuisance abatement costs from any person other than the facility owner. No change of ownership, occupancy or possession affects the application of this Section, and the failure of any owner to discover that property was purchased against which a lien for stormwater nuisance abatement costs exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full. 
(g)  The Town may enforce its lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the lien. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid stormwater nuisance abatement costs and allowable court costs in the manner provided for foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(h)  The lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to the treasurer of the county wherein the property is located for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected or by any other means provided by law. 
(i)  Unpaid stormwater nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at eight percent (8%) per annum and costs of collection (including but not limited to attorney fees), may also be collected by civil suit against the facility owner, commenced at any time after the charges become due. 
(j)  The remedies provided under this Section are cumulative and supplemental to each other. 
(k)  This Section shall apply to all stormwater nuisance abatement costs incurred by the Town on or after June 1, 2009. 
(Ord. 2009-1342 2) 
Sec. 7-8-60. - Compliance with applicable water quality regulations. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to relieve any facility owner or, in the event the Town shall undertake stormwater nuisance abatement measures, the Town from compliance with the requirements of any county, state or federal authority having jurisdiction over water quality matters, including but not limited to permitting requirements associated with wetlands protection. 
(Ord. 2009-1342 2) 
ARTICLE IX - Keeping of Chicken Hens 

Sec. 7-9-10. - Sale of chickens, sale of eggs. 
    Chickens younger than eight (8) weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of less than six (6) to a single purchaser. No person keeping chicken hens within the Town shall exchange eggs for valuable consideration. 
(Ord. 2011-1421 1) 
Sec. 7-9-20. - Keeping of chickens; limitations and requirements. 
    The keeping of chicken roosters or more than six (6) chicken hens is prohibited upon any parcel of land within the Town. However, up to six (6) chicken hens may be kept per parcel of property, subject to the following requirements and subject to all other applicable provisions of this Article: 
(1)  All structures devoted to the keeping of chicken hens shall be located between the rear-most portion of the residence and the rear lot line of the parcel in question. No chicken hens shall be permitted within any other portion of the lot or parcel. 
(2)  If a parcel has more than one (1) dwelling unit, all adult residents and the owners of the parcel must consent in writing to allowing the chicken hens on the property. 
(3)  Any person keeping chicken hens pursuant to this Article must first have been issued a permit by the Town, the application for which shall be made available by the Town Clerk and shall expressly incorporate an acknowledgement of the provisions of Section 7-9-50 below. The Town Clerk shall assess an application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each application received under this Article. 
(4)  All chicken hens must be provided with a covered, predator-resistant chicken house that is properly ventilated, designed to be easily accessed, cleaned and maintained and at least two (2) square feet per chicken in size, and no portion of which shall exceed six (6) feet from grade. 
(5)  During daylight hours, the chicken hens must have access to the chicken house, must have access to adequate fresh water, and must also have access to an enclosure that is screened on all sides and on top and adequate to protect them from predators. 
(6)  The chicken hens must be further protected from predators by being closed in the chicken house from dusk until dawn. 
(7)  Neither the chicken house nor any portion of the outdoor enclosure may be located less than fifteen (15) feet from any abutting property line unless the owner or keeper of the chicken hens obtains the written consent of the owners of all abutting properties to which the enclosure is proposed to be more closely located; in which event, the agreed-upon location shall then be deemed acceptable to all such abutting property owners, notwithstanding any subsequent change in ownership of such abutting properties. 
(8)  The chicken hens must be sheltered or confined in such fashion as to prevent them from coming into contact with wild ducks or geese or their excrement. 
(9)  The chicken hens shall be killed by or at the direction of the owner or keeper if so ordered pursuant to the lawful order of state or county health officials, or for the purpose of euthanasia when surrendered to a licensed veterinarian for such purpose, or as otherwise expressly permitted by law. 
(10)  If the parcel upon which the keeping of chicken hens is proposed falls within the jurisdiction of a homeowners' association or similar covenant-based property owners' association, the requirements of this Article shall be considered minimum requirements. Any such association shall have the right to lawfully adopt more stringent chicken-keeping standards, including the outright prohibition of chicken-keeping, for any parcel within the regulatory authority of such association. 
(Ord. 2011-1421 1) 
Sec. 7-9-30. - Owner or keeper slaughter of chicken hens. 
    An owner or keeper of chicken hens may slaughter his or her chicken hens for the purpose of food provision for the owner's or keeper's family. Any owner's or keeper's slaughter of chicken hens shall be accomplished in a humane and sanitary manner and shall take place out of public view. No person shall slaughter or dispose of chicken hens in exchange for valuable consideration. 
(Ord. 2011-1421 1) 
Sec. 7-9-40. - Declaration of nuisance and unlawful acts; duty to maintain chicken habitat. 
(a)  The unsanitary or unsafe keeping of chicken hens within the Town is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of every owner or keeper of chicken hens to maintain the chicken hen habitat in a secure, neat, tidy, methodical, systematic, clean and orderly condition, permitting no accumulation of odor, dust, droppings, feed, organic material, pests or loitering of predators. Any owner or keeper who is found to have violated the provisions of this Section shall be deemed subject to the nuisance abatement measures provided in Article I of this Chapter. 
(b)  Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to immediate and permanent revocation of any permit issued to such person under this Article. 
(c)  Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum established under Subsection 1-4-20(a) of this Code, exclusive of court costs. 
(d)  The remedies contained in this Article are cumulative, nonexclusive and shall not be deemed to limit the Town's authority to seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2011-1421 1; Ord. 2012-1433 3; Ord. 2014-1470 2) 
Sec. 7-9-50. - Town disposal of chicken hens found at large. 
    In addition to all other remedies available at law or equity, the Town shall have the authority to seize, impound and dispose of any chicken hens found at large within the Town's corporate limits. Such seizure, impoundment and disposal shall not require notice to any owner or keeper, nor any attempt to locate the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 2011-1421 1) 
ARTICLE X - Methamphetamine Laboratory Cost Recovery Code 

Sec. 7-10-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Town of Windsor Methamphetamine Laboratory Cost Recovery Code is to allocate the burden of methamphetamine laboratory remediation to the property benefitted thereby, to provide due process of law to affected property owners and to assure that the Town's taxpayers do not bear such costs without means of recovery. 
(Ord. 2011-1412 1) 
Sec. 7-10-20. - Conditions constituting nuisances. 
    Whenever there shall be in or upon any lot, piece of ground or structure within the Town limits any unlawful activity involving the assembly, collection, distribution, storage, use or combination of chemicals associated with the use, distribution or manufacture of methamphetamine, the existence of any such chemicals for such purpose shall be unlawful and shall constitute a methamphetamine laboratory nuisance. 
(Ord. 2011-1412 1) 
Sec. 7-10-30. - Methamphetamine laboratory nuisances prohibited. 
    No person being the owner, agent or occupant of or having under his or her control any building, lot or premises or unimproved real estate within the Town limits shall maintain or allow any methamphetamine laboratory nuisance to be or remain therein. The knowledge of each owner, each agent and each occupant shall be imputed to each, such that lack of actual knowledge shall not be an excuse from liability for any such person under this Article. 
(Ord. 2011-1412 1) 
Sec. 7-10-40. - Notice to owner. 
(a)  Upon discovery of a methamphetamine laboratory nuisance within any lot, tract or parcel of land within the Town, and without compromising any criminal investigation thereof, the Town shall as soon as practicable give written notice to every person owning such lots, tracts or parcels of land, informing such owner as follows: 
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED that the real property described below ("Property") has been identified as a methamphetamine laboratory nuisance pursuant to Chapter 7, Article X of the Windsor Municipal Code. Due to the hazardous nature of methamphetamine manufacture, storage, assembly and use, the Property has undergone immediate methamphetamine laboratory remediation measures, and may continue to undergo methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement measures, including but not limited to evaluation, decontamination and demolition. 
The cost of methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement measures associated with the said Property and incurred by the Town of Windsor as of the date of this notice is $________________. 
Pursuant to Chapter 7, Article X of the Windsor Municipal Code, you are hereby notified that the costs of such methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement measures shall constitute a methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien upon the said Property as provided in Section 7-10-50 of the Windsor Municipal Code. 
You are further notified that you have the right to request a hearing before the Windsor Municipal Court to contest the imposition of the methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien. Any such request shall be in writing, shall bear your signature, shall contain your mailing address and shall be delivered in person to the Police Department within ten (10) days of the date appearing below. You will be given written notice of the date and time of such hearing by first-class mail to the address appearing in the request for hearing. Failure to request a hearing as provided in this Notice shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the imposition of a methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien upon the said Property. 
Property description: 
_______________________ 
DATED this ___ day of ________________, 20____. 
_________________________ 
[signature of issuing official] 
(b)  Any notice issued pursuant to this Section may be served in any manner calculated to give the property owner reasonable notice, including posting of the Property, personal delivery, certified mailing or mailing via first-class United States mail. Such service on one (1) owner of the property shall be deemed service on all owners. The Chief of Police shall under oath swear in writing to the date and addressees of such service and the method of service. Such sworn statement shall constitute proof of notice to the property owner for all intents and purposes hereunder. 
(Ord. 2011-1412 1) 
Sec. 7-10-50. - Lien for methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement costs. 
(a)  The owner of any property subject to a methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien under this Article shall have the right to request a hearing before the Municipal Court. Such request shall be in writing, shall contain the requestor's mailing address and shall be delivered in person to the Police Department within ten (10) days of service as specified in Section 7-10-40(b) above. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Chief of Police shall schedule a hearing before the Municipal Court and provide written notice of the same to the requesting party by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address appearing on the request for hearing. Failure to request a hearing as provided in this Subsection shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the lien for methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement measures established in this Article. 
(b)  If a hearing is timely requested by the property owner, the sole question at the hearing shall be the cost incurred by the Town for methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement measures associated with the subject property. The Chief of Police shall present any evidence in support of the costs associated with the methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement measures in question. The property owner shall have a right to present evidence and argument in opposition. The Municipal Judge shall determine all evidentiary questions and shall render a written order within thirty (30) days of the hearing containing findings and conclusions as to the amount of the methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien. The written order shall be mailed to the property owner and a copy provided to the Chief of Police. 
(c)  Any methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien established under this Section shall constitute a perpetual lien on the property upon which methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement measures were undertaken in accordance with this Article. 
(d)  The attachment of such methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien is not dependent on the recording of written notice, and the methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien is prior and superior to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances, whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. The methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien remains attached to the property from the date the methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement costs are incurred until all methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date the costs were incurred, are paid. 
(e)  The Town is not required to seek payment of methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement costs from any person other than the owner of the property. No change of ownership, occupancy or possession affects the application of this Section, and the failure of any owner to discover that property was purchased against which a lien for methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement costs exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full. 
(f)  The Town may enforce its methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement costs and allowable court costs in the manner provided for foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(g)  The methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to the treasurer of the county wherein the property is located for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected or by any other means provided by law. 
(h)  Unpaid methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at eight percent (8%) per annum and costs of collection, may also be collected by civil suit against the owner of the property, commenced at any time after the methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement lien is perfected as provided herein. 
(i)  The remedies provided under this Section are cumulative and supplemental to each other. 
(j)  This Article shall apply to all methamphetamine laboratory nuisance abatement costs incurred by the Town on or after June 1, 2011. 
(Ord. 2011-1412 1) 
CHAPTER 8 - Vehicles and Traffic 
ARTICLE I - Model Traffic Code 

Sec. 8-1-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., the Town does hereby adopt by reference the 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado , promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, Denver, CO 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the Town. The purpose of this Article and the adopted Model Traffic Code is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State and the Nation. Three (3) copies of the adopted Model Traffic Code are now filed in the office of the Town Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
Sec. 8-1-20. - Additions and modifications. 
    The adopted Model Traffic Code is subject to the following additions and modifications: 
(1)  Section 107 is amended to read as follows: 
" 107. Obedience to police and fire department officials. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer, or member of the fire department at the scene of a fire, who is invested by the law or ordinance with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic." 
(2)  Section 1203 is added to read as follows: 
" 1203. Parking for certain purposes prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose of: 
"(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
"(2) Washing, greasing, painting or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
"(3) Displaying advertising." 
(3)  Section 1204(l) is amended by adding paragraph (1): 
"(l) Within an alley except during the necessary and expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise or freight. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property." 
(4)  Section 1204(2) is amended by adding paragraph (g) to read as follows: 
"(g) Within less than two (2) feet clearance from adjacent vehicles." 
(5)  Section 1701 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"The penalty for a violation of this Article shall be as provided in Chapter 1, Article IV of the Windsor Municipal Code ." 
(6)  Section 1702 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Appendix Parts A through G, inclusive, are hereby deleted in their entirety. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
Sec. 8-1-30. - Application. 
    This Article shall apply to all streets, alleys, highways, lanes and ways, whether public or private, within the corporate limits of the Town without exception. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
Sec. 8-1-40. - Interpretation. 
    This Article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform to the State's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this Article and the adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
Sec. 8-1-50. - Certification. 
    The Town Clerk shall certify to the passage of the ordinance codified herein and make not less than three (3) copies of the adopted Model Traffic Code available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
Sec. 8-1-60. - Penalties. 
    The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this Article: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions adopted in this Article. 
(2)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision adopted in this Article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the maximum penalty provided in Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code and/or useful public service as is allowed by specific ordinance. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
Sec. 8-1-70. - Speeding fines doubled. 
(a)  Any fine imposed as a penalty for speeding shall be doubled if such speeding took place within a school zone or a construction zone. The total fine imposed pursuant to this Subsection shall not exceed the maximum penalty provided in Chapter 1, Article IV of this Code. 
(b)  The Town Manager is hereby authorized to oversee the development and placement of appropriate street signs and to oversee the development and adoption of such other rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to effectuate and carry out the intent of this Section. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
Sec. 8-1-80. - Validity. 
    If any part or parts of this Article are for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article. The Town Board hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified herein and each part or parts thereof, irrespective of the fact that any part or parts are later declared invalid. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
Sec. 8-1-90. - Repeal. 
    Existing or parts of ordinances covering the same matters as embraced in this Article are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this Article are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to this Article taking effect. 
(Ord. 2014-1466 1) 
ARTICLE II - Parking Regulations 

Sec. 8-2-10. - Parking of boats, trailers or trucks upon the streets of the Town. 
(a)  No boat, trailer coach, mobile home, motor home, trailer, semi-trailer, truck or truck-tractor, all as defined in the Model Traffic Code , or any part of any such vehicle, shall be parked or stored upon the streets of the Town, except: 
(1)  Trailer coaches or trucks not exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in overall length. 
(2)  Motor homes not exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in overall length. As used in this Section, motor home means a vehicle which is designed to provide temporary living quarters and which is built into, as an integral part of or a permanent attachment to, a motor vehicle, chassis or van. 
(3)  Trucks or truck-tractors currently licensed by the Colorado Department of Revenue, Motor Vehicle Division, which are on business or delivery calls not exceeding eight (8) hours in length. 
(4)  Moving vans or similar vehicles being used for loading or unloading personal household goods for a period not exceeding twenty-four (24) hours in length. 
(5)  Trailers, semi-trailers and trucks or truck-tractors being used expeditiously to provide services, including but not limited to construction activities, or for special events as authorized by the Police Department. 
(6)  Motor homes exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in overall length, boats, trailer coaches and trailers, when engaged in loading, unloading or related activities for a time period not exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, with a maximum of four (4) such twenty-four-hour periods in any calendar month. 
(b)  No boat, trailer coach, mobile home, motor home, trailer, semi-trailer, truck or truck-tractor, all as defined in the Model Traffic Code , shall be parked or stored upon any lot in the Town closer than the parameters established by Section 16-10-10 of this Code concerning visibility at intersections. In accordance therewith, the parking of such vehicle shall be prohibited at street intersections within a triangular area described as follows: "beginning at the point of intersection of the edges of the driving surface, then to points forty (40) feet along both intersecting edges and then along a transverse line connecting those points." (Prior code 8-21; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1254) 
Sec. 8-2-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 2016-1525 ,  1, adopted Sep. 12, 2016, repealed  8-2-20, which pertained to parking prohibited during certain hours and derived from prior code  8-22; Ord. 2006-1236,  1. 
Sec. 8-2-30. - Parking prohibited at certain locations. 
(a)  The parking of motor vehicles on 11 th Street between Main Street and Sagewood Drive shall be prohibited at all times. 
(b)  The parking of motor vehicles on the north and south sides of Garden Drive between Kenosha Court and Diamond Valley Parkway shall be prohibited. 
(c)  The following regulations shall apply to parking of motor vehicles on Walnut Street in the specific locations described below: 
(1)  The parking of motor vehicles on the south side of Walnut Street commencing two hundred thirty-five (235) feet north from the center of the intersection of Walnut Street and Cottonwood Drive and continuing thereafter for one hundred (100) linear feet; and 
(2)  The parking of motor vehicles on the south side of Walnut Street commencing two hundred ninety-two (292) feet west from the center of the intersection of Walnut Street and 10 th Street and continuing thereafter for one hundred (100) linear feet shall be prohibited. 
(d)  The parking of motor vehicles in designated fire lanes shall be prohibited, without exception. 
(e)  The Town Manager is hereby authorized and instructed to erect appropriate signs and make appropriate street and curb markings to designate the restricted parking areas established hereby. 
(Prior code 8-24; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2016-1525 , 2) 
Sec. 8-2-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 2016-1525 ,  1, adopted Sep. 12, 2016, repealed  8-2-40, which pertained to parking prohibited after snowfall accumulation and derived from prior code  8-25; Ord. 2006-1236,  1. 
ARTICLE III - Abandoned and Inoperable Vehicles 

Sec. 8-3-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means: 
a.  Any motor vehicle or trailer left unattended on private property for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or longer without the consent of the owner or lessee of such property or his or her legally authorized agent. 
b.  Any motor vehicle or trailer left unattended on public property for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or longer, unless the owner or driver has conspicuously affixed thereto a dated notice indicating his or her intention to return or has otherwise notified the appropriate law enforcement agency of his or her intention to remove the same within seventy-two (72) hours. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any automobile, truck, self-propelled vehicle incapable of moving under its own power, any trailer incapable of moving, or any motor vehicle or trailer which lacks a valid state license plate or does not comply with the minimum safety requirements of state motor vehicle laws. 
    No motor vehicle or trailer shall be deemed abandoned or inoperable under this Section if said motor vehicle or trailer is stored in a fully enclosed garage or similar structure on private property. 
(Prior code 8-41; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532  13) 
Sec. 8-3-20. - Inoperable vehicles unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person having control over any inoperable vehicle to allow such vehicle to remain within the limits of the Town, except in areas specifically zoned for the storage, maintenance or repair of such vehicles. 
(b)  Inoperable vehicles found in areas other than those specifically zoned as aforesaid may be towed and impounded in accordance with the provisions of state law and this Code. 
(Prior code 8-42; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 8-3-30. - Abandonment of motor vehicles unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any motor vehicle upon public property or upon private property other than his or her own property. Abandoned vehicles may be towed and impounded in accordance with the provisions of state law and this Code. 
(Prior code 8-43; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 8-3-40. - Storage and disposal of abandoned or inoperable vehicles. 
    Vehicles removed from public or private property within the Town and placed in storage as provided in this Code shall be stored and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of state lawand this Code. 
(Prior code 8-44; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 8-3-50. - Notice and hearing concerning impounded vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a motor vehicle is impounded pursuant to this Code and state law, the Police Department shall notify the registered owner of record of the impoundment of such vehicle and of the owner's opportunity to request a hearing to determine the validity of the impoundment. 
(b)  Notice of impoundment shall be pursuant to Model Traffic Code  1804 and 42-4-1804 of the Colorado Revised Statutes in effect at the time of the impoundment. In the event of a conflict between the Model Traffic Code and the Colorado Revised Statutes, the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, shall control. 
(c)  Hearings requested hereunder shall be conducted by the Municipal Judge and shall take place within seventy-two (72) hours after the receipt of a request for hearing, excluding weekends and holidays. The failure of the owner of a motor vehicle to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall be conclusive of the validity of the impoundment and shall satisfy the hearing requirement of this Section. 
(d)  Hearings conducted hereunder shall be limited to the sole issue of the legality of the impoundment of the motor vehicle. The burden of proof shall be upon the Police Department to establish probable cause for the impoundment. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and shall not be governed by technical rules of evidence. The Municipal Court may, in its discretion, adopt procedural rules for conducting such hearings. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Municipal Judge shall prepare a written decision and shall provide a copy thereof to the Police Department and the owner of the impounded vehicle. The decision of the Municipal Judge shall be final. 
(f)  In the event the Municipal Judge determines that the impoundment was invalid, the Town shall be responsible for the costs incurred in the towing and storage of the motor vehicle in question. 
(Prior code 8-45; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532 14) 
ARTICLE IV - Truck Routes 

Sec. 8-4-10. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this Article, shall have the meaning hereinafter designated, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise or unless such meaning is excluded by express provision: 
    Immediate area of operation means a segment of a restricted route between successive intersecting streets, including any restricted route which provides the only practical access to that segment of the restricted route. 
    Restricted route means any street, highway, public way or portion thereof prohibited to the operation of through truck travel. 
    Through truck travel means operation of a truck without an origin or destination in the immediate area of operation. Origin or destination shall not include the residence of the owner, lessee or operator of the truck. 
    Truck means any motor vehicle, including tractor/semitrailer combinations but excluding privately owned recreational vehicles and publicly owned mass transportation motor vehicles, of or in excess of forty-five (45) feet in length inclusive of front and rear bumpers, or in excess of thirty thousand (30,000) pounds of empty weight. 
    Truck route means an street, highway, public way or portion thereof designated specifically for the operation of trucks. 
(Prior code 8-61; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 8-4-20. - Designation of routes, maps. 
(a)  The Town Board shall have the authority to designate those streets, highways, public ways or portion thereof upon which trucks shall operate. The Town Board shall likewise have the authority to restrict the operation of trucks upon streets, highways, public ways or portions thereof. Such designations and restrictions shall be made upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer and shall be based upon traffic engineering investigations and studies, environmental considerations and neighborhood characteristics of affected areas. 
(b)  The Town Engineer shall maintain in his or her office maps designating truck and restricted routes. Copies of such maps shall be made available to the public through the office of the Town Clerk. 
(Prior code 8-62; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 8-4-30. - Signs. 
    The Town Engineer shall post with appropriate signs all restricted routes. The Town Engineer may, in his or her discretion, also post designated truck routes with appropriate signs. 
(Prior code 8-63; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 8-4-40. - Unlawful travel on restricted routes. 
    Through truck travel shall be unlawful upon restricted routes. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a truck, upon a restricted route, without an origin or destination in the immediate area of operation. 
(Prior code 8-64; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 8-4-50. - Exclusive use of truck routes. 
    Upon the designation of truck routes, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck or cause a truck to be operated on any other street, highway, public way or portion thereof. 
(Prior code 8-65; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 8-4-60. - Evidence to justify travel required. 
    Any person operating a truck upon a street, highway, public way or portion thereof that is not a truck route, or upon a restricted route, shall have in his or her possession a log book, delivery slip or other evidence of his or her point of origin and destination to justify the presence of the vehicle upon such route. Failure to produce such evidence upon the reasonable request of a police officer shall be unlawful. 
(Prior code 8-66; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE V - Motorized Utility Vehicles 

Sec. 8-5-10. - Motorized utility vehicle defined. 
    A motorized utility vehicle ( MUV ) is defined as either: 
(1)  A four- or six-wheeled chassis and cargo bed powered by a 4-cycle gasoline or diesel motor; a drivetrain consisting of a continuously variable transmission; seating for a driver and one (1) passenger side-by-side; designed to travel at speeds not to exceed twenty (20) miles per hour; maintains a low center of gravity riding upon high-flotation tires; may be equipped with a trailer, cab enclosure, headlights, implements and similar attachments; and primarily designed for transporting loads, freight and maintenance equipment; or 
(2)  Any motorized equipment used for cutting grass, cutting weeds, maintaining landscaping and related purposes. 
(Ord. 2008-1324) 
Sec. 8-5-20. - Operation of MUVs authorized. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the terms of this Article or Article VIII of Chapter 11 of this Code, the operation of MUVs within the Town shall be prohibited. MUVs shall be operated within the Town only by the Town, the local school district, any local special districts, any local metropolitan districts and other private property owners with significant commercial property maintenance duties. MUVs shall be used only for the property maintenance-related functions of the Town, the local school district, any local special districts, any local metropolitan districts and other private property owners with significant commercial property maintenance duties, or unless otherwise authorized by the Town for programs or events. MUVs may be operated on any trail owned or operated by the Town or any duly-constituted trail authority for the purpose of maintaining property owned or operated by the Town or any such trail authority. 
(Ord. 2013-1451 6) 
Sec. 8-5-30. - MUV parking and equipment regulations. 
    MUVs shall not be parked on Town streets in violation of posted vehicle parking regulations, nor in any manner impede the safe passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Except as may be necessary for the Town's maintenance of its property, no MUV shall be parked or left unattended on any sidewalk within the Town. 
(Ord. 2006-1273 3) 
Sec. 8-5-40. - Minimum age for operation of MUVs. 
    The operation of MUVs shall be limited to persons sixteen (16) years of age or older, and such operators shall have a valid Colorado driver's license on his or her person at all times while operating an MUV within the Town. 
(Ord. 2006-1273 4) 
Sec. 8-5-50. - Operation of MUVs on state highways prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any MUV on any state highway, unless such MUV is equipped as required under Model Traffic Code Sections 204 through 231, inclusive. All MUVs operated upon any roadway within the Town shall at all times be equipped with the slow-moving vehicle emblem described in Model Traffic Code Section 234. All MUVs operated upon any roadway within the Town shall bear a visible insignia, label or decal indicating the owner's name. 
(Ord. 2006-1273 5) 
Sec. 8-5-60. - Violations. 
    Violations of this Article shall be punishable in accordance with the properly adopted penalty provisions as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. 2006-1273 6) 
ARTICLE VI - Golf Cars 

Sec. 8-6-10. - Golf car defined. 
    A golf car is a self-propelled vehicle not designed primarily for operation on roadways and that has: 
(1)  A design speed of less than twenty (20) miles per hour; 
(2)  At least three (3) wheels in contact with the ground; 
(3)  An empty weight of not more than one thousand three hundred (1,300) pounds; and 
(4)  A carrying capacity of not more than four (4) persons. 
(Ord. 2009-1357 1) 
Sec. 8-6-20. - Operation of golf cars authorized. 
(a)  Except as authorized and as provided by the terms of this Article, the operation of golf cars within the Town shall be unlawful. 
(b)  The operation of golf cars shall be permitted only pursuant to the following requirements: 
(1)  Permits for the operation of a golf car upon Town streets shall be issued only for particular neighborhoods and subdivisions, and only by resolution of the Town Board. 
(2)  Any person wishing to seek Town Board permission for operation of a golf car upon Town streets within a particular neighborhood or subdivision shall first obtain the written consent of the homeowners' association within the applicable neighborhood or subdivision or the written approval in the form of a signed petition from a majority of the residents within the applicable neighborhood or subdivision. 
(3)  Any person wishing to seek Town Board permission for operation of a golf car upon Town streets shall submit to the Police Department the written consent required under Paragraph (2) above, together with a legible map of the neighborhood or subdivision for which permission is sought pursuant to this Section. The Chief of Police shall, upon receipt of the required documentation under this Section, refer the permit request to the Town Board for consideration. 
(4)  The Town Board shall have the authority to deny a golf car permit application or revoke a permit previously issued if, in its sole discretion, it determines that the safety of the public cannot be assured. 
(5)  The Town Board may, in its sole discretion, attach such limitations and conditions as it deems fit to any permit issued under this Section to assure the safety of the public. 
(Ord. 2009-1357 1) 
Sec. 8-6-30. - Golf cars, restricted operations. 
    Notwithstanding the issuance of any permit under Section 8-6-20 above, the following restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  No golf car shall be operated by any person under the age of sixteen (16) years. 
(2)  No golf car shall be operated by any person unless such person holds valid driving privileges pursuant to Title 42, C.R.S., or the equivalent under the law of any other jurisdiction within the United States. 
(3)  No golf car shall be operated upon any sidewalk, pedestrian trail or recreational facility within the Town, whether or not such trail or recreational facility is operated under authority of the Town, with the exception of golf courses and associated golf facilities. 
(4)  Golf cars shall not be operated upon or across any portion of Colorado State Highway 392 or Colorado State Highway 257. 
(5)  The operator of a golf car must obey all traffic and parking regulations otherwise applicable to motor vehicles. 
(6)  No golf car shall be operated between sunset and sunrise or at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet ahead, unless such golf car is equipped and illuminated with head lamps, tail lamps, stop lamps and turn signals as required under Title 42, Article 4, Part 2, C.R.S. 
(7)  No golf car shall be operated in violation of any limitation or condition imposed by the Town Board pursuant to the authority provided under Paragraph 8-6-20(b)(5) above. 
(Ord. 2009-1357 1) 
Sec. 8-6-40. - Golf cars, operation within roadway. 
    Golf cars shall be operated as close to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when approaching, overtaking or passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction or when approaching, overtaking or passing a pedestrian or bicyclist. 
(Ord. 2009-1357 1) 
Sec. 8-6-50. - Violations. 
    Violations of this Article shall be punishable in accordance with the penalty provisions as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. 2009-1357 1) 
ARTICLE VII - Electronic Personal Assistance Mobility Devices 

Sec. 8-7-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following defined meaning: 
    Electronic personal assistance mobility device (EPAMD) means a device used by a person with a mobility disability. This definition excludes gasoline-powered devices or vehicles, Segway &reg; PT devices, any mobility device designed to operate in areas without defined pedestrian routes, golf cars and riding lawn mowers. This definition is restricted to a device with the following additional specifications: 
a.  Must not exceed one-half (1/2) the width of any part of the trail, path or sidewalk upon which the device is being operated; 
b.  Must weigh no more than five hundred (500) pounds; 
c.  Must be designed to travel on two (2) or more low-pressure tires; and 
d.  Must operate by an electric-powered engine with a maximum decibel level of fifty-five (55) or less when measured at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the device. 
    Wheelchair means a manually operated or power-driven device designed primarily for use by an individual with a mobility disability for the main purpose of indoor or of both indoor and outdoor locomotion. 
(Ord. 2013-1446 1) 
Sec. 8-7-20. - Scope and authorization. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to the use of EPAMDs within Town-owned, operated and/or maintained trails and on all associated lands and facilities, including but not limited to all facilities related to the operation of the Poudre River Trail, and further including but not limited to associated parking lots, restroom facilities, benches, etc. (collectively referred to as the "trail facilities"). 
(b)  The Town Board affirms and authorizes that persons with mobility impairments may use wheelchairs and manually-powered mobility aids (e.g., walkers, crutches, canes, braces or similar devices designed for use by individuals with mobility disabilities) within the trail facilities. 
(c)  The Town Board further authorizes persons with mobility impairments to use EPAMDs within the trail facilities, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The operator of the EPAMD must be a person with a mobility impairment. Credible assurance of such impairment may be requested by Town personnel in accordance with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) regulations. Credible assurance of such impairment may include: 
a.  A valid state-issued disability parking placard or card or other state-issued proof of disability; or 
b.  In lieu of a valid state-issued disability parking placard or card or other state-issued proof of disability, a verbal representation, not contradicted by observable fact, that the mobility device is being used for a mobility disability. 
(2)  The EPAMD is only permitted in areas of the trail facilities in which the general public is allowed. 
(3)  The EPAMD operator must not use or operate the EPAMD within the trail facilities if such use causes damage to real or personal property. 
(4)  Operating an EPAMD within any trail facility while impaired by the consumption of alcohol or drugs is prohibited. 
(5)  The EPAMD shall not be operated between dusk and dawn. 
(6)  The EPAMD shall not be operated within wet or ecologically sensitive or hazardous areas posted as prohibited access areas by the Town or any authority having jurisdiction over the area in question. 
(7)  The EPAMD shall not be used to transport anyone other than a single mobility-impaired operator. 
(8)  The EPAMD shall not be operated in a careless or reckless manner or at speeds that unreasonably jeopardize the safety or the operator or any other person. 
(Ord. 2013-1446 1) 
Sec. 8-7-30. - No authorization for other power-driven mobility devices. 
    The Town Board does not authorize the use of other power-driven mobility devices which are excluded from the definition of an EPAMD pursuant to this policy. 
(Ord. 2013-1446 1) 
Sec. 8-7-40. - Mobility-impaired operators only. 
    An individual without a mobility disability is prohibited from using an EPAMD within the Town's trail facilities under this policy, regardless of whether or not he or she is accompanying an individual with a mobility disability who is using an EPAMD. 
(Ord. 2013-1446 1) 
Sec. 8-7-50. - Storage. 
    The Town shall not be responsible for the storage of any EPAMD. 
(Ord. 2013-1446 1) 
Sec. 8-7-60. - Town not liable. 
    The Town shall not be liable for damage to any EPAMD or injury to any person, regardless of the source or cause, or any circumstance involving the use, transportation or storage of any EPAMD within Town trail facilities. 
(Ord. 2013-1446 1) 
Sec. 8-7-70. - Limitation or suspension of use. 
    The Town Board reserves the right to suspend and/or limit EPAMD use within trail facilities, if deemed necessary to protect the public interest or public safety. 
(Ord. 2013-1446 1) 
Sec. 8-7-80. - Right to modify. 
    The Town Board reserves the right to change, modify, revise or amend the regulations applicable to the operation of EPAMDs at any time. 
(Ord. 2013-1446 1) 
CHAPTER 10 - General Offenses 
ARTICLE I - Criminal Code 

Sec. 10-1-10. - Jurisdiction. 
    This Chapter shall apply to conduct and occurrences within the corporate limits of the Town, the manner of which the Town has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. 
(Prior code 10-1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-1-20. - Interpretation. 
    This Chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose. Articles and section headings of this Article and the adopted Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Prior code 10-2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE II - Offenses by or Against Public Officers and Government 

Sec. 10-2-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Government includes any branch, subdivision, institution or agency of the government of this Town. 
    Governmental function includes any activity which a public servant is legally authorized to undertake on behalf of a government. 
    Public servant means any officer or employee of the government, whether elected or appointed, and any person participating as an advisor or consultant, engaged in the service of process, or otherwise performing a governmental function, but the term does not include witnesses. 
(Prior code 10-11; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-2-20. - False reporting to authorities. 
    It is unlawful for a person to falsely report to authorities. A person commits false reporting to authorities if: 
(1)  He or she knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within an official or volunteer fire department, ambulance service or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; 
(2)  He or she makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that it did not occur; or 
(3)  He or she makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that he or she has no such information or knows that the information is false. 
(Prior code 10-12; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-2-30. - Public buildings; trespass; interference. 
(a)  No person shall so conduct himself or herself at or in any public building owned, operated or controlled by the Town as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee or invitee on such premises the lawful rights of such official, employee or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of or to leave any such public building. 
(b)  No person shall, at or in any public building, willfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
(c)  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer or his or her designee charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions being carried on in the public building. 
(d)  No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative or administrative body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session. 
(e)  No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official at or in any public building willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
(f)  The term public building , as used in this Section, includes any premises being temporarily used by a public officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section commits an unlawful act. 
(Prior code 10-13; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE III - Offenses Against Property 

Sec. 10-3-10. - Trespassing; privately owned property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly occupy, use or remain on or in any privately owned property, real or personal, without the permission of the owner or persons entitled to the possession thereof. 
(Prior code 10-31; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE IV - Offenses Against Public Peace, Order and Safety 

Sec. 10-4-10. - Loitering prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any persons to be upon any public way or place of public nature in such manner as to interfere with free and unobstructed use of such public way or place of public nature by any other person or persons, or to be profane, lewd or wanton in speech or behavior in such public way or place. 
(Prior code 10-41; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-20. - Disorderly conduct. 
    It is unlawful to commit disorderly conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct if he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Openly urinates or defecates in or upon any street, alley or public place other than in a toilet facility provided for such purpose; 
(2)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; or 
(3)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm a member of the public. 
(Prior code 10-42; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-30. - Disturbing the peace; using offensive language. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or to tend to disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, by loud or unusual noises, by unseemly, profane, obscene or offensive language calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, or by assaulting, striking or fighting another; or for any person to permit any such conduct in any house or upon any premises owned or possessed by him or her or under his or her management or control, when it is within his or her power to prevent, so that others in the vicinity are or may be disturbed thereby. 
(Prior code 10-43; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-40. - Assault. 
(a)  An assault is an unlawful attempt coupled with a present ability to commit a bodily injury on the person of another. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to assault, beat, strike, wound, imprison or inflict violence on another. 
(Prior code 10-44; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-50. - Obstructing highway or other passageway. 
(a)  It is unlawful to obstruct a highway or other passageway. 
(b)  An individual or corporation commits an offense if, without legal privilege, he or she intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Obstructs a highway, street, sidewalk, railway, waterway, building, entrance, elevator, aisle, stairway or hallway to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access or any other place used for the passage of persons, vehicles or conveyances, whether the obstruction arises from his or her acts alone or from his or her acts and the acts of others; or 
(2)  Disobeys a reasonable request or order to move issued by a person he or she knows to be a peace officer, fireman or person with authority to control the use of the premises, to prevent obstruction of a highway or passageway or to maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot or other hazard. 
(3)  For purposes of this Section, obstruct means to render impassible or to render passage unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous. 
(Prior code 10-45; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-60. - Location restriction for campers, trailers and mobile homes. 
    No person or persons shall occupy a camper, trailer or mobile home anywhere within the limits of the Town, unless said camper, trailer or mobile home is located in an authorized and approved mobile home park. 
(Prior code 10-46; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-70. - Assembling to commit unlawful act. 
    It shall be unlawful for any three (3) or more persons to assemble together in the Town with an intent to do any unlawful act; or, being assembled, mutually to agree or act in concert, to do an unlawful act with force or violence against the property of the Town or the person or property of another or against the peace and to the terror of others; or to make any move or preparation therefor; or, being present at such meeting or assembly, to fail to endeavor to prevent the commission of or perpetration of such unlawful act. 
(Prior code 10-47; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-80. - Throwing missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the Town to throw any stones, snowballs or other objects or missiles upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public way or upon other public ground. 
(Prior code 10-48; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-90. - Use and possession of weapons. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any persons to discharge any firearms, BB guns, pellet guns, bow and arrow or crossbows in the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to peace officers engaged in the lawful execution of their duty or to peace officers engaged in firearms training. Additionally, this prohibition shall not apply to any persons lawfully defending their person or property in accordance with the laws of the State. 
(b)  The Town Board may, by resolution containing such conditions as may be appropriate, designate certain areas of the Town wherein firearms, BB guns, pellet guns, bow and arrow or crossbows may be discharged for the purpose of hunting or target shooting. Any such resolution so adopted shall be subject to all statutes and regulations of the State pertaining to the discharge of firearms, BB guns, pellet guns, bow and arrow or crossbows. 
(Prior code 10-49; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-100. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or her to physical contact; or 
(2)  In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; or 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; or 
(4)  Engages in conduct or repeatedly commits acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose; or 
(5)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone which is obscene; or 
(6)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; or 
(7)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours or in offensively coarse language; or 
(8)  Repeatedly insults, taunts or challenges another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(b)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, obscene means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions. 
(c)  Any act prohibited by Paragraph (a)(5) of this Section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call was either made or received. 
(Prior code 10-50; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-110. - Vagrancy. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be deemed a vagrant in the Town. The following persons shall be deemed vagrants in the Town: 
(1)  Any person found loitering or strolling in, about or upon any street, land, avenue, alley or any other public way or public place, or at any public gathering or assembly, or in or around any store, shop or business or commercial establishment, or on any private property or place without lawful business and conducting himself or herself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior. 
(2)  Any person upon whose person or in whose possession shall be found any instrument, tool or other implement for picking locks or pockets, or any implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred is designed to be employed in the commission of any felony, misdemeanor or in the violation of any ordinance. 
(3)  Any person wandering abroad and occupying, lodging or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop or other building or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car or other vehicle, without owning the same and without permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during the hours of darkness. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Any person who asks or receives any compensation, gratuity or reward for practicing fortune-telling, palmistry or clairvoyance. 
(6)  Any person who shall be found trespassing in the nighttime upon the private premises of others. 
(Prior code 10-51; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2018-1580 1) 
Sec. 10-4-120. - Disturbing religious worship. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise or rude or indecent behavior, or profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. 
(Prior code 10-52; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-130. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  No person shall unlawfully enter or remain upon any premises within the Town. 
(b)  Premises , as used in Subsection (a) above, means real property, buildings and other improvements thereon located in the Town. 
(Prior code 10-53; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-140. - Door-to-door solicitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon any public or private premises in the Town, not having been requested or invited by the occupant or occupants thereof, for the purpose of soliciting the immediate or future purchase or sale of goods, services or any other thing of value. The provisions of the ordinance codified herein shall apply to, but shall not be limited to, books, pictures and periodicals. 
(b)  Nothing in the ordinance codified herein shall be deemed to apply to solicitations by nonprofit organizations exempt from federal income tax under 26 U.S.C.  501(c)(3). 
(c)  Nothing in the ordinance codified herein shall be deemed to apply to any person engaged in the business of selling and delivering goods or services directly to residents of the Town, who regularly delivers on a schedule or usually employs a vehicle for such deliveries over a regularly defined route and ordinarily sells from orders previously placed by such residents. 
(d)  Nothing in the ordinance codified herein shall be deemed to apply to any person engaged in the distribution of information in the exercise of such person's rights under the constitutions of the United States and the State of Colorado. 
(Prior code 10-54; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-150. - Attempt to obtain invitation prohibited. 
    No person shall attempt to obtain, by telephone or otherwise, an invitation to visit any private residence for the purpose of soliciting the purchase or sale of goods, services or any other thing of value, by knowingly making a false or deceptive representation or statement. 
(Prior code 10-55; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-160. - Signs prohibiting solicitation. 
    With the exception of solicitations permitted by Subsection 10-4-140(d), no person shall enter or remain upon any public or private premises in the Town, having not been requested or invited by the occupant or occupants thereof, for the purpose of soliciting the immediate or future purchase or sale of goods, services or any other thing of value when a "No Solicitation" or "No Trespassing" sign is posted at or near the entrance to such premises. 
(Prior code 10-56; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-170. - Hours for solicitation. 
    All persons exempted by the provisions of the ordinance codified herein shall conduct solicitations only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Prior code 10-56.1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-180. - Storage of flammable liquids. 
    It shall be unlawful to store or cause to be stored or parked any tank vehicle carrying flammable liquids or gases upon any streets, ways or avenues of the Town, or in any part of the Town, except those areas zoned for such uses. 
(Prior code 10-57; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-190. - Explosives. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store within the Town limits or within one (1) mile thereof any amount of gunpowder, blasting powder, nitroglycerine, dynamite or other high explosive in excess of one (1) fifty (50) pound box or in excess of five hundred (500) caps or other devices used for the detonation of such high explosives. 
(Prior code 10-58; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-200. - Open fires. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have an open fire in the Town without first obtaining an appropriate permit to burn from the Windsor-Severance Fire Protection District. 
(b)  For purposes of this Article, an open fire shall include all open burning with the specific exception of properly designed furnaces or other equipment connected to a stack or chimney, inside fireplaces and stoves, permanent outdoor fireplaces, charcoal-activated grills, propane grills, natural gas grills and outdoor electric cooking devices. 
(Prior code 10-59; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-4-210. - Private marijuana clubs prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or association of persons to operate any private marijuana club, which shall, for purposes of this Section, be defined as follows: 
The consumption of marijuana by persons assembled within a commercial or industrial structure, where such consumption is permitted, encouraged, promoted, enabled or condoned by persons assembled therein, whether such consumption is the primary intended purpose or an intended purpose incidental to other reasons for assembly therein. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section , marijuana shall have the same meaning as defined in Article XVIII, Section 16, subsection (2)(f) of the Colorado Constitution. 
(c)  This Section shall be liberally construed to prevent and prohibit the establishment, operation and continuation of any activity identified in Subsection (a) above, but shall not be construed to criminalize lawful activity under Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(d)  The establishment, operation and continuation of any activity in violation of the terms of this Section is specifically determined to constitute a public nuisance, may be abated by the Town as a nuisance and may be enjoined by the Town in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county in which such activity occurs. The provisions of Chapter 7, Article I of this Code shall apply to any nuisance declared pursuant to this Section and shall entitle the Town to any rights, remedies and powers provided therein with respect to the abatement of nuisances declared under this Section. The remedies set forth in this Section shall not be exclusive, shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 2013-1449 2) 
Sec. 10-4-220. - Large noncommercial marijuana cultivation facilities prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or association of persons to operate any large marijuana cultivation facility, which shall, for purposes of this Section, be defined as follows: 
Any location wherein more than four hundred (400) cubic feet of space is devoted to the growing of marijuana plants at any time or where more than twenty-four (24) mature marijuana plants are found within a single address at any time. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, marijuana shall have the same meaning as defined in Article XVIII, Section 16, subsection (2)(f) of the Colorado Constitution. 
(c)  This Section shall be liberally construed to prevent and prohibit the establishment, operation and continuation of any activity identified in Subsection (a) above, but shall not be construed to criminalize lawful activity under Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall affect the limitations and regulations found in Chapter 6, Article IV of this Code with respect to medical marijuana cultivation facilities, as defined therein. 
(e)  The establishment, operation and continuation of any activity in violation of the terms of this Section is specifically determined to constitute a public nuisance, may be abated by the Town as a nuisance and may be enjoined by the Town in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county in which such activity occurs. The provisions of Chapter 7, Article I of this Code shall apply to any nuisance declared pursuant to this Section and shall entitle the Town to any rights, remedies and powers provided therein with respect to the abatement of nuisances declared under this Section. The remedies set forth in this Section shall not be exclusive, shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 2013-1450 2) 
ARTICLE V - Curfew 

Sec. 10-5-10. - Curfew established. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to loaf, play, loiter or remain upon the streets, public parks or alleys or in any unoccupied or vacant lot, block or building within the limits of the Town between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This Section shall not apply to persons who meet any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any person engaged in lawful employment; 
(2)  Any person engaged in religious activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution; 
(3)  Any person accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person at least twenty-one (21) years of age who has permission of the parent or guardian to have custody of such person; 
(4)  Any person engaged upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person; or 
(5)  Any person traveling either on foot or in or upon any conveyance directly to or from any activity specified herein and the person's residence. 
(b)  Upon the conviction of a violation of this Section, the Municipal Court shall have authority to impose a fine as is otherwise authorized by this Code and, in addition thereto, the Municipal Court: 
(1)  Is hereby authorized to impose useful public service hours not to exceed one hundred (100) hours, in addition to any fine which may be imposed hereunder; 
(2)  May impose a minimum of twenty (20) hours of useful public service upon the first conviction of a violation of this Section. 
(3)  May impose a minimum of forty (40) hours of useful public service upon a second and subsequent conviction. 
(4)  In the event useful public service is imposed, the Municipal Court shall assess costs for the administration of useful public service in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) upon the imposition of a sentence to useful public service. Payment of said costs shall be deemed mandatory and necessary for the administration of the useful public service program and shall not be suspended. 
(Prior code 10-81; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-5-20. - Parental responsibility. 
    It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the duty of care or custody of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to knowingly allow such person to violate Subsection 10-5-10(a) above. 
(Prior code 10-82; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VI - Noise 

Sec. 10-6-10. - Noise, unreasonable. 
    No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any unreasonable noise; and no person shall knowingly permit such noise upon any premises owned or possessed by such person or under such person's control. For purposes of this Section, members of the police department are empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether a noise is unreasonable. 
(Prior code 10-91; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 10-6-20. - Garbage collection. 
    No person or entity providing garbage collection service for a fee shall operate any vehicle for the purpose of collecting solid waste, garbage or recyclable materials on any street within the Town between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Prior code 10-92; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VII - Fireworks 

Sec. 10-7-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Display means a supervised public display of fireworks by municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks or other organizations. 
    Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances or particles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of balloons that require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, Day-Glo bombs, any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound or any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substances, except that the term fireworks shall not include automobile flares, sparklers or other devices of like construction, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths (.25) of a grain of explosive content per cap manufactured in accordance with the Interstate Commerce Commission regulations for packing and shipping as provided therein, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the same and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(Prior code 10-101; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1246 1) 
Sec. 10-7-20. - Manufacture, sale, use or possession of fireworks. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, offer for sale, possess, use or explode any fireworks within the Town. 
(b)  The Windsor-Severance Fire Protection District may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks in the Town. Such permits may be granted upon application to the Windsor-Severance Fire Protection District. The District may prescribe reasonable requirements for the issuance of such permits, including but not limited to a reasonable fee for such permit, the posting of an appropriate bond, limitation as to the type of fireworks displayed, time and location of such display, requirements concerning the licensure or certification of the operator of the display and disposal of unused fireworks. 
(c)  Permits issued by the Windsor-Severance Fire Protection District for a public display of fireworks in the Town must be reviewed and approved in writing by the Chief of Police. No permit issued by the Windsor-Severance Fire Protection District shall be valid in the absence of the written approval thereof by the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code 10-102; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1246 1) 
Sec. 10-7-30. - Seizure of illegal fireworks. 
    The Windsor-Severance Fire Protection District or any police officer of the Town shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale or stored or held in violation of this Article. 
(Prior code 10-105; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1246 1) 
ARTICLE VIII - Marijuana Enterprises 

Sec. 10-8-10. - Marijuana enterprises prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate the following business enterprises: 
(1)  A marijuana store, as defined in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution; 
(2)  A marijuana cultivation facility, as defined in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution; 
(3)  A marijuana product manufacturing facility, as defined in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution; and 
(4)  A marijuana testing facility, as defined in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(b)  Any person found to be in violation of this Article shall, upon conviction, be fined up to the maximum penalty permitted for municipal courts of record. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2013-1448 2) 
Sec. 10-8-20. - Liberal construction. 
    This Article shall be liberally construed to prevent and prohibit the establishment, operation and continuation of any activity identified in Subsection 10-8-10(a) above. 
(Ord. 2013-1448 2) 
Sec. 10-8-30. - Town civil remedies. 
    The establishment, operation and continuation of any activity in violation of the terms of this Article is specifically determined to constitute a public nuisance, may be abated by the Town as a nuisance and may be enjoined by the Town in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county in which such activity occurs. The provisions of Chapter 7, Article I of this Code shall apply to any nuisance declared pursuant to this Article and shall entitle the Town to any rights, remedies and powers provided therein with respect to the abatement of nuisances declared under this Article. The remedies set forth in this Section shall not be exclusive, shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 2013-1448 2) 
ARTICLE IX - Regulations Applicable to Conduct of Persons in Town-Owned Parks and Open Space 

Sec. 10-9-10. - Applicability of 2013 Parks and Open Space Regulations. 
    The conduct of persons within Town-owned parks and open space shall be governed by the 2013 Parks and Open Space Regulations approved by Town Board Resolution No. 2013-16 and shall be maintained by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Culture. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Culture shall post, circulate and otherwise make the 2013 Parks and Open Space Regulations, together with any amendments thereto, available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. 2013-1451 1) 
Sec. 10-9-20. - Noncompliance with 2013 Parks and Open Space Regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of the 2013 Parks and Open Space Regulations, as well as any amendments thereto. Upon conviction, any person so convicted shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the limits established under Section 1-4-20 of this Code. Each day during which a violation takes place shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2013-1451 1) 
ARTICLE X - Regulation of Internet-Based Simulated Gambling Facilities 

Sec. 10-10-10. - Statement of intent and legal authority. 
(a)  Statement of legal authority. The Town, as a home rule municipality, is authorized to exercise all powers of self-government as set forth in Article 20, Section 6 of the Colorado Constitution. Included within these general powers of self-government are the powers necessary, requisite or proper for the government and administration of its local and municipal matters. Section 2.4 (B) of the Town's Home Rule Charter specifically provides that the Town shall have all powers granted to municipalities under state statutes, as defined herein. These powers specifically include: 
(1)  The general police powers enumerated in Section 31-15-401, C.R.S.; and 
(2)  The powers to regulate businesses enumerated in Section 31-15-501, C.R.S. 
(b)  Statement of intent. The intent of this Article is to prohibit the operation of simulated gambling devices, as defined herein, to provide for remedies in conjunction therewith and to provide for the imposition of penalties for violations thereof. 
(Ord. 2014-1485 1) 
Sec. 10-10-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Electronic gaming machine means a mechanically, electrically or electronically operated machine or device that displays the results of a sweepstakes game entry or game outcome to a participant on a screen or other mechanism at a business location, including a private club, that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed, in whole or in part, by any person conducting the sweepstakes or by that person's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, agents or contractors. The term includes an electronic gaming machine or device that: 
a.  Uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries; 
b.  Selects prizes from a predetermined, finite pool of entries; 
c.  Predetermines the prize results and stores those results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry is revealed; 
d.  Uses software to create a game result; 
e.  Requires a deposit of any currency or token or the use of any credit card, debit card, prepaid card or other method of payment to activate the electronic gaming machine or device; 
f.  Requires direct payment into the electronic gaming machine or device or remote activation of the electronic gaming machine or device upon payment to the person offering the sweepstakes game; 
g.  Requires purchase of a related product with legitimate value in order to participate in the sweepstakes game or makes a related product available for no cost but under restrictive conditions; 
h.  Reveals a sweepstakes prize incrementally even though the progress of the images on the screen does not influence whether a prize is awarded or the value of any prize awarded; or 
i.  Determines and associates the prize with an entry or entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered. 
    Enter or entry means the act or process by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize offered in a game promotion or sweepstakes. 
    Prize means any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit or anything else of value that may be transferred to a person, whether or not possession of the prize is actually transferred or placed on an account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize. Prize does not include free or additional play or any intangible or virtual award that cannot be converted into money or merchandise. 
    Simulated gambling device means a mechanically or electronically operated machine, network, system, program or device that displays simulated gambling displays on a screen or other mechanism at a business location, including a private club, that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed, in whole or in part, by any person conducting the game or by that person's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, agents or contractors. The term includes: 
a.  A video poker game or any other kind of video card game; 
b.  A video bingo game; 
c.  A video craps game; 
d.  A video keno game; 
e.  A video lotto game; 
f.  A video roulette game; 
g.  A pot-of-gold; 
h.  An eight-liner; 
i.  A video game based on or involving the random or chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers or symbols; 
j.  A personal computer of any size or configuration that performs any of the functions of an electronic gaming machine or device as defined in this Section; 
k.  A slot machine, as defined by Section 12-47.1-103(26)(a), C.R.S.; and 
l.  A device that functions as, or simulates the play of, a slot machine. 
    Sweepstakes shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Section 6-1-802(10), C.R.S. 
(Ord. 2014-1485 1) 
Sec. 10-10-30. - Simulated gambling devices prohibited. 
    A person commits the crime of unlawful offering of a simulated gambling device if the person offers, facilitates, contracts for or otherwise makes available to or for members of the public or members of an organization or club any simulated gambling device where: 
(1)  The payment of consideration is required or permitted for use of the device, for admission to premises on which the device is located or for the purchase of any product or service associated with access to or use of the device; and 
(2)  As a consequence of, in connection with or after the play of the simulated gambling device, an award of a prize is expressly or implicitly made to a person using the device. 
(Ord. 2014-1485 1) 
Sec. 10-10-40. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this Article shall, upon conviction, be fined up to the maximum penalty permitted for municipal courts of record. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2014-1485 1) 
Sec. 10-10-50. - Other remedies. 
(a)  Without regard to any penalty under Section 10-10-40 above, the Town may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate additional relief, including: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to restrain and enjoin violations of this Article; 
(2)  Such other and further relief as is available at law or in equity. 
(b)  The remedies set forth in this Article shall be not exclusive, shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other relief or penalty imposed upon the person in violation. 
(Ord. 2014-1485 1) 
Sec. 10-10-60. - Exceptions, exemptions, provisions inapplicable. 
(a)  Nothing in this Section: 
(1)  Prohibits, limits or otherwise affects any purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction related to stocks, bonds, futures, options, commodities or other similar instruments or transactions occurring on a stock or commodities exchange, brokerage house or similar entity; 
(2)  Limits or alters in any way the application of the requirements for sweepstakes, contests and similar activities that are otherwise established under the laws of the State; or 
(3)  Prohibits any activity authorized under Article 35 of Title 24 or Article 9, 47.1 or 60 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
(b)  The provision of internet or other online access, transmission, routing, storage or other communication-related services or web site design, development, storage, maintenance, billing, advertising, hypertext linking, transaction processing or other site-related services by a telephone company, Internet service provider, software developer or licensor, or other party providing similar services to customers in the normal course of its business does not violate this Article even if those customers use the services to conduct a prohibited game, contest, lottery or other activity in violation of this Article; except that this Subsection does not exempt from criminal prosecution or civil liability any software developer, licensor or other party whose primary purpose in providing such service is to support the offering of simulated gambling devices. 
(Ord. 2014-1485 1) 
ARTICLE XI - Public Consumption of Alcohol 

Sec. 10-11-10. - Public consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcohol beverage as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code and the Colorado Beer Code, and it shall be unlawful for any person to possess an unsealed container holding a measurable amount of an alcohol beverage, on or in any street, parking lot, alley, park, public place, or sidewalk, within the Town's corporate limits. 
(b)  Exception for Special Event Permits. This Section 10-11-10 shall not apply to the consumption or possession of alcohol beverages dispensed in accordance with any special event permit lawfully issued for the sale and consumption of alcohol beverages in any public place. 
(c)  This Section shall not apply if the unsealed container has been removed from a licensed premise pursuant to and subject to the limitations set forth in Title 44, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 2018-1575 1) 
Sec. 10-11-20. - Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in public parks. 
(a)  Beer and Wine in Town Parks, Limitations. The consumption of fermented malt beverages (beer) and vinous liquors (wine) within Town-owned community parks and Town-owned neighborhood parks shall be permitted, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  There shall be no consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in the Town's Chimney Park, unless in accordance with a special event permit or liquor license that has been lawfully issued for the sale and consumption of alcohol beverages in the Town's Chimney Park. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the issuance of a valid special event permit, no alcohol beverage shall be dispensed in glass containers or consumed from glass containers. 
(b)  Repealer. This Section 10-11-20 shall repeal at 12:01 a.m. on December 31, 2019, unless extended by prior official action of the Windsor Town Board. 
(Ord. 2018-1575 1) 
CHAPTER 11 - Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property 
ARTICLE I - Standard Specifications and Construction 

Sec. 11-1-10. - Adoption of standards. 
    Pursuant to Article 16 of Title 31, C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference the Standard Specifications and Construction Manual, officially approved, adopted and published on November 12, 1979, by the Town. The Town Clerk shall certify to the passage of this Article, cause notice of its contents and passage to be published, and make not less than one (1) copy of the adopted Manual available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(Prior code 11-1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-1-20. - Applicability. 
    The Standard Specifications and Construction Manual adopted herein shall apply to the construction, repair or replacement of streets, curbs, gutter, sidewalks, water mains, sewer mains and storm sewer in the Town. 
(Prior code 11-2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-1-30. - Interpretation. 
    This Article shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to establish specifications for the construction of streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water mains, sewer mains and storm sewers in the Town. Article and section headings of this Article and the adopted Standard Specifications and Construction Manual shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Prior code 11-3; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE II - Excavations 

Sec. 11-2-10. - Permit required; exception in the case of emergency. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than a duly authorized Town official or employee, to make or cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the Town, without first having obtained and having in force a permit therefor; provided, however, that, in case of actual emergency, it shall be lawful to make such excavation without a permit in order to repair utilities if a present danger to life or property exists. 
(Prior code 11-11; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-20. - Types of permits. 
    Permits under this Article shall be of two (2) types: permits for a single excavation (hereinafter referred to as Type I permits); and blanket permits to cover all excavations during a calendar year made by a public utility company (hereinafter referred to as Type II permits). A public utility company is defined as a company providing public utility services to the Town, including but not limited to the Public Service Company, U.S. West and any cable television company licensed, franchised or permitted within the Town. 
(Prior code 11-12; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-30. - Application for permit; contents and conditions. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit for such excavations shall make written application therefor to the Director of Engineering on the form prepared and provided by the Town. 
(1)  For a Type I permit, the application shall give the following information: 
a.  The permit number. 
b.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
c.  The date of the application. 
d.  The location, size, width, length and depth of the proposed excavation. 
e.  The type of pavement to be cut. 
f.  The purpose of the excavation. 
g.  The estimated time schedule, including the date the pavement will be broken, the date the excavation will be backfilled and the date of final repair. 
h.  All streets and abutting property addresses which will be affected by the excavation. 
(2)  For a Type II permit, the application shall give the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
b.  The date of the application. 
c.  Such other information as is required by the Director of Engineering. 
(b)  Every applicant shall agree in making application for a permit to be bound by all of the provisions of this Article. Application for a Type I permit shall be accompanied by a set of plans drawn to a minimum scale of one (1) inch to fifty (50) feet, showing in detail the location, size and kind of installation for the excavation. 
(Prior code 11-13; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-40. - Fees for permits. 
    A fee shall be charged and paid for each application for each Type I or Type II permit to cover the cost of administration and inspection. Such fee schedule shall be separately established by resolution of the Town Board. Scheduled excavations shall be those which the Department of Engineering is notified of, on a form to be supplied by the Town, at least three (3) days in advance of the work. Such notice shall give the location, size and time schedule for the work. Holders of Type II permits shall report all excavations not previously reported to the Director of Engineering, on a form to be supplied by the Town, within five (5) days after the work has begun. Other than as set forth herein, there shall be no additional fee for the permit. If the permit is denied, the fee shall not be refunded. 
(Prior code 11-14; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-50. - Bond and insurance requirements. 
    In addition to the above, every applicant for an excavation permit shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  File with the Town an acceptable corporate surety bond or other security approved by the Town, conditioned for the faithful performance of the work covered by the permit within the time allowed by the permit in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the Town; for the cost of restoration of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in which an excavation may be made under the permit to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering, for the cost of maintenance of such condition for a reasonable length of time as shall be required by the Director of Engineering; and for the payment of all fees, costs and charges of the Town in connection with the excavation. Or, in lieu of a bond or other approved security, the applicant may make a cash deposit in the appropriate amount, which deposit shall be held subject to the same conditions as a bond. Such bond or other approved security shall be in full force and effect for a period of one (1) year after the permit expires. For a Type I permit, such bond or other approved security shall be in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the amount that the Director of Engineering estimates will be the cost of restoring the street opening or two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is greater. For a Type II permit, such bond or other approved security shall be in the amount determined by the applicant, but the permit shall only authorize the holder thereof to have open at any one (1) time only such excavations as can be repaired at the cost of the amount of the bond as determined by the Director of Engineering. 
(2)  File with the Town an acceptable certificate of insurance, insuring against all claims for damages which may arise from or out of the performance of work under the permit. 
(Prior code 11-15; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-60. - Requirements for performance of work. 
    Anyone making excavation by virtue of a permit issued under this Article shall do work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and to occupants of neighboring properties. In particular, the following requirements shall be followed: 
(1)  Occupants of neighboring properties shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the work to be done. Such notice shall include the estimated time schedule and the extent of the work. Written notice shall also be given to all utility companies that may be affected, including but not limited to telephone, electrical, water and gas companies. 
(2)  Noise, dust and debris shall be kept to as low a level as practicable. 
(3)  Excavated material shall be stored in neat, compact piles and not allowed to be scattered by wind, rain, traffic or other means. 
(4)  Private driveways shall be kept open whenever possible. If driveways must be closed, they shall be closed at the time most convenient to the users thereof and for as short a time as possible. 
(5)  Not more than two hundred (200) linear feet of trench shall be open at one (1) time without written permission from the Director of Engineering. 
(6)  When traffic or other conditions warrant, the Director of Engineering may require that the work be accomplished during slack hours or at particular times or that the work proceed on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis, or the Director of Engineering may require other appropriate measures. All such requirements shall be complied with. 
(7)  No excavations shall be made, without written permission from the Director of Engineering, entirely across a street or across so much of a street that traffic cannot move on said street. Such permission may impose additional requirements, and in such case, such requirements shall be followed. 
(Prior code 11-16; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-70. - Safety and protective requirements. 
    Whenever any person, under authority of this Article or otherwise, shall place any obstruction in any street, alley, sidewalk or other place, or make any excavation therein or alteration thereto, such person shall keep such obstruction, excavation or alteration properly safeguarded by substantial barricades, and between dusk and daylight adequate warning lights or flares shall be placed around the obstruction, excavation or alteration. In all instances, fire hydrants shall be kept clear of all building material, dirt and rubbish, with clear and adequate access to such hydrant from the roadway. Existing gutters and other drainage courses shall be kept open so as to allow adequate drainage. All excavations shall be made in such a way as to protect any existing surveying monuments and existing utilities. The Director of Engineering shall have authority to specify protective measures and minimum clearances regarding existing utilities, and any such specifications shall be followed. Sufficient shoring of excavations shall be provided whenever needed or whenever deemed necessary by the Director of Engineering. 
(Prior code 11-17; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-80. - Backfilling of excavations. 
    All permit holders shall adequately backfill any excavations made under the authority of this Article. Backfilling shall be done in accordance with the Standard Specifications and Construction Manual for the Town. At the request of the Director of Engineering, the density of the compacted backfill shall be tested by a soils engineer and a copy of the test results shall be given to the Director of Engineering. The number and location of soil tests shall meet the approval of the Director of Engineering. All costs for testing shall be paid by the permit holder. The permit holder must notify the Director of Engineering before backfilling. 
(Prior code 11-18; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-90. - Inspection of backfilling. 
    Within forty-eight (48) hours after completion of backfilling, the permit holder shall notify the Department of Engineering and request an inspection. The surface of the excavation shall not be replaced until the backfill has been approved on inspection. Any defects in the backfill shall be corrected by the permit holder within the time required by the Department of Engineering. Upon correction of defects noted, the permit holder shall again request an inspection from the Department of Engineering. 
(Prior code 11-19; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-100. - Restoration of surface. 
(a)  Upon receiving approval of the backfill from the Department of Engineering, the permit holder shall restore the surface of the excavation in the manner required by this Section, or, at the option of the permit holder, such work may be done by the Town and charged to the permit holder, in which case the permit holder shall reimburse the Town for such work within thirty (30) days after it is billed. 
(b)  All patches shall have straight and vertical edges and shall cover the total width of the excavation. Patches in concrete pavements shall be six (6) inches thick, shall be made from concrete conforming to specifications of the Town and shall be finished to the same surface texture as the adjacent existing concrete. The existing concrete shall be saw-cut to a depth of one and one-half (11/2) inches to assure a straight edge and uniform patch. Patches in asphalt pavements shall consist of four (4) inches of base course material and asphalt surfacing equal to the total thickness of adjacent existing pavement. The concrete and asphalt shall conform to the specifications of the Town. Asphalt surfacing shall be compacted to conform to the specifications of the Town. Permanent asphalt patches shall not be put in during freezing weather. Upon completion of work, all surplus earth, rubbish and other materials shall be immediately removed, and the Department of Engineering shall be notified that the job is completed. 
(Prior code 11-20; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-110. - Conformance to permit required; supplemental applications. 
    In no case shall any permit holder open or remove a greater area of surface or make such removal at a location other than that specified in the permit. In the event it shall be necessary to open or remove a greater area than originally applied for, the applicant shall first notify and obtain the consent of the Director of Engineering and, if required by said Director, file a supplemental application and make an additional deposit. No person shall exceed the time limit specified on the permit without the express consent of the Director of Engineering. 
(Prior code 11-21; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-120. - Permittee liable in case of nonconformance. 
    In the event any permit holder fails to do anything required of him or her hereunder, the Department of Engineering may cause the same to be done, the cost of the same shall be charged to the holder of the permit, and he or she shall be liable therefor. 
(Prior code 11-22; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-130. - Permittee liable for injuries to person or property. 
    Every permit holder acting under a permit issued pursuant to this Article shall be responsible to anyone for injury to person or property by reason of the work done under the permit and shall indemnify and hold the Town harmless from any expenses, costs, claims or other charges or fees arising out of such work. The permit holder shall be responsible for adequately protecting the work, the surrounding property and the public and shall adequately safeguard the work regardless of whether any specific requirements in connection with the work are made by the Director of Engineering. 
(Prior code 11-23; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-2-140. - Excavations under sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporation to make any excavation or opening at a depth greater than one (1) foot and/or two (2) inches in diameter under any sidewalk or upon any street, alley or public ground of the Town, for the purpose of installing permanent areaways thereunder, without first obtaining a right so to do from the Director of Engineering; and no such right or privilege shall be granted by the Director of Engineering, except upon written application therefor and upon conditions to be prescribed by the Director of Engineering respecting the continued occupancy and use of such areaways after the same have been constructed. 
(Prior code 11-24; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE III - Encroachments and Obstructions 

Sec. 11-3-10. - Encroachments and obstructions prohibited. 
    No encroachment or obstruction whatever, other than that provided by law or by this Article or some other Town ordinance, shall be made or placed upon any street, alley or other public place within the Town. 
(Prior code 11-41; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-20. - Application for occupation of street. 
(a)  Any person desiring to occupy any portion of a street, alley or other public place in connection with the erection, construction, remodeling or demolishing of any building or improvement on property abutting or adjacent thereto shall make written application to the Department of Engineering on a form prepared and provided by the Town. The application shall give the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
(2)  The street, alley or other public place affected and the amount thereof. 
(3)  The address of the property on which the work is to be done. 
(4)  The reason for blocking the street. 
(5)  The amount of time the permit is needed. 
(b)  The applicant shall agree in making the application to be bound by all of the provisions of this Article and the rules and regulations of the Department of Engineering. 
(Prior code 11-42; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-30. - Term of permit; renewal and revocation. 
    No permit required under Sections 11-3-10 through 11-3-70 shall be issued for a period of more than ninety (90) days, provided that the Director of Engineering may renew any such permit for additional ninety (90) day periods upon written application. Any permit issued under this Article may be revoked by the Director of Engineering if the holder thereof violates any of the provisions of this Article or the rules and regulations of the Department of Engineering or if the work allowed by the permit unduly interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Prior code 11-43; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-40. - Surety bond required. 
    Any person applying for a permit under Sections 11-3-10 through 11-3-70 shall file with the Town an acceptable corporate surety bond conditioned for the faithful performance of the work in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the Town and the terms of the permit, and indemnifying and saving harmless the Town against and from any and all damages or claims for damages, loss, costs and charges or expenses that may be brought against it by any person for or on account of injury to persons or property resulting from or occasioned by reason of the occupation of the street, alley or public place. 
(Prior code 11-44; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-50. - Protection of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
    The holder of any permit issued under Sections 11-3-10 through 11-3-70 shall provide whatever fencing the Director of Engineering requires to protect pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the abutting public property. If required, the permit holder shall build and maintain a good and substantial protected walkway around the obstruction. The permit holder shall adequately light and mark the obstruction so as to protect pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Prior code 11-45; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-60. - Adequate drainage and access to fire hydrants required. 
    Any person holding a permit issued under Sections 11-3-10 through 11-3-70 shall take such measures as may be required to ensure that adequate drainage is maintained around the obstruction. All fire hydrants shall be kept clear of all building materials, rubbish and other obstructions, and easy access to such hydrants shall be provided and kept clear at all times. Upon completion of the work, the permit holder shall remove all obstructions, materials, debris and rubbish within ten (10) days. 
(Prior code 11-46; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-70. - Permittee liable in case of nonconformance. 
    In the event any permit holder fails to do anything required of him or her hereunder, the Department of Engineering may cause the same to be done, and the cost of the same shall be charged to the holder of the permit, and such holder shall be liable therefor. 
(Prior code 11-47; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-80. - Permit application for encroachment. 
    Any person desiring to erect a building, fence, barrier, post or other obstructions or encroachments upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, highway, public right-of-way or other public ground within the Town shall file a written application for a permit therefor upon a form prepared and provided by the Town. Said application shall state therein the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
(2)  The location of the proposed encroachment, obstruction or structure. 
(3)  The type of encroachment, obstruction or other structure. 
(4)  The purpose of the proposed encroachment, obstruction or other structure. 
(5)  That the applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of Sections 11-3-80 through 11-3-110 of this Article. 
(Prior code 11-48; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-90. - Investigation; fee; revocation of permit. 
    The application provided for in Section 11-3-80 shall be made to the Department of Engineering. Such Department shall make an investigation of the information contained in the application and, prior to the issuance of a permit, shall determine that the proposed encroachment, obstruction or other structure does not constitute a nuisance, destroy or impair the use of the right-of-way by the public or constitute a traffic hazard. No permit shall be issued where the above conditions are found to exist. At the time of issuance of a permit hereunder, the applicant shall pay a fee equal to the cost of recording the permit with the County Clerk and Recorder. The Department of Engineering shall so record a copy of the permit. Any such permit so issued may be revoked by the Department of Engineering at any time the conditions above referred to are found to exist, or when it is determined that the property upon which the encroachment, obstruction or structure exists is required for use by the public. 
(Prior code 11-49; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-100. - Notice to remove encroachment. 
(a)  Whenever any encroachment, obstruction or structure is made or located contrary to the terms of the permit therefor or without a permit or at such time as the permit is revoked as above provided for, the Town Manager or his or her authorized agent shall give notice to the person who made or located such encroachment, obstruction or structure or caused or permitted the same to be done, or who owns or controls the premises with which such encroachment, obstruction or structure is connected, to remove such encroachment, obstruction or other structure. The same shall be removed within ten (10) days after notice. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to continue any encroachment, obstruction or other structure for a period of ten (10) days after receipt of the notice provided for above. 
(Prior code 11-50; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-3-110. - Noncompliance with notice. 
(a)  In case any notice given under Section 11-3-100 shall not be complied with, the Town Manager or his or her authorized agent is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the removal of the encroachment, obstruction or structure. 
(b)  Upon completion of such removal, the Town Manager or his or her authorized agent shall certify to the Town Clerk the cost of said removal, and the Town Clerk shall thereupon, by certified mail addressed to the owner of the premises with which the obstruction is connected, give notice of such removal and the cost incurred for such work, together with a statement that the cost of the work will be assessed against the owner's lot, tract or parcel of land if such cost is not paid to the Town within thirty (30) days after mailing of such notice. 
(c)  If such person fails to make payment within the aforesaid thirty (30) days, the Town shall make assessment by ordinance against the lot, tract or parcel of land in connection with which the encroachment, obstruction or structure was made, and such assessment shall be certified to the County Treasurer for the purpose of having the same placed upon the tax rolls and collected in the same manner as general taxes are collected. 
(Prior code 11-51; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE IV - Moving of Buildings 

Sec. 11-4-10. - Permit required; fee; liability; revocation; term. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporation to use or occupy any street, alley or other public ground in the Town for the purpose of moving a building or other structure greater than fourteen (14) feet in width across or thereon without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works. 
(b)  Application for a permit hereunder shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the Director of Public Works and shall set forth such information as may be required thereon. At the time of making application, the applicant shall pay a permit fee as established by resolution by the Town Board and shall file the bond required herein. 
(c)  Application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a corporate surety bond in an amount established by the Town Board, conditioned upon compliance with all requirements of the ordinances of the Town relating to activities under the permit. 
(d)  Any person using the streets, alleys or other public ground for the purpose of moving buildings and other structures across or thereon shall be responsible for any damage done to such street, alley or public ground or any improvements situated thereon, including, without limitation, trees and other plantings, signs, utility poles, utility lines, traffic signals and the like. Any such persons shall also be responsible for any damage caused to any private property by virtue of use of the streets, alleys and other public grounds of the Town for the purpose of moving such buildings or other structures. 
(e)  The Director of Public Works shall determine whether the applicant possesses the technical qualifications and the necessary equipment for the moving of buildings and structures and shall issue or deny the permit based upon such determination. 
(f)  Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked by the Director of Public Works upon written notice to the holder of the permit, if the permit holder fails to comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the Town relating to the permit or for other good cause relating thereto. In the event of such revocation, no fee paid hereunder shall be refunded. If any permit holder objects to the revocation of a permit by the Director of Public Works, he or she may request a hearing on the question of revocation before the Town Board, which shall make the final determination on the question. 
(g)  Any permit granted hereunder shall be valid for ten (10) days unless sooner revoked. 
(Prior code 11-71; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE V - Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters 

Sec. 11-5-10. - Construction authorized. 
(a)  Sidewalks, curbs and gutters may be constructed, repaired and replaced by the owners of property abutting upon the same at their expense within the corporate limits of the Town, when streets are laid out, open, improved and in common use by pedestrians, and shall be constructed of the character, location, grade, material and in the same manner provided for in this Article. 
(b)  Except as provided herein, sidewalks, curbs and gutters installed, repaired or replaced by the Town shall be constructed of the character, location, grade, material and in the same manner as provided for in this Article, and the cost of such installation, repair and replacement shall be borne entirely by the Town. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
Sec. 11-5-20. - Grades to be established by Town. 
    The grades for sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be established by the Town. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
Sec. 11-5-30. - Construction permit required. 
    Before constructing any sidewalks, curbs or gutters, the owner of the property adjacent thereto shall make application to the Director of Engineering for a permit upon forms furnished by said Director, and the sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall be constructed in conformity with the grades established by the Town. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
Sec. 11-5-40. - Duties and powers of Director of Engineering. 
    It shall be the duty of the Director of Engineering to have charge of all sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveways within the limits of the Town and to see that the same are properly constructed and kept in repair and, if the construction of additional sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveways shall be required or if existing sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveways shall become unsafe or out of repair, to order the construction or repair. When a permit shall be issued to any person to construct any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway, it shall be the duty of the Director of Engineering to supervise the construction thereof and require the same to be constructed pursuant to the provisions of this Article, all ordinances of the Town in relation thereto and the latest specifications of the Director of Engineering adopted by the Town. The Director of Engineering is hereby charged with the duty of requiring an inspector to see that all sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveways are constructed as required by this Article and, to this end, shall select and designate a suitable person to act as inspector; and no such work shall be accepted by the Director of Engineering unless the same has been inspected as herein provided. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
Sec. 11-5-50. - Contents of permit. 
    The Director of Engineering shall retain a copy of any permits issued under Section 11-5-40 above, said copy to contain an accurate description of the property where the construction is to be done, the portion of the property which said construction is to affect, the kind of material to be used in the construction and other data necessary for that particular work. The copy of the permit maintained by the Director of Engineering shall become a part of the records of the Director of Engineering and shall be filed together with all pertinent information concerning that particular work. Where proceedings are had to lay sidewalks, curbs and gutters under any special law of the State, and where the entire work in a district is let by the Town as one (1) contract, it shall not be necessary for the property owner to procure a permit. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
Sec. 11-5-60. - Conformity to specifications required. 
    The specifications, construction and material for all sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be in conformity with the specifications heretofore or hereafter adopted by resolution duly passed by the Town Board, and copies thereof are now and shall be on file in the office of the Director of Engineering. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
Sec. 11-5-70. - Maintenance. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any real property in the Town adjacent to any sidewalk, curb and gutter to keep such sidewalk, curb and gutter in repair so that the same does not endanger the public. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
Sec. 11-5-80. - Inspection. 
    The Director of Engineering or his or her authorized representative shall periodically inspect the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in the Town. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
Sec. 11-5-90. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article, or who shall change, disturb or alter any grade stakes or pins set by the Director of Engineering or by his or her subordinates, either upon any special work done by said Director or upon the regular pins or monuments set by said Director or by his or her subordinates in establishing grades as provided in this Article or any ordinances of the Town, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally or negligently shall cause damage to any curb, gutter or sidewalk maintained by the Town shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, in addition, be liable for any cost associated with the repair of any such curb, gutter or sidewalk so damaged. 
(Ord. 2008-1326) 
ARTICLE VI - Curb Cuts and Driveways 

Sec. 11-6-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the following terms are defined as follows: 
    Change of use means any change of purpose for which any land, building or structure is occupied, maintained, arranged, designed or intended. 
    Driveway means any area, construction or facility between the roadway or the street and private property. 
    Parkway means the space between the street, roadway or curbline and the property line, with the exception of a sidewalk area.. 
    Sidewalk area means that portion of the space lying between the street, roadway or curbline and the property line which is reserved for sidewalks, either existing or proposed. 
    Street means any street, alley or other public place within the Town. 
(Prior code 11-111; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-6-20. - Driveways required for access to private property. 
    Any access from any public roadway to private property hereafter provided, constructed, altered or repaired shall be through driveways constructed according to the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 11-112; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-6-30. - Permit required; application contents and conditions. 
(a)  Except when included in a building permit, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or organization to construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any driveway in the Town without first obtaining a permit therefor and paying the permit fee as required by Section 11-6-40 hereof; provided, however, that no permit fee shall be required of a subdivider constructing driveways as a part of street and sidewalk installation within the subdivision. No permit fee will be required when driveway construction occurs as part of a special improvement district. 
(b)  Any party requesting such permit shall file a written application with the Director of Engineering. Such application shall be made on a standard Town form provided for that purpose and shall include: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of the property abutting and the street where the work is to be performed. 
(3)  The exact location of the proposed work, giving the street address or legal description of the property involved. 
(4)  A detailed plan showing the exact dimensions of the abutting property and the exact dimensions and location of all existing or proposed driveways and other pertinent features with the limits of the frontage of said property. 
(5)  The location of buildings, loading platforms or off-street parking facilities being serviced or to be served by such driveways. 
(6)  The Director of Engineering may require, at his or her discretion, the filing of any other information when, in his or her opinion, such information is necessary to properly enforce the provisions of this Article. 
(7)  No plan shall be approved nor a permit issued where it appears that the proposed work, or any part thereof, conflicts with the provisions of this Article or any ordinance of the Town; nor shall issuance of a permit be construed as a waiver of the Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance requirements concerning the plan. 
(Prior code 11-113; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-6-40. - Permit fees. 
    The permit fees for driveways approved by the Director of Engineering shall be established by a fee schedule separately established by resolution of the Town Board. 
(Prior code 11-114; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-6-50. - Notice to reconstruct curbs or driveways. 
    The Director of Engineering or his or her authorized representative may, at his or her discretion, order the reconstruction, alteration or repair of driveways and associated structures, presently constructed or constructed hereafter under the terms of this Article, where he or she determines such to be an impediment to the free movement of vehicles upon the streets or the uneconomic distribution of parking spaces at the curb of the aforementioned streets, or a hazard to the travel or safety of pedestrians thereon. Such notice to reconstruct, alter or repair shall be given by registered or certified mail to the owner of the premises involved, who shall commence such reconstruction, alteration or repair within thirty (30) days thereafter. In the event that the owner fails to so commence, the Town may make such reconstruction, alteration or repair, billing the costs of the same to said owner, who shall be obligated therefor. 
(Prior code 11-115; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-6-60. - Removal of abandoned driveways. 
    When, in the opinion of the Director of Engineering or his or her authorized representative, an abandoned driveway constitutes a hazard to vehicular traffic or to pedestrians within the Town, the Director of Engineering may order the removal of such driveway, and the reconstruction of the new curb shall be made by the owner of the premises involved, after notice has been given as provided in Section 11-6-50 hereof, and the owner shall be obligated therefor. 
(Prior code 11-116; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-6-70. - Authority of Director of Engineering. 
    The Director of Engineering, when directed by the Town Board, shall have the authority to order the removal of any driveway if such removal would be in the best interest of traffic movement or safety for pedestrians or vehicles. 
(Prior code 11-117; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-6-80. - Standard plans and specifications; construction procedures. 
(a)  All construction outlined in this Article shall be located and constructed in accordance with the Town's Standard Specifications and Construction Manual, which shall be drawn up by the Director of Engineering, approved by the Town Board and available and on file in the office of the Director of Engineering, and shall be performed to the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering or his or her authorized representatives. 
(b)  The type of construction shall be designated and/or approved by the Director of Engineering, and all materials used shall be of satisfactory quality and subject to inspection and approval. No concrete shall be placed until the Director of Engineering or his or her duly appointed agent has inspected and approved the forms. Driveways shall be completely paved with concrete in the area between the roadway and the property line. 
(Prior code 11-118; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-6-90. - Driveway construction regulations. 
    Every driveway hereafter constructed, reconstructed or altered, in the street right-of-way, shall conform to the Street Design and Construction Standards established and maintained by the Director of Engineering. 
(Ord. 2009-1355 1) 
ARTICLE VII - Snow and Ice Removal 

Sec. 11-7-10. - Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. 
    The owners or occupants of property abutting upon or adjacent to sidewalks within the corporate limits of the Town shall at all times keep such sidewalks free and clear of snow and ice. In the event such owners or occupants fail to remove snow and ice from such sidewalks within twenty-four (24) hours after the accumulation of snow and ice thereon, the Town may have the sidewalks cleaned and cleared of snow and ice, and the cost thereof, including inspection and other incidental costs and an additional cost for administration not to exceed ten percent (10%), shall be assessed against the property in accordance with the assessment provisions set forth below. 
(1)  The Chief of Police designee shall certify in writing the costs associated with snow and ice removal measures undertaken pursuant to this Section, and such certification shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to both the owner of the property and to the property address if different from the owner's address. Such service shall constitute proof of notice to the property owner for all intents and purposes hereunder. 
(2)  The owner of any property subject to a snow and ice removal lien under this Article shall have the right to request a hearing before the Municipal Court. Such request shall be in writing, shall contain the requestor's mailing address and shall be delivered in person to the Police Department within ten (10) days of the mailing specified in Subsection (a) above. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Chief of Police designee or Town Prosecutor shall schedule a hearing before the Municipal Court and provide written notice of the same to the requesting party by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address appearing on the request for hearing. Failure to request a hearing as provided in this Subsection shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the lien for snow and ice removal measures established in this Section. 
(3)  lf a hearing is timely requested by the property owner, the sole question at the hearing shall be the cost incurred by the Town for snow and ice removal measures associated with the subject property. The Chief of Police designee, and/or Town Prosecutor shall present any evidence in support of the costs associated with the snow and ice removal measures in question. The property owner shall have a right to present evidence and argument in opposition. The Municipal Judge shall determine all evidentiary questions and shall render a written order within thirty (30) days of the hearing containing findings and conclusions as to the amount of the lien. The written order shall be mailed to the property owner and a copy provided to the Chief of Police and to the Town Prosecutor. 
(4)  Any lien established under this Section shall constitute a perpetual lien on the property upon which snow and ice removal measures were undertaken in accordance with this Section. 
(5)  The attachment of such lien is not dependent on the recording of written notice, and the lien is prior and superior to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances, whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. The lien remains attached to the property from the date the snow and ice removal costs are incurred until all such costs, together with simple interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date the costs were incurred, are paid. 
(6)  The Town is not required to seek payment of snow and ice removal costs from any person other than the owner of the property. No change of ownership, occupancy or possession affects the application of this Section, and the failure of any owner to discover that property was purchased against which a lien for snow and ice removal costs exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full. 
(7)  The Town may enforce its lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the lien. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid snow and ice removal costs and allowable court costs in the manner provided for foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(8)  The lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to the treasurer of the county wherein the property is located for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected or by any other means provided by law. 
(9)  Unpaid snow and ice removal costs, together with simple interest at eight percent (8%) per annum and costs of collection, may also be collected by civil suit against the owner of the property, commenced at any time after the charges become due. 
(10)  The remedies provided under this Section are cumulative and supplemental to each other. 
(11)  This Section shall apply to all snow and ice removal costs incurred by the Town on or after December 14, 2015. 
(Prior code 11-131; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. No. 2015-1515 , 1-11-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1515 , adopted Jan. 11, 2016, repealed the former  11-7-10, and enacted a new  11-7-10 as set out herein. The former  11-7-10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code 11-131; Ord. 2006-1236 1. 
ARTICLE VIII - Public Parks, Recreational Facilities and Trails 

Sec. 11-8-10. - Hours of closure. 
(a)  General park closure hours. Except as provided in this Subsection and in Subsection (b) below, all public parks, recreational facilities and trails within the Town shall be closed to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any park or recreational facility or to use any trail within the Town during those hours unless otherwise authorized by the Town for programs or events. 
(b)  Night fishing on Windsor Lake. Notwithstanding the general park closure hours set forth in Subsection (a) above, fishing on Windsor Lake is permitted subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  For purposes of this Subsection, fishing is defined as efforts to take fish, amphibians or crustaceans by hook and line from the shore only, which hook and line shall be under the immediate physical control of a person. 
(2)  For purposes of this Subsection, fishing does not include: 
a.  Efforts to take fish by handline, trotline, jug, seine, net, underwater spearfishing, archery, snagging or gigging; or 
b.  Merely accompanying another who is fishing as defined herein. 
(3)  Fishing on Windsor Lake may take place only along the west edge of Windsor Lake adjacent to State Highway 257, between the southerly pavement edge of the Town's parking lot and the inlet bridge for the Greeley #2 Ditch. 
(4)  Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to permit fishing on Windsor Lake from a boat or aquatic vessel of any kind between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. 2008-1323; Ord. 2013-1451 3) 
Sec. 11-8-20. - Possession of glass containers prohibited, exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, or to have in his or her possession, any glass beverage container in any park or recreational facility or on any trail within the Town unless otherwise authorized by the Town for programs or events. 
(Ord. 2013-1451 2) 
Sec. 11-8-30. - Dumping prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in and dump, deposit or leave any bottles or other containers made of glass, any broken glass, ashes, papers, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, tree leaves and limbs, garbage, refuse or other trash in or upon any park, recreational facility or trail within the Town. 
(Prior code 11-143; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-8-40. - Trash disposal required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person utilizing any park, recreational facility or trail within the Town to leave such park, recreational facility or trail without first placing in provided trash disposal receptacles all trash, of whatever kind or nature, generated by his or her usage of the park, recreational facility or trail. In the event no trash disposal receptacle is available, then such person shall carry away said trash and dispose thereof in a proper and legal manner. 
(Prior code 11-144; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-8-50. - Dogs. 
    Dogs shall be allowed in public parks and on trails within the Town under appropriate supervision and specifically in accordance with the provisions appearing elsewhere in this Code concerning dogs. 
(Prior code 11-145; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-8-60. - Removal of dog waste required. 
    The owner or keeper of any dog shall be responsible for the removal of any feces deposited by such animal in any public park or on or adjacent to any trail within the Town. 
(Prior code 11-146; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-8-70. - Horses. 
    Except in areas specifically designated for equestrian activities, it shall be unlawful for any person to allow any horse or pony in any public park, recreational facility, public open space or on any trail within the Town. 
(Prior code 11-147; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-8-80. - Golfing. 
    Unless specifically allowed in designated areas, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or hit golf balls in any public park, recreational facility or on any trail within the Town. 
(Prior code 11-148; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-8-90. - Operation of motor vehicles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle, including but not limited to golf cars, motorized utility vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, off-road vehicles, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motorbikes, motor scooters, go-carts or motor homes in any public park, recreational facility, public open space or on any trail within the Town. This provision shall not apply to duly authorized employees of the Town in the performance of work activities in the scope of their employment or unless otherwise authorized by the Town for programs or events. 
(Ord. 2013-1451 7) 
Sec. 11-8-100. - Posting of signs and notices. 
    The Town Manager shall cause to be erected in public parks, recreational facilities, and upon trails, such signs or notices as may be necessary to adequately inform the citizens of the Town of the restrictions set forth in this Article. 
(Prior code 11-150; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-8-110. - Tents and portable shelters prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any tent or portable shelter, or to keep any tent or portable shelter standing, in any park or open space area within the Town after 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise authorized by the Town for programs or events. 
(Ord. 2013-1451 4) 
Sec. 11-8-120. - Limitations on portable cooking devices. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized by the Town for programs or events, it shall be unlawful for any person to bring any charcoal-fueled portable cooking device into any park or open space within the Town. 
(b)  Unless otherwise authorized by the Town for programs or events, it shall be unlawful for any person to bring any portable cooking device into any park or open space within the Town which exceeds or conflicts with the following specifications: 
(1)  Propane-fueled cooking devices with a total cooking surface exceeding two hundred (200) square inches; and 
(2)  Propane-fueled cooking devices served by a fuel tank exceeding sixteen and four-tenths (16.4) ounces of capacity. Ord. 2013-1451 5) 
ARTICLE IX - Cemetery 

Sec. 11-9-10. - Supervision and control; promulgation of rules and regulations. 
    The Town Board shall exercise exclusive supervision and control over the Town's cemetery known as "Lakeview Cemetery." The rules and regulations governing the laying out and sale of lots in the cemetery and rules and regulations governing the use of the cemetery shall be promulgated from time to time by resolution of the Town Board. 
(Prior code 11-161; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 11-9-20. - Prices and charges. 
    The Town Board shall from time to time, by resolution, establish prices and charges for grave space, opening and closing of graves, disinterment and monument foundations. 
(Prior code 11-162; Ord. 2004-1193 1) 
CHAPTER 13 - Municipal Utilities 
ARTICLE I - Sewers 

Sec. 13-1-10. - Fees established. 
(a)  Sewer plant investment fee. The sewer plant investment fee shall be reestablished in accordance with the following schedule: 
Meter Size Sewer Plant
Investment Fee 3/4" $ 4,400 1" 7,128 11/2" 16,808 2" 27,676 3" 60,984 4" 105,028 Taps over 4" will be considered individually  
(b)  Out-of-Town fees. Sewer service to properties outside the boundaries of the Town shall be at the sole discretion of the Town Board. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as obligating or otherwise requiring the Town to serve any property outside the corporate boundaries. In the event a request for sewer service outside the Town boundaries is approved, the sewer plant investment fee shall be double the fee set forth in Subsection (a) above. The monthly sewer service fees for out-of-Town users shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the fees set forth in Subsection (a) above. 
(Prior code 13-1; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2005-1216 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1244 2; Ord. 2007-1290 2; Res. 2014-37 , 7-14-2014) 
Sec. 13-1-20. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Article shall be as follows: 
    BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20) C, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer ) means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial waster, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Superintendent means the Town Manager, or his or her authorized deputy agent or representative, or such other person as shall be appointed by the Town Board. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Prior code 13-2; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-1-30. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the Town, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this Article within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
(e)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing or otherwise limiting the installation of individual disposal systems which may otherwise be authorized by this Code. 
(Prior code 13-3; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-1-40. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works or designee. 
(b)  The owner or his or her agent shall make application for a building sewer permit on a form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director of Public Works or designee. A permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and fifty dollars ($50.00) for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this Article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. All sewer cleanouts shall be located on the exterior of buildings and shall be at a location accessible for service. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director of Public Works before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town. 
(Prior code 13-4; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2017-1532 15) 
Sec. 13-1-50. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous soils, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150) (65C). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees (32) and one hundred fifty degrees (150) (0 and 65C). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Subsection (d) above, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may; 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Subsection (j). 
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(f)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(g)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. 
(h)  When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(j)  No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Prior code 13-5; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-1-60. - Sewer connections; maintenance of privies. 
    No person owning or occupying any lot or premises within any regularly established sewer district of this Town shall be permitted to have upon his or her premises any privy or water closet, except as the same is properly connected with a sewer, and no person shall hereafter construct within a sewer district any cesspool, but all waste, soil and drain pipes shall be connected with the sewer. 
(Prior code 13-6; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-1-70. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Prior code 13-7; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-1-80. - Powers and authority of inspector. 
(a)  The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Article. The Superintendent shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Subsection (a) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by Town employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damages asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Subsection 13-1-50(h). 
(c)  The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Prior code 13-8; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-1-90. - Sewer Utilities Enterprise. 
(a)  The Town Board hereby recognizes and confirms the operation of the municipal sewer system (the "system") as an "enterprise" within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution. 
(b)  The Town Board hereby formally establishes the Town Sewer Utilities Enterprise (the "Enterprise"), pursuant to the Act, for the purpose of continuing the operation of the system as a Water Activity Enterprise under the Act and as an "enterprise" within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution. 
(c)  The Town Board hereby designates itself as the ex officio governing body of the Enterprise, pursuant to the Act. 
(d)  To the extent it deems necessary, the governing body of the Enterprise shall exercise the Town's legal authority relating to the system, but shall not levy a tax. 
(e)  All action (not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section) heretofore taken by the Town Board or by the officers and employees of the Town directed toward the operation of the system as an "enterprise" under Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(f)  All ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, orders and other instruments, or parts thereof, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent only of such inconsistency. This repealer shall not be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution, bylaw or other instrument, or part thereof, heretofore repealed. 
(g)  If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or other provision of this Section shall, for any reason, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or unenforceability thereof shall not affect any of the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, clauses or provisions of this Section. 
(Prior code 13-9; 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE II - Water 

Sec. 13-2-10. - Declaration of purpose. 
    There is hereby created and established a Water Department of the Town, for the purpose of management, maintenance, care and operation of the water works of the Town. 
(Prior code 13-21; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-20. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Article shall be as follows: 
    Air-gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, other device or vessel and the flood level rim of said vessel. 
    Approved means accepted by the Department of Public Works as meeting the applicable specifications stated or cited in this Article. 
    Approved backflow prevention device means a device listed in the latest University of Southern California, Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research "List of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies." 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the Town's water supply or any natural sources such as a well, spring, river, stream, pond, lake, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids." These waters may be polluted or contaminated, or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the Town does not have sanitary control. 
    Backflow means the undesirable reversal of the direction of flow of the water or mixtures of water and other liquid, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable water supply of water from any source or sources caused by backpressure and/or backsiphonage. 
    Backflow prevention device means a device or means designed to prevent backflow created by backpressure, backsiphonage or backpressure and backsiphonage acting together. 
    Back pressure means the backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or "head" in pipe, or any means that could create greater pressure within a piping system than that which exists within the potable water supply. 
    Backsiphonage means the reverse flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, gases or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system caused by negative or subatmospheric pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Certified cross-connection control device technician means a person who has shown his or her competency and has passed the cross-connection control technician certification examination given by the Water Distribution and Wastewater Collection Systems Council. This person shall be familiar with appropriate laws, rules and regulations which address cross-connection control. He or she shall be able to make competent tests and repairs on all approved backflow prevention devices and stay abreast of all new products and information on the subject. The technician shall be listed by the Colorado Department of Health. 
    Check valve means a self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one direction. A single check valve is not an approved backflow prevention device. 
    Colorado Department of Health cross-connection control manual means a manual that has been published by the State addressing cross-connection control practices which shall be used as a guidance document for implementing a cross-connection control program. 
    Containment , protection by , means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device or method on the water service lines servicing any premises, location, facility or area. Protection by containment shall be used when the potable water system may be contaminated or polluted by substances used or stored within a building or premises. 
    Contamination means the impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Critical level means the point on a backflow prevention device or vacuum breaker, conforming to approved standards and established by testing laboratory, which determines the minimum elevation above the flood-level rim of the fixture, highest point of usage, or receptacle served at which the device may be installed. When a backflow prevention device does not bear a critical level marking, the bottom of the vacuum breaker, combination valve or any such approved device shall constitute the critical level. 
    Cross-connection means any physical arrangement whereby a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, tank, plumbing fixture or the device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other waste, liquid or gas of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination or pollution to the potable water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable spools, swivel or changeover devices, four-way valve connections and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
    Cross-connection, controlled , means a connection made between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device, properly installed and tested, that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Director means the Director of Public Works of the Town or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    Double check valve assembly means a backflow prevention device which consists of two (2) independently operating check valves which are internally loaded, with four (4) properly located test cocks for testing purposes. The assembly shall be located between two (2) drip-tight valves. 
    Flood-level rim means the edge of the receptacle from which liquid overflows. 
    Hazard, degree of , means the term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, health , means any condition, device or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the Town may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water used. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross-connections, in a water supply system or a direct connection of a potable water supply line to a sanitary sewer. 
    Hazard, plumbing , means a plumbing type cross-connection in a potable water system that has not been properly protected by an air-gap separation or an approved backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing type cross-connections are considered to be a health hazard. 
    Hazard, pollution , means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the user's potable water system and would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be a threat to life or be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, system , means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the potable water system or the user's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system caused by a cross-connection. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically, radiologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and "used waters" originated from the potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalis, circulated cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, lakes, dams, ponds, retention pits, irrigation canals or system, etc.; oils, gases, glycerin, glycols, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting purposes. 
    Isolation means the control of cross-connections within a building's plumbing system by the installation of approved backflow prevention devices or methods at or near the potential sources of pollution or contamination. 
    Nonpotable water means water that is not safe for human consumption or that does not meet the requirements set forth in the State Primary Drinking Water regulation. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness without causing a threat to the public health. 
    Potable water means water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. The bacteriological, chemical and radiological quality shall conform with State Primary Drinking Water regulations. 
    Reduced pressure principal device means an assembly of two (2) independently operating approved check valves with a hydraulic automatic operating differential relief valve between the two (2) checks closing shutoff valves and having four (4) properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall be an approved backflow prevention device. 
    Submerged inlet means a water pipe or extension thereof from a potable water supply terminating below the flood level rim of a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant or pollutant. 
    User means any person or business that uses water from the Town water system, whether located inside or outside of the Town. 
    Vacuum means any pressure less than atmospheric pressure. 
    Vacuum breaker, atmospheric , means a vacuum breaker consisting of an air inlet opening and a nonloaded floating check disk valve designed to prevent backsiphonage only. The device shall not be subjected to continuous static line pressure or backpressure or be installed where it would be under pressure for more than twelve (12) continuous hours. 
    Vacuum breaker, pressure , means a vacuum breaker designed to prevent backsiphonage only, consisting of a spring-loaded check valve, a spring-loaded air inlet opening, a tightly closing shutoff valve on each side of the device and two (2) appropriately located test cocks. The device shall not be subjected to backpressure. The entire assembly shall be an approved backflow prevention device. 
    Water distribution and wastewater collection systems certification council means the group which has been designated by the State Department of Health to administer and maintain the cross-connection control technician certification program. 
    Water service connection means the terminal end of the Town's water service connection from the Town's potable water distribution system; i.e., where the Town loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the user's stop box or shutoff valve or meter, whichever comes first from the water main. This shall include irrigation systems and fire sprinkler systems. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the potable water system. 
    Water system means the complete distribution system which is made up of two (2) parts: the Town's water system and the user's system. The Town's water system shall consist of the source facilities of the water system under the complete control of the Town, up to the point where the user's water system begins. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. The Town's distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the user's water system. The user's water system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the Town's distribution system which are utilized in conveying the Town-delivered potable water to points of use. 
(Prior code 13-22; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-30. - Powers and duties of Town Manager. 
    The Town Manager shall have the immediate control and management of all things pertaining to the Town water works system, and he or she shall perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient and economical management and protection of said water works, subject to the approval and confirmation of the Town Board. The Town Board shall have the power by resolution to prescribe such other and further rates, rules and regulations as it may deem necessary. 
(Prior code 13-23; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-40. - Receipts and deposits. 
    The Town Clerk shall keep a correct account of all receipts, make out all bills for water rents and materials furnished to property owners, collect the same and deposit the proceeds. 
(Prior code 13-24; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-50. - Inspections. 
    Whenever, in the judgment of the Town Manager, he or she deems it necessary, the Town Manager or his or her authorized representative may inspect the premises or buildings of any water user for the purpose of examining the condition of all pipes, motors, meters and water fixtures, or the manner in which the water is used. 
(Prior code 13-25; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-60. - Application for connection and use of water. 
    Any person desiring to make a connection to the water system or use water therefrom shall make written application to the Town. No person shall connect to the water system or use water therefrom until such application has been approved and such person has otherwise complied with all relevant provisions of the Code. 
(Prior code 13-26; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-70. - Water plant investment fee. 
    Any applicant desiring to take and use water from the water utility of the Town shall pay a water plant investment fee for each individual service pursuant to the schedule of fees set forth herein. Such fees shall be paid in full prior to the time water is used for any purpose. Said fees shall be in addition to all other charges and required dedication of raw water as set forth in this Article and elsewhere in this Code. 
(1)  Schedule 1. New in-town water taps. 
a.  The water plant investment fee shall be reestablished in accordance with the following schedule: 
Meter Size Water Plant
Investment Fee 3/4" $ 9,400 1 15,228 11/2" 35,908 2" 59,126 3" 130,284 4" 224,378 Taps over 4" will be considered individually  
b.  All taps in excess of three-fourths (3/4) inch shall be charged a fee negotiated by the Town Manager and approved by the Town Board upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer. All plant investment fees are subject to revision from time to time by resolution made by the Town Board. 
(2)  Schedule 2. Enlargement of existing in-town water taps. In the event that a property owner applies for and obtains permission to increase the size of his or her water tap, he or she shall pay an additional water plant investment fee. 
(3)  Schedule 3. Out-of-town water taps. Water service to owners of property outside the boundaries of the Town shall be at the sole discretion of the Town Board. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as obligating or otherwise requiring the Town to serve any property outside its corporate boundaries. In the event a request for water service outside the Town boundaries is approved, the water plant investment fee shall be double the fee set forth in Subsection (1) hereof. 
(Prior code 13-27; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1244 1; Ord. 2007-1290 1; Res. 2014-37 , 7-14-2014) 
Sec. 13-2-80. - Grant of water rights required. 
(a)  All premises requesting original water service from the Town shall furnish to the Town, without cost to the Town, water rights in the following amounts: 
(1)  Single-family residential with separate non-potable irrigation system: 0.25 AF per residence, plus a seventeen percent (17%) shrinkage factor, for a total of 0.29 AF; 
(2)  Multi-family with separate non-potable irrigation system: 0.15 AF per dwelling unit, plus a seventeen percent (17%) shrinkage factor, for a total 0.18 AF; 
(3)  Single-family without separate non-potable irrigation system: 0.50 AF per residence, plus a seventeen percent (17%) shrinkage factor, for a total 0.58 AF; 
(4)  Multi-family without non-potable irrigation system: 0.15 AF per dwelling unit, plus 3 AF per acre of irrigated landscape, plus a seventeen percent (17%) shrinkage factor. 
(b)  The water rights dedication requirements for all zoning districts other than those listed in sub-section (a) above shall be reviewed and determined by the Town Engineer as specific development plans are proposed. The basis of water dedication requirements shall be the anticipated annual water usage of the development as initially proposed. 
(c)  The water rights dedication requirements for all zoning districts other than those listed in subsection (a) above shall be based upon the initial intended use and shall be satisfied one (1) time only for each annexation, subdivision, sub-development and parcel of land, except that if the initial intended use is later increased, the owner of such tract shall furnish such additional water as shall be determined by the Town to be due on account of such different use. 
(d)  The water requirements herein shall be satisfied by water rights deemed acceptable to the Town. Such water rights shall be transferred to the Town in accordance with the applicable subdivision or site development improvements agreement and, in the case of cash paid in lieu of required raw water dedication, at the time that the request for building permit approval is presented to the Town for approval. 
(e)  In no case shall the fact that a portion of any tract or lot was served previously with water from the Town water utility excuse the furnishing of additional water rights when new water service is requested for other portions of said tract or lot. In the event the present owner or owners of any existing tract or lot sells, conveys or otherwise permits a portion or portions of such tract or lot to be used for building purposes, additional water rights shall be dedicated for such portion or portions in the amount or amounts determined by the Town to be applicable thereto. The Town may in its sole discretion accept cash in lieu of water rights dedication. The amount of cash in lieu of water rights payment shall be determined in the sole discretion of the Town. 
(Ord. 2016-1527  1) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2016-1527 ,  1, adopted Dec. 12, 2016, repealed the former  13-2-80 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  13-2-80 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code 13-28; Ord. 2004-1193,  1; and Ord. 2006-1236,  1. 
Sec. 13-2-90. - Metered water rate schedules. 
(a)  With the specific exception of structures with one (1) meter and containing one (1) or more dwelling units as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Code, the charge for water on a monthly basis taken through a meter inside the corporate limits of the Town shall be as follows: 
(1)  A monthly charge established by resolution of the Town Board will be assessed on the basis of the size of the property owner's water meter. 
(2)  In addition to the aforesaid charge, a monthly charge, to be established by resolution of the Town Board, shall be calculated on the basis of the amount of water taken through the property owner's meter. 
(b)  For structures with a single meter containing one (1) or more dwelling units as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Code, the charge for water on a monthly basis taken through a meter inside the corporate limits of the Town shall be as follows: 
(1)  Each month a base charge equal to the number of dwelling units in a structure times a fee established by resolution of the Town Board shall be assessed. 
(2)  In addition to the aforesaid charge, a monthly charge established by resolution of the Town Board shall be calculated on the basis of the amount of water taken through the property owner's meter. 
(c)  The rate schedule set forth above shall apply to all users outside the corporate limits of the Town, but the applicable schedule shall be increased by one and one-half (11/2) times. All users outside the corporate limits of the Town shall be on individual meters. 
(Prior code 13-29; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-100. - Estimate of charges in event of meter failure. 
    If any meter shall fail to register in any billing period, the water user shall be charged according to the average quantity of water used in a similar period. 
(Prior code 13-30; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-110. - Effective date of billings. 
    Billing for water service and any other notices relating to the water utility shall be effective upon mailing the billing or notice to the last known address of the property owner as shown on the records of the Town Clerk. 
(Prior code 13-31; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-120. - Payment of water charges. 
    All charges for the use of water as provided by this Code are due and payable at the Town Hall. All charges are due on the 20th day of the month. Charges are delinquent and service is subject to termination on the 20th day of the following month. Partial payments may be accepted at the sole discretion of the Town. A past due statement and notice of termination of service may be sent upon delinquency. 
(Prior code 13-32; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-130. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-2-140. - Termination of service for nonpayment of charges. 
    In case any water user shall fail to pay all charges as prescribed by this Article, the Town may shut off the water and the water shall not be turned on again until all charges, together with the charge for turning on the water, are paid. 
(Prior code 13-34; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-150. - Charges for turning water on or off. 
(a)  Following termination of service due to nonpayment. 
(1)  There shall be a charge, to be established by resolution of the Town Board, for turning the water on again after it has been turned off due to nonpayment of the bill or failure to abide by the rules and regulations as set forth in this Article. Such amounts are to be charged if the turn-on or turn-off is made during regular working hours. 
(2)  If the turn-on is made after regular working hours of the staff person performing the task, the charge shall be as established by resolution of the Town Board. All property owners shall be responsible for metered service until such service is actually turned off. 
(b)  Normal circumstances. 
(1)  The regular fee for turning water on to any premises after it has been turned off for any period of time shall be as established by resolution of the Town Board. This fee must be paid at the time the owner signs the application for service. 
(2)  The property owner or designated representative must be present at the property when the water is turned on. In the event that the owner or designated representative is not present at the scheduled time, a fee established by resolution of the Town Board will be charged for each additional trip to the property. 
(Prior code 13-35; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-160. - Interference with water facilities prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tap any water lines or to make any connections therewith, or in any manner to interfere with the property, equipment, pipes, valves or any other water appliances of the Town, or to change or alter the position of any valve or appliance regarding the flow of water in any pipeline, without the express written authority of the Town Manager or the Town Engineer. 
(Prior code 13-36; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-170. - Connections to water system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection with any water pipeline which forms a part of the Town's water system except as may be properly authorized by the Town Engineer. It shall be unlawful to make any connection with any privately owned water line which is connected to the Town's water system or to change, alter or renew any presently existing private water line connected with the Town's water system with any pipe larger than that which is already in existence, except as provided herein. 
(Prior code 13-37; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-180. - Restrictions on water use. 
(a)  The use of water from the water utility for lawn sprinkling purposes may, upon recommendation of the Town Manager, be prohibited or restricted as determined by resolution of the Town Board. Such order shall be effective when notice thereof is published once in a newspaper published or circulated within the Town. Upon the publication of such notice, the sprinkling restrictions or prohibitions so prescribed shall take effect and any violator thereof may be punished by penalties as provided by this Code. Water shall not be used through hoses or pipes without nozzles or sprinklers attached thereto. This regulation shall apply to all users of water service. 
(b)  The setting of sprinklers or nozzles so as to interfere with traffic on sidewalks is prohibited. 
(c)  In the event of an emergency that should require the immediate curtailment of the use of water from the water utility, the Town shall have the authority to make such restrictions as it deems necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Prior code 13-38; Ord 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. Nos. 2003-1143, 2003-1146 and 2003-1151, copies of which are available at the Town Clerk's office, established, and thereafter rescinded, certain water use restrictions. 
Sec. 13-2-190. - Shutoff of water for repairs. 
    Water may be shut off from any street main when necessary to repair the main or to make any connections or extensions of the water mains or to perform any other work necessary to maintain the water system. 
(Prior code 13-39; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-200. - Reservation of rights by Town. 
    The use of water under the provisions of this Article shall not constitute or be deemed to be a relinquishment of any water or water right by the Town, and the Town reserves the full right to determine all matters in connection with the control and use of said water. 
(Prior code 13-40; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-210. - Use of water by other than customers prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having water service hereunder to permit any other person, firm or corporation to take or use water from his or her said water service for use on property not connected to the Town water system, except as provided herein. 
(Prior code 13-41; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-220. - General regulations for water service lines. 
(a)  Original service lines from the water main to the structure to be served shall be installed by the water user at his or her expense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed plumber or a Town-authorized representative to install a water service line from the main to the meter pit or curb stop. All service lines shall be of Type K copper or other suitable material as determined by the Town. Corporation stops, meter risers or curb stops and service lines shall be of the size and type specified by the Town. All service lines shall be buried at least fifty-four (54) inches below the established grade of the street or ground. When the main is of greater or lesser depth, the service line shall be brought to the required depth as soon as taps shall be inspected by the Town's authorized representative prior to use. 
(c)  The water service line from the street main to the water distribution system of the building to be serviced with water shall be of sufficient size to furnish an adequate flow of water to meet the requirements of the building at peak demand and in no case shall be less than three-fourths (3/4) inch nominal diameter. 
(d)  In the case that the water user desires to disconnect his or her premises, he or she shall not be permitted to take up that portion of the service line between the main and the curb stop or the meter pit or take up the meter pit, but at his or her expense the water shall be shut off at the corporation stop and all appliances from the water main to and including the meter pit shall remain in the ground and become the property of the Town. New services shall not be approved by the Town and the water shall not be turned on until old service lines are dug up and the corporation stop shut off at the main. 
(Prior code 13-42; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-230. - Installations prior to street paving. 
    Before any street containing a water line is paved, the Town shall cause to be installed all service lines with meter pits or curb stops and meter risers, as the Town determines necessary to serve said property when fully developed. 
(Prior code 13-43; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-240. - Individual service lines required. 
    Each property shall be served by its own service line, and no connection with the water utility shall be made by extending the service line from one (1) property to another property. 
(Prior code 13-44; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-250. - Maintenance of service lines and fixtures. 
(a)  The owner of any property connected to the Town water utility shall be responsible for the maintenance of the water service line from the property line where the water service line enters upon the property of the user to the structure being served, and the owner shall keep this line in good condition and, at his or her expense, shall at all times keep all pipes, fixtures and appliances on his or her property tight and in good working order so as to prevent waste of water. 
(b)  The Town will maintain the service line from the water main to the point where the line enters onto the private property. Where a curb stop or meter pit has been installed in the service line near the actual property line, the point of change of maintenance responsibilities shall be at the curb stop or meter pit. 
(Prior code 13-45; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-260. - Water meters: requirements and installation. 
(a)  All water services supplied by the Water Utilities Enterprise shall be metered. Use of any water without proper metering shall be prohibited. 
(b)  All meters shall be of a size, type and design approved by the Town Manager and shall be installed in a readily accessible location for the meter reader. All water meters shall be installed either in a frost-proof meter pit or inside the structure with a remote reading device connected to allow reading from the outside of the structure. All meters shall be installed with a stopcock on each side of the meter. 
(c)  At the time of construction of new commercial or industrial buildings which will be served by the Sewer Utilities Enterprise, the Town Manager may require, at the sole discretion of the Town, the installation of dual water meters for such commercial or industrial water users where usage of water partially for irrigation purposes would otherwise create inequitable billing by the Sewer Utilities Enterprise for sewer discharge. In such instances, the second meter shall record water used exclusively for irrigation purposes, and the use of such water shall be reflected in water billings by the Water Utilities Enterprise, but shall not be reflected in sewer billings by the Sewer Utilities Enterprise. 
(d)  Each meter shall be inspected by the Town and shall be properly adjusted before installation. 
(e)  A record shall be made and preserved of each meter or meters installed, giving the location, the serial number and the size of the meters. 
(f)  All meters for all water services shall be installed by the Town or an authorized representative of the Town at the expense of the property owner. 
(Prior code 13-46; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-270. - Maintenance of meters. 
    All water meters shall be maintained by the Town and shall be tested and repaired as necessary. Meters may be inspected at any reasonable time by the Town. 
(Prior code 13-47; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-280. - Meter interference and bypass prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper or interfere with any meter or meter seal or to so arrange a water service or piping that the use of water will not actuate the meter. The Town shall discontinue water service immediately to any user who violates the provisions of this Section until satisfactory payment has been made for all water used and all repairs to the meter and piping. 
(Prior code 13-48; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-290. - Size of water mains. 
    The size of the main required to serve any part of the Town shall be determined by the Town. No main less than four (4) inches in diameter shall be placed in the water distribution system. 
(Prior code 13-49; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-300. - Extension of water mains; payment of costs. 
    When water mains are extended, the property owners benefited thereby, as determined by the Town, shall pay all of the costs of extending such mains insofar as such costs relate to the size of the main required to serve the property benefited. In the event the Town requires that such main be of a size larger than eight (8) inches, the Town shall pay the additional costs incurred on such amount. At the time of annexation, or as the property abutting such water main is developed and connections are made to said water main, the Town may collect a charge assessed in relation to the affected property, based upon the original construction cost. 
(Prior code 13-50; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-310. - Construction of mains for a subdivision. 
(a)  All water mains required within a platted subdivision, including cross-ties, shall be installed at the cost of the subdivider. The subdivider shall install mains to the farthest point of his or her subdivision. 
(b)  When a subdivider finds it necessary to extend a water main from the existing water system through land owned by someone other than the subdividers or construct lines on the perimeter of said subdivision, the subdivider shall pay the cost of the original construction. Cost of construction shall include the acquisition of any necessary easement, if applicable. The size of the mains shall be determined by the Town and where the required mains are larger than eight (8) inches, the Town shall pay a percentage of the cost as set forth in this Section. 
(c)  The subdivider shall install the mains in his or her subdivision by private contractor, subject to approval by the Town of the plans and specifications and actual construction. Failure to do so may result in the Town's refusal to participate in oversizing costs and acceptance of the mains for perpetual maintenance. 
(Prior code 13-51; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-320. - Control and operation of fire hydrants. 
    All fire hydrants connected to the Town's water mains shall be a part of the water system and shall be kept in repair by the Town's staff. No person, other than a fireman of the Windsor-Severance Fire District, Town employee or other person authorized by the Town, shall operate any fire hydrant. 
(Prior code 13-52; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-330. - Unprotected cross-connection prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to make, install, maintain or permit any cross-connection with the water system without providing protection against backflow by proper installation and maintenance of an approved backflow prevention device to insure that it is in proper working order. Failure to permit entry to the premises shall result in discontinuance of water services to said premises. 
(Prior code 13-53; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-340. - Inspection of user's system. 
    The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to access and inspect any private water system to determine whether cross-connections or other violations of this Article exist, and to determine the extent and degree of hazard the system poses to the Town's water system. The Director also has the right to inspect any installed approved backflow prevention device to ensure that it is in proper working order. Failure to permit entry to the premises shall result in discontinuance of water service to said premises. 
(Prior code 13-54; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-350. - Notice to remove or correct violation. 
(a)  When a condition involving a violation of this Article resulting in a hazard is determined to exist, the Director of Public Works shall notify in writing the owner of the premises. The notification shall include a description of the hazard and required remedial action and set a reasonable time period in which the property owner must have the violation removed or corrected. 
(b)  If the property owner fails to correct the violation in the specified time, the Director of Public Works may, if in his or her judgment an imminent health hazard exists, request that the water service to the building or premises be terminated. Additional fines or penalties, as otherwise set forth in this Code, may also be assessed following termination of service. 
(Prior code 13-55; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-360. - Testing, repair and replacement of backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, at any premises where a backflow prevention device is installed, to have a certified operational test made immediately after original installation of the device and least once annually thereafter at the property owner's expense. In those instances where the Director of Public Works deems the hazard to be great enough, he or she may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. All inspections and tests must be performed by a certified cross-connection control technician. 
(b)  In the event that a device fails a test or inspection or cannot be repaired, the technician must verbally report it to the Director of Public Works and the property owner. This notification shall be made immediately, if possible, but in no case later than one (1) work day after the discovery of the failing device. A written notification shall follow within three (3) working days. All devices which do not pass the certified test shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the property owner within fifteen (15) working days of the test. The device must be re-tested by a certified technician following repairs or replacement. 
(c)  A written report shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works within five (5) working days of any test or work performed on a device. All records of the certified test, repairs and replacements of a backflow prevention device shall be maintained by the Director of Public Works, the property owner and the certified technician for a period of not less than two (2) years. 
(Prior code 13-56; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-370. - Premises requiring backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  Auxiliary water supply: In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be safe of bacteriological, radiological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the Director of Public Works, the Town's water system shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(b)  Industrial fluids: In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the Town's water system, the Town's system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by an approved backflow prevention device in the water service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the Town's water system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(c)  Internal cross-connections: 
(1)  In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled; 
(2)  Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements; 
(3)  Where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist; 
The Town's water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by an approved backflow prevention device in the water service line. 
(Prior code 13-57; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-380. - Location of the backflow prevention device. 
    When determined to be necessary, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at or near the property line or immediately inside the structure being served before the first branch line leading off the water service line. In all cases, the backflow prevention device shall be installed after the water meter. 
(Prior code 13-58; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-390. - Required types of backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in preceding paragraphs of this Article and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the Town's water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device. 
(b)  In the case of any premises where there is water or a substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the Town's water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
(c)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the Town's water system, the water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(d)  In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(e)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow or backsiphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises. 
(f)  The following guidelines relating to backflow prevention devices for irrigation systems shall apply: 
(1)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be installed after the last control valve of each sprinkler circuit and at a minimum of six (6) inches above the highest irrigation circuits with heads that will not return any pressure in the circuit when the circuit control valve is closed. 
(2)  Pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed at the beginning of each irrigation circuit and at a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest irrigation head on the circuit. Individual irrigation circuits having quick coupling valves or other similar type heads that will permit pressure to be retained in the circuit shall have a pressure vacuum breaker installed as a minimum requirement for each circuit. Irrigation systems using the subsurface drip method shall have a pressure vacuum breaker on each circuit. A pressure vacuum breaker may not be installed where a double check valve assembly, reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device or air-gap separation is required. 
(3)  A double check valve assembly may be installed to serve multiple irrigation circuits in lieu of vacuum breakers on each individual irrigation circuit. 
(4)  Reduced pressure principal backflow device or air-gap separation shall be required before any piping network in which fertilizers, pesticides and other chemical or toxic contaminants are injected or siphoned into the irrigation system. 
(g)  Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use, shall be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. In cases where the domestic water system is used for both drinking and fire-fighting purposes, approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines as are not used for fire-fighting purposes. 
(h)  The use of a Town fire hydrant shall only be done with the approval of the Director of Public Works. Any time water is taken out of a fire hydrant for the purpose of filling a tank or container, this will require the use of an air-gap or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device, which will be installed on the line connection the fire hydrant. 
(Prior code 13-59; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-400. - Standards for backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the Director of Public Works. The standards used for approval shall be those of the American Water Works Association (AWWA), the American Society of Sanitary Engineering and the Foundation of Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCC & HR) of the University of Southern California in their present form and as they subsequently may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Those backflow prevention devices which are not subject to the approval of the laboratory listed in (a) above, i.e., in line dual checks, atmospheric vacuum breakers or hose bibb vacuum breakers, shall have full approval by appropriate organizations such as the American Society of Sanitary Engineering, International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials or Los Angeles Mechanical Laboratory. 
(Prior code 13-60; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-410. - Water Utilities Enterprise. 
    The Town Board hereby declares that pursuant to Section 37-45.1-101 et seq . , C.R.S., the Windsor Water Utilities Enterprise is a water activity enterprise receiving less than ten percent (10%) of its annual revenues and grants from other governmental entities and which is authorized to issue its own revenue bonds pursuant to applicable law. 
(Prior code 13-61; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 13-2-420. - Lawn watering restrictions. 
(a)  From May 1 through September 30 of each year, no lawn watering shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  Lawn watering with privately owned well water or raw water shall not be restricted, provided that the user of any such well or raw water for lawn watering has obtained and posted in a visible location a permit issued by the Town for the current year. 
(Ord. 2007-1291 1, 2) 
ARTICLE III - Storm Drainage[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-1543 ,  1, adopted Sep. 25, 2017, repealed the former Art. III,  13-3-10-13-3-130, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code  13-81-13-93; Ord. 2004-1193,  1; Ord. 2005-1209,  1-3; Ord. 2006-1236,  1; Ord. 2006-1243,  1; and Ord. 2007-1292,  1. 

Sec. 13-3-10. - Statement of intent. 
    The intent of this Article is to provide for the proper drainage and control of storm and surface waters, reduce pollution, enhance the environment, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the Town's inhabitants and visitors. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-20. - Owners of property to provide on-site drainage facilities as a condition of development. 
    In accordance with the assumptions and findings of the Town of Windsor Master Drainage Plan: 2017 Update, Volumes I through III, dated August, 2017 ("Drainage Master Plan"), the owners of property to be developed within the Town shall be required as a condition of development to provide at their sole expense such on-site stormwater drainage facilities as are required by the approved development plan and necessary to mitigate the impact of such development. Such requirements shall include an obligation of owners of property to provide facilities necessary to convey stormwater runoff to major drainage ways. Since the development of elevated land can increase the amount of stormwater runoff from such land onto adjoining lands at lower elevations, the owner of elevated land has the legal duty to prevent such increased runoff from doing damage to other lands, which duty shall be deemed satisfied if adequate facilities are installed as required by this Section. Thus, in determining under this Section what facilities a landowner shall be responsible for constructing, the amount of increased stormwater runoff that will result from the development shall be taken into account. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-30. - Stormwater drainage utility enterprise. 
(a)  The Town Board hereby recognizes and confirms the operation of the stormwater drainage system ("system") as an enterprise within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution. 
(b)  The Town Board hereby formally affirms and re-establishes the Town's Stormwater Drainage Utility Enterprise for the purpose of continuing the operation of the System as a water activity enterprise and as an "enterprise" within the meaning of Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution. 
(c)  The Town Board hereby designates itself as the governing body of the Stormwater Drainage Utility Enterprise. 
(d)  To the extent it deems necessary, the Town Board, as the governing body of the Stormwater Drainage Utility Enterprise, shall exercise the Town's legal authority relating to the System, but shall not levy a tax without voter approval as required by Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution. 
(e)  All action heretofore taken by the Town Board or by the officers and employees of the Town directed toward the operation of the System as an "enterprise" under Section 20 of Article X of the State Constitution is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-40. - Adoption of Drainage Master Plan. 
    The Drainage Master Plan, consisting of the 2003 Stormwater Drainage Master Plan and the modifications thereto as set forth in the 2017 Stormwater Drainage Master Plan Update prepared by Anderson Consulting Engineers, Inc. ("Drainage Master Plan"), is hereby adopted by the Town. The Town Board finds and concludes that the adoption of the Drainage Master Plan promotes the health, safety and welfare of the public. The Town Board further finds that the Drainage Master Plan provides an adequate, justifiable and reasonable basis upon which to assess the New Growth Basin Impact Fee and the Monthly Basin User Fee established by this Article, as well as the collection of those fees and the acquisition and construction of stormwater drainage facilities. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-50. - New Growth Basin Impact Fee and Monthly Basin User Fee established. 
(a)  The Town Board hereby establishes a New Growth Basin Impact Fee and a Monthly Basin User Fee to be paid by the owners of developed property in the Town. 
(b)  The New Growth Basin Impact Fee shall be collected prior to the issuance of any building permit or, in the event construction is undertaken and no building permit is required, upon commencement of construction. Any change in the amount of the New Growth Basin Impact Fee shall be effective only as to property that has not paid the fee in full prior to any subsequent modification of the New Growth Basin Impact Fee. After the collection of the New Growth Basin Impact Fee as to a particular property, the amount of the fee for that property shall not be increased, except in the case where additions, expansion or redevelopment of the property results in an increase in impervious surface in excess of three-hundred-fifty (350) square feet, in which case the fee for that property shall be increased only to reflect the increased impervious surface. Except as otherwise provided in this Article regarding additions or expansion of developed property, a New Growth Basin Impact Fee shall not be assessed against any property for which any stormwater drainage plant investment fee has been paid pursuant to any previous ordinance in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. 
(c)  Any change in the New Growth Basin Impact Fee as calculated by the ordinance codified herein shall be effective for all property to be developed within the Town and shall be calculated by the formula set forth below. The Monthly Basin User Fee as calculated pursuant to this Article shall be effective for all developed property within the Town and shall be collected by the formula set forth below. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-60. - New Growth Basin Impact Fee. 
(a)  A New Growth Basin Impact Fee is hereby imposed upon each and every lot or parcel of land to be developed within the Town, and upon the owners thereof, with respect to any improvement that creates an impervious surface covering more than three hundred fifty (350) square feet of the lot or parcel. The fee is deemed reasonable and necessary to pay for the design, right-of-way acquisition and construction or reconstruction of major stormwater drainage systems identified in the Drainage Master Plan needed to protect the health, safety and welfare and inhabitants of the basin. In accordance with the Drainage Master Plan and for purposes of this Article, the Town's stormwater basin shall include all property within the boundaries of the Town. The New Growth Basin Impact Fee established hereby shall be based upon the cost of the design, right-of-way acquisition and construction or reconstruction of major stormwater drainage systems in accordance with the Drainage Master Plan, the area of each lot or parcel of land and the runoff coefficient of the lot or parcel of land. In accordance with the provisions of this Article, the director of engineering shall determine the rates to apply to each lot or parcel of land within the guidelines set forth herein and shall establish the New Growth Basin Impact Fee in accordance with the rate, together with the other factors set forth herein. 
(b)  For purposes of this Article, impervious shall be defined as "roof, asphalt, concrete or similar surfaces." Pervious shall be defined as "lawn, open space or similar surfaces." 
(c)  The Director of Engineering shall calculate the New Growth Basin Impact Fee as follows: 
(1)  Impervious Rate Factor. The Impervious Rate Factor of each lot or parcel of land shall be based upon the average percentage of impervious area. The Director of Engineering shall consider the following basis in assigning the Impervious Rate Factor for categories of development: 
Category of Development Impervious Rate Factor Range Very Low Density Single-Family Residential (VLD SFR) 2.5 acres 0.10 Single-Family Residential (SFR) medium density 0.40 Single-Family Residential (SFR) high density 0.45-0.60 Multi-Family Residential (MFR) 0.70-0.85 Commercial (C) 0.60- 0.80 Central Business District (CB) 0.95 Limited industrial (IL) 0.70-0.85 Heavy Industrial (IH) 0.30-0.85  
It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Engineering to determine the basic category of development for each lot or parcel of land generally in accordance with the schedule set forth above and based upon the percentage of impervious area and corresponding Impervious Rate Factor typical for the particular land use and/or zoning for that lot or parcel of land. The decision of the Director of Engineering shall be subject to review and appeal pursuant to the provisions of this Article as set forth below. 
(2)  New Growth Basin Impact Fee Factor. Subject to modification by subsequent ordinance as aforesaid, the New Growth Basin Impact Fee factor is initially established at $0.2206 per square foot of net impervious area. 
(3)  Area. The New Growth Basin Impact Fee rate calculation for each lot or parcel of land shall be predicated upon the net area in square feet of the lot or parcel. 
(4)  Calculation. 
a.  With regard to initial improvements, the New Growth Basin Impact Fee for each lot or parcel of land shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
New Growth Basin Impact Fee = (Impervious Rate Factor) x (New Growth Basin Impact Fee Factor) x (Area) 
b.  With regard to additions and expansions, the New Growth Basin Impact Fee calculation for each developed lot or parcel of land upon which an addition or expansion is proposed, whether attached to an existing structure or not, shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
New Growth Basin Impact Fee shall equal the difference between the fee as calculated in accordance with the formula set forth above in this Section, Subparagraph (c)(4)a, for the lot or parcel of land of all existing and proposed improvements and the same lot or parcel with only the existing improvements. 
(d)  The New Growth Basin Impact Fee assessed hereby shall be segregated, credited and deposited in a special fund and shall not be transferred therefrom except to pay for expenses directly attributable to the stormwater drainage activities as aforesaid. The New Growth Basin Impact Fee assessed hereby shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the Town, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting and management thereof. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Town from making temporary interfund loans or transfers as may be specifically allowed by law and in accordance with the requirements of the Town's Home Rule Charter. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-70. - Review and appeal of Director of Engineering's determination of Impervious Rate Factor for calculation of New Growth Basin Impact Fee. 
(a)  As is established by the provisions of this Article, the determination of the Director of Engineering with regard to the Impervious Rate Factor for calculation of the New Growth Basin Impact Fee shall be conclusive unless by a preponderance of relevant and reliable evidence the owner of any lot or parcel of land shall establish, to the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering, that the Impervious Rate Factor used for calculation of the New Growth Basin Impact Fee for the lot or parcel of land in question should deviate from the assumed Impervious Rate Factor as established by this Article. The suggested deviation shall be supported by a competent study performed by a qualified engineer at the owner's expense, and all Town costs incurred in connection with reviewing said study shall be borne by the party seeking review of the Director of Engineering's determination. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days of receipt of an application for review as aforesaid, the Director of Engineering shall review the application and shall render a written determination as to whether or not there should be a deviation from the Impervious Rate Factor for calculation of the New Growth Basin Impact Fee as established by this Article. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days of the written decision of the Director of Engineering, an appeal may be taken to the Town Board by filing a notice of such appeal with the Town Clerk. The notice of appeal shall specify the written decision from which the appeal is taken and shall briefly state the grounds for such appeal. The Town Clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the Town Board for an upcoming regular Town Board meeting. At such hearing, the Town Board shall have the power to affirm or reverse the decision of the Director of Engineering. In the event the Town Board reverses the decision of the Director of Engineering, it shall direct the Director to recalculate the New Growth Basin Impact Fee in accordance with its findings. In no case shall the Town Board have the authority to negotiate the amount of the New Growth Basin Impact Fee or waive the New Growth Basin Impact Fee. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-80. - Periodic Reviews; Annual Reviews, Five-Year Reviews, Ten-Year Reviews. 
    The Town Board shall periodically review the rates established by this Ordinance and, by subsequent ordinance, shall consider adjustments to those rates as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose and intent of this Article and the Drainage Master Plan. Such adjustment shall be based upon a revision of the estimates of the cost of the construction and maintenance of such facilities and the rate at which revenue therefor is received by the Town. 
    At a minimum, the following reviews shall be conducted: 
(a)  The New Growth Basin Impact Fee shall be adjusted annually to account for construction cost inflation. The adjustment shall be accomplished by multiplying the New Growth Impact Fee by a ratio, the numerator of which is the most recently available two-year moving average of the annual Colorado Construction Cost Index by the Colorado Department of Transportation, and the denominator of which is the same index for a period one (1) year earlier than the numerator. The adjusted fee schedule shall become effective upon and in accordance with the approval thereof by the Town Board. The adjusted New Growth Basin Impact Fee shall be published upon adoption. 
(b)  The Monthly Basin User Fee shall be adjusted annually to account for consumer cost inflation. The adjustment shall be accomplished by multiplying the Monthly Basin User Fee by a ratio, the numerator of which is the most recently available one-year average Consumer Price Index for the Denver-Boulder area, and the denominator of which is the same index for a period one (1) year earlier than the numerator. The adjusted fee schedule shall become effective upon and in accordance with the approval thereof by the Town Board. The adjusted Monthly Basin User Fee shall be published upon adoption. 
(c)  Every five (5) years, beginning in 2022, the findings and assumptions set forth in the Drainage Master Plan for future development and stormwater drainage facilities needed to address them shall be reviewed. Any adjustments in these findings and assumptions, and any resulting modifications to the fees established herein, shall become effective upon adoption by the Town Board by ordinance. 
(d)  The Drainage Master Plan, and all subsequently-adopted stormwater master drainage plan updates, shall be reviewed and updated every ten (10) years. Any such future updates, and any resulting modifications to the fees as recommended therein, shall become effective upon adoption by the Town Board. 
    Prior to making any fee adjustments, the Town Board shall seek recommendations from the Town Manager, the Director of Engineering and the Director of Finance. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-90. - Capital contribution front-ending agreements. 
    The Town may enter into capital contribution front-ending and reimbursement agreements with any developer who proposes to construct major stormwater drainage facilities as identified in the Drainage Master Plan. Under no circumstances will the Town be required to reimburse or pay the costs of any stormwater drainage facilities that the developer is otherwise required to construct at its sole cost as a reasonable requirement for any development proposal. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-100. - Annual recommendation for expenditure of fees. 
    Each year, in conjunction with annual budget review, the Director of Engineering, after reviewing the Drainage Master Plan, shall recommend to the Town Board, appropriations to be spent by the Town from New Growth Basin Impact Fee funds. After review of the recommendations, the Town Board shall approve or modify the recommended expenditures. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-110. - Refund of New Growth Basin Impact Fees not spent. 
    Any New Growth Basin Impact Fee collected shall be returned to the fee payor, or the fee payor's successor(s) in interest, if the fee has not been spent within ten (10) years from the date the fee was paid, along with interest in an amount equal to the average rate of return on the Town's pooled investments for the relevant ten-year period. For the purposes of determining whether New Growth Basin Impact Fee funds have been spent or encumbered, the first fees collected shall be considered the first monies spent or encumbered. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-120. - Monthly basin user fee. 
(a)  With respect to any improvement that creates an impervious surface covering more than three hundred fifty (350) square feet of lot or parcel, a Monthly Basin User Fee is hereby imposed upon each and every developed lot or parcel of land within the Town, as well as the owners thereof. This fee is deemed reasonable and necessary to pay for the operation, maintenance, depreciation, administration and routine functions of the existing Town stormwater drainage facilities and for the operation, maintenance, depreciation and administration of such future stormwater drainage facilities as may be established within the Town, and to pay for the design, right-of-way acquisition and construction or reconstruction of such existing and future Town stormwater drainage facilities. All of the proceeds of the Monthly Basin User Fee are deemed to be in payment for the use and availability of the stormwater drainage system by the real property on and with respect to which the fee is imposed upon the owners. Further, the Town Board finds that Monthly Basin User Fee benefits all property owners by allowing for the construction, improvement, operation, maintenance and depreciation of stormwater drainage facilities in the Town that promote the health, safety and welfare of such property owners during storms and floods. 
(b)  The Director of Engineering shall determine the fee that shall apply to each specific lot or parcel of land within the guidelines set forth herein. 
(1)  Impervious Rate Factor. The Impervious Rate Factor of each lot or parcel of land shall be based upon the average percentage of impervious area. The Director of Engineering shall consider the following basis in assigning the Impervious Rate Factor for categories of development: 
Category of Development Impervious Rate Factor Range Very Low Density Single-Family Residential (VLD SFR) 2.5 acres 0.10 Single-Family Residential (SFR) medium density 0.40 Single-Family Residential (SFR) high density 0.45-0.60 Multi-Family Residential (MFR) 0.70-0.85 Commercial (C) 0.60-0.80 Central Business District (CB) 0.95 Limited industrial (IL) 0.70-0.85 Heavy Industrial (IH) 0.30-0.85  
It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Engineering to determine the basic category of development for each lot or parcel of land in accordance with the schedule set forth above and based upon the percentage of impervious area and corresponding Impervious Rate Factor typical for the particular land use and/or zoning for that lot or parcel of land. 
(2)  Operations and Maintenance Rate. Each lot or parcel of land shall be assessed a monthly base amount of two dollars and twenty cents ($2.20) plus $0.0002 per square foot of net impervious area for operations and maintenance, subject to modification by the Town Board, as is otherwise provided for by this Article. 
a.  The operation and maintenance rate portion of the Monthly Basin User Fee as established by this Section shall be set at one dollar ($1.00) per month for the purpose of mosquito control. 
b.  The aforesaid increase shall apply equally to each lot or parcel of land and shall be billed pursuant to the provision of this Section. 
c.  The mosquito control portion of the Monthly Basin User Fee established by this Article shall be segregated, credited and deposited in a special fund and shall not be transferred therefrom except to pay for expenses directly attributable to mosquito control. The funds assessed hereby shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the Town, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting and management thereof. 
(3)  Monthly Basin Improvement Rate. Each lot or parcel of land shall be assessed a monthly amount for basin improvement, subject to modification by the Town Board, as is otherwise provided for by this Article. This rate is initially established at $0.00072 per square foot of net impervious area. 
(4)  Area. The Monthly Basin User Fee rate calculation for each lot or parcel of land shall be predicated upon the net area in square feet of the lot or parcel. 
(5)  Calculation. The Monthly Basin User Fee for each lot or parcel of land shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
Monthly Basin User Fee = [(Operations and Maintenance Rate) x (Impervious Rate Factor) x (Square Footage Area of Lot or Parcel of Land) + $2.20] + [(Monthly Basin Improvement Rate) x (Square Footage Area of Lot or Parcel of Land) x (Impervious Rate Factor)] 
(c)  The Monthly Basin User Fee shall not be collected in connection with any Town street, road or alley, or any railroad right-of-way used exclusively for trackage and related safety appurtenances. 
(d)  The Monthly Basin User Fee assessed hereby shall be segregated, credited and deposited in a special fund and shall not be transferred therefrom except to pay for expenses directly attributable to the stormwater drainage activities as aforesaid. The Monthly Basin User Fee assessed hereby shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the Town, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting and management thereof. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Town from making temporary interfund loans or transfers as may be specifically allowed by law. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
Sec. 13-3-130. - Billing for Monthly Basin User Fee and administrative fee for establishment of Monthly Basin User Fee accounts. 
    The Monthly Basin User Fee shall be billed and collected with the monthly utility bill for those lots or parcels of land utilizing or having available other Town utilities, and shall be billed and collected separately for those lots or parcels of land, and owners thereof, not utilizing or having available other Town utilities. All such bills for Monthly Basin User Fees shall be rendered monthly and shall become due and payable in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Director of Finance for the collection of utility bills. A one-time administration fee shall be charged for the establishment of Monthly Basin User Fee accounts. This fee shall be initially set at ten dollars ($10.00) for each account established; such fee may be modified by the Town Board by resolution. 
(Ord. 2017-1543 , 1) 
ARTICLE IV - Utility Accounts 

Sec. 13-4-10. - Delinquency fee. 
(a)  By resolution, which may be amended from time to time, the Town Board shall establish a delinquency fee for municipal utility accounts. 
(b)  The delinquency fee shall be charged for each month in which a delinquency occurs. No charge shall be made on any account for the first delinquency, and said charge shall be assessed in the second month. 
(c)  Any delinquency fees assessed hereunder against a property shall become a perpetual lien upon the property and may be collected in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 13-101; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1237 3) 
Sec. 13-4-20. - Unpaid utility charges, fees and delinquencies shall constitute a perpetual lien; collection of utility charges, fees and delinquencies. 
(a)  Any charges or fees imposed by this Code for utility services, together with interest, delinquency fees, shut-off and turn-on costs and costs of collection, if not paid by the due date specified on the utility bill, constitute a perpetual lien on the property to which the utility service was delivered. 
(b)  The attachment of such lien is not dependent on the recording of written notice, and the lien is prior and superior to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. The lien remains attached to the property from the date the fees and charges become due until all such fees and charges, together with interest, delinquency fees, shut-off and turn-on costs and costs of collection, if any, are paid. 
(c)  The Town is not required to seek payment of utility bills from any person other than the owner of the property served. No change of ownership, occupation or possession affects the application of this Section, and the failure of any owner to discover that property was purchased against which a lien for utility services exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full. 
(d)  The Town may enforce the lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the lien. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid fees and charges and allowable costs in the manner provided for foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(e)  The lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to the treasurer of the county wherein the property is located for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected, or by any other means provided by law. 
(f)  Delinquent utility fees and charges, together with interest and costs of collection, may also be collected by civil suit against the owner of the property, commenced at any time after the charges become delinquent. 
(g)  The remedies provided under this Section are cumulative and supplemental to each other. 
(h)  This Section shall apply to all utility services rendered by the Town on or after April 15, 2006. 
(Ord. 2006-1237 4, 5) 
ARTICLE V - Stormwater Quality 

Sec. 13-5-10. - Intent. 
    The intent of this Article is to regulate non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system and subsequent receiving waters as required by federal and state law in order to protect and enhance the water quality of the Town's watercourses, water bodies and wetlands in a manner consistent with the Clean Water Act. The objectives of this Article are: 
(a)  To regulate and reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the introduction of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4); 
(b)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4; 
(c)  To provide for inspection and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Article; 
(d)  To reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges from construction activity by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land; 
(e)  To require the construction of permanent stormwater runoff controls with development to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the deterioration of water quality; and 
(f)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of pollutants into the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-20. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this Section: 
    Best Management Practices (BMPs) : A technique, process, activity or structure used to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the pollutant content of a stormwater discharge into receiving waters. BMPs include nonstructural methods such as good housekeeping and preventive maintenance and structural modifications to control the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into receiving waters, which limit the release of pollutants into stormwater discharges or function as treatment controls. For the purpose of this Article, the term BMP is used interchangeably with the term control measure or CM , and can include other methods such as the installation, operation, and maintenance of structural controls and treatment devices. 
    BMPs, Nonstructural : Practices that include: schedules of activities, site planning incorporating low-impact development techniques, general good housekeeping pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. 
    BMP, Structural : Physical features or practices implemented at construction sites, and the permanent systems designed for the treatment of stormwater to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants. 
    Control Measure : Any best management practice or other method used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. Control measures include, but are not limited to best management practices. Control measures can include other methods such as the installation, operation, and maintenance of structure controls and treatment devices. 
    CDPHE : The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. By its definition herein, the Town recognizes that CDPHE is authorized to administer the NPDES program in Colorado. 
    CDPS : Colorado Discharge Permit System. 
    Clean Water Act : The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et. seq. ), and any amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity : ground surface disturbing and associated activities, which include, but are not limited to, clearing, grading, excavation, demolition, installation of new or improved haul roads and access roads, staging areas, stockpiling of fill materials, and borrow areas that disturbs at least one (1) acre of land (or is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will disturb at least one (1) acre). Activities that include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility are not considered construction activity. Construction activity occurs from initial ground breaking to final stabilization regardless of ownership of the land upon which construction activity takes place. 
    Common plan of development or sale : a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activity may be taking place at different times on different schedules, but remain related. 
    Construction stormwater management plan (SWMP) : The State of Colorado-required document developed and maintained by owners and/or operators of construction activities to assure compliance with the general permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activities. 
    Contiguous : construction activities located in close proximity to each other (within one-quarter (1/4) mile). 
    Director : The Town of Windsor Town Manager or designee. 
    Disturbed area : that area of the land's surface disturbed by any work or activity upon the property by means including, but not limited to, grading; excavating; stockpiling soil, fill, or other materials; clearing; vegetation removal; removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other materials; or other activities which expose soil. Disturbed area does not include the tillage of land that is under agricultural use pursuant to an express written agreement with the Town. 
    Facility : Any building, including a private home, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
    Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and Permit (GESCPP) : The collection of maps, specifications, plan sets and associated narrative for construction activity within the Town's MS4 boundaries, signed, updated and maintained by the owner/operator and/or assigns, and also signed and sealed by the design engineer. 
    Hazardous material : Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connections : Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system; and 
    Any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved. 
    Illicit discharge : Any direct or indirect release of pollutants to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in subsection 13-5-50(b). 
    Industrial activity : Activities subject to CDPS industrial permits, as defined in 40 CFR  122.26(b)(14). 
    Mobile washing operation : A commercial activity involving power washing, steam cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning of, to include, but is not limited to, the following: vehicles, fabric, pets and/or exterior surfaces. 
    MS4 : Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system : Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, catch basins, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins or other water quality structures, and natural and manmade or altered drainage ditches/channels/lakes/reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit or NPDESpermit : A permit issued pursuant to  402 of the Clean Water Act, including CDPS permits issued by the State of Colorado in compliance with the Act. 
    Non-stormwater discharge : Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Operator : The individual who has day-to-day supervision and control of activities occurring at a construction site or facility; operator can include the owner, lessee, the developer, the general contractor or the agent(s) of any one (1) or more of these parties. 
    Owner : The person who owns and is financially responsible for a facility, development, part of a facility, or land. 
    Pollutant : Any sewage, sewage biosolids, garbage, chemical waste, biological material, solid waste, incinerator residue, ash, munitions, radioactive material, heat, rock, sand, sediment and industrial and agricultural wastes discharged into a waterbody, and can be either foreign substances/energies or naturally occurring contaminants. 
    Pollution : The presence in waters of the state of any substances, contaminants, or manmade or man-induced impairment of waters or alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. 
    Potential discharge : A condition where there is a substantial probability of a nonstormwater discharge to the MS4, which makes it reasonably necessary to take immediate action to prevent, reduce or mitigate damage to persons, property or natural resources. 
    Premises : Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, and including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Receiving water : Any water of the State of Colorado that receives a stormwater discharge from an MS4, including all watercourses, even if they are usually dry, and irrigation ditches that receive municipal stormwater. Receiving water also includes storm sewer systems owned by other entities. 
    Spill : Any intentional or unintentional release of solid or liquid material which may cause pollution of the MS4 or waters of the state. 
    Storm drainage system : Interchangeable with Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). 
    Stormwater : Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater management plan (SWMP) : A plan describing BMP's and activities to be implemented to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, the MS4, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Town : The Town of Windsor, a Colorado home rule municipal corporation. 
    Wastewater : Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Watercourse : A channel, natural depression, slough, artificial channel, gulch, arroyo, stream, creek, pond, reservoir or lake, including major drainageways, in which stormwater runoff and floodwater flow, whether regularly or infrequently. 
    Waters of the State of Colorado (waters of the state) : Any and all surface and subsurface waters that are contained in or flow in or through the State of Colorado but does not include waters in sewage systems, waters in treatment works of disposal systems, waters in potable water distribution systems, and all water withdrawn for use until use and treatment have been completed. This definition includes all watercourses, even if they are usually dry. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-30. - Applicability of this Article. 
    This Article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by this Article. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-40. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article. 
    In addition to the foregoing powers, the Director shall have the power to adopt written policies and procedures necessary to implement this Article, and shall make such written policies and procedures available to the public. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-50. - Illicit discharge prohibited; exemptions. 
(a)  Illicit discharges enumerated. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or watercourses any illicit discharge, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Chemicals, petroleum products, paint, varnishes, solvents, oil and grease and other automotive fluids, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, or other toxic materials; 
(2)  Nonhazardous liquid, solid wastes and yard wastes; 
(3)  Hazardous materials, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals; 
(4)  Trash, refuse, rubbish, garbage, food wastes, pet wastes, litter, other discarded or abandoned objects, floatables and cleaning products; 
(5)  Landscaping materials, sediment, lawn clippings, leaves, branches or other landscaping and yard debris; 
(6)  Construction activities wastes and residues including, but not limited to, painting, paving, concrete placement, saw cutting, material storage and earthwork; 
(7)  Wastes and residues that result from mobile washing operations; discharges from toilets; sinks; industrial processes; cooling systems; boilers; fabric cleaning; equipment cleaning; commercial vehicle cleaning and substances added to the storm drain to control root growth; 
(8)  Any other material that is considered harmful to humans, animals, or aquatic life and its habitat. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following discharges, when not otherwise enumerated as illicit above, are exempt from the discharge prohibitions established by this article: 
(1)  Waterline flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, irrigation return flows, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to stormdrains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, roof drains, foundation or footing drains, crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated, less than 0.05 ppm chlorine). 
(2)  Agricultural stormwater runoff. 
(3)  Flows from emergency firefighting activities and water incidental to street sweeping (includes associated sidewalks and medians). 
(4)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES or CDPS permit. 
(5)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted in accordance with CDPHE's current policies and guidance regarding Low Risk Discharges, provided that such discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of such policies and guidance and all other applicable orders, laws and regulations. 
(6)  Dye testing in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations. 
(7)  Stormwater runoff with incidental pollutants. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-60. - Illicit connections prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to the adoption of this Article, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(b)  Cleaning of paved surfaces required. The owner of any paved parking lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as necessary to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, an illicit discharge of pollutants. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and treatment of wash water or other methods in compliance with this Article. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-70. - Potential discharges. 
(a)  Generally. It is unlawful to cause materials to be deposited in such a manner or location as to constitute a threatened discharge into MS4 or waters of the state. Pollutants that are no longer contained in a pipe, tank or other container are considered to be potential discharges unless they are actively being cleaned up. 
(b)  Materials storage. Materials including, but not limited to, stockpiles used in construction and landscaping activities shall be stored and maintained to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the potential discharge and release of pollutants. 
(c)  Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations and applicable laws. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be stored in a manner to prevent potential discharge and release to the MS4. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-80. - Best management practices. 
    The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment or a disturbed area shall provide at its own expense reasonable protection from accidental or potential discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for premises which are or may be the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4 at said person's expense. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-90. - Right of entry and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  Whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this Article, the Director shall have the right to enter the premises at any reasonable time, with prior notice, to determine if the owner or operator is complying with the requirements of this Article. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the Town is hereby empowered to seek relief from the Municipal Court to obtain a court order authorizing such entry. 
(b)  The Director shall have the right to install such devices as are necessary to investigate illicit discharges upon the property of any discharger to the MS4. The investigation may include, but is not limited to, the following: sampling of any discharge or process waters, the taking of photographs, interviewing staff on alleged violations, and access to any and all facilities or areas within the premises that may have any effect on the discharge. 
(c)  If the Director discovers a violation constituting an imminent danger to public health or public safety, the Director is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or bring the property into compliance with the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-100. - Notification of spills. 
    The owner or operator or person responsible for emergency response at a facility or operation shall, upon discovery of circumstances reasonably likely to constitute a known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the state, take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, assessment, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of a release of hazardous materials said owner or operator shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (emergency 911 service). The requirements of this Section shall be in addition to any other requirements of law. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-110. - Applicability of permit; notification requirements. 
(a)  Permits required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity resulting in the a disturbed area of one (1) acre or more without first obtaining a GESCP permit from the Town of Windsor and, when applicable, the State of Colorado. 
(2)  The Town may also require a GESCP permit regardless of the size of the total disturbed area in certain circumstances, with the approval of a final subdivision plat, special use permit, site development, or proximity of the activity to Waters of the State. 
(b)  Notification required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity resulting in disturbance of less than one (1) acre if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development and construction activities may take place at different times on different schedules, without first notifying the Town of Windsor via the requirements noted in the building permit application process. These activities will be subject to all enforcement and abatement as stated in Section 13-5-160, all SWMP requirements stated in Section 13-5-120, and all standards and specifications as stated in Section 13-5-130. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from this Article: 
(1)  Agricultural land management activities. 
(2)  Construction activities taking place on land under the authority of a non-standard MS4 Permit holder. 
(3)  The discharge is from a parcel or area that is not under the jurisdictional authority of the Town, or is under the authority of another stormwater permit entity. 
(4)  Activities associated with oil and gas exploration, production, treatment operations or transmission facilities. 
(5)  Construction activities pursuant to a State-approved R-Factor Waiver. 
(d)  Permit application. Applications for GESCP permits shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Town, with accompanying site plans and, drainage reports, and other documents as specified. 
(1)  In support of the application, the applicant shall supply all information required on the Town's form and any additional information requested by the Director. 
(2)  The application shall be signed by the person or persons under penalty of perjury responsible for compliance with the permit throughout the permit's validity. 
(3)  The applicant shall attach documentation of an application for a CDPHE stormwater general permit for construction activities. 
(4)  The applicant shall pay a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first acre of disturbance, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional acre (or any portion thereof) of additional acre of disturbance at the time of application, which fees may be adjusted by subsequent resolution adopted by the Town Board. 
(5)  The Director may reject an incomplete application or application for which the required fee has not been received. 
(e)  Permit approval required. Land disturbing activities may not proceed until a GESCP permit is issued by the Town, and an initial inspection is scheduled by the permittee with the Town's Stormwater Program Coordinator and/or inspection staff. 
(f)  Permit issuance/denial. The Town shall either issue or deny a permit within thirty (30) working days of its receipt of a completed permit application. The permit may be denied if the applicant fails to provide the information or pay the fee required by this Article. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the grounds for denial and of the corrective actions that must be taken to obtain a permit. An applicant may appeal the denial in writing to the Town Manager no later than twenty-eight (28) calendar days from the date of written denial. The appeal must set forth the grounds for the appeal and include any documents in support of the appeal. The Town Manager shall rule on the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the appeal. The Town Manager's ruling on the matter shall be based solely upon review of the application, denial, appeal, and all documents related thereto. The parties shall receive written notice of the Town Manager's decision. The Town Manager's decision shall be deemed final agency action for purposes of judicial review. 
(g)  Permit close-out. The requirements of the GESCP permit will remain in effect until the Director has given written notice to the permittee of final stabilization via a Final Inspection Report and notification of final acceptance from the Town. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-120. - Construction Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP). 
(a)  Preparation of SWMP. In addition to all State requirements, the SWMP shall be prepared in accordance with the engineering, hydrologic and pollution control practices outlined in the Town's current standards and specifications for design and construction of public improvements. 
(b)  SWMP required on site. The SWMP shall be kept on-site and kept updated at all times, and the owner or its representative shall be prepared to respond to maintenance of and compliance with specific BMPs. 
(c)  Inspection of BMPs. The owner or its representative shall self-inspect all BMPs at one (1) of the frequencies available in the State-issued permit. Self-inspections of BMPs shall be conducted by an individual or team with formal training in erosion and sediment control by a recognized organization acceptable to the Director. A certification of successful completion of such training shall be provided upon request. Self-inspection reports, to include descriptions of resolutions to findings within the required time frame, shall be forwarded to the Stormwater Program Coordinator within two (2) days after the reports are closed out. 
(d)  Installation of BMPs. The owner or its representative shall ensure erosion, sediment and waste control BMPs are implemented for all pollutant sources throughout all stages of construction from the initial inspection until final stabilization has been certified by the Director as set forth in subsection 13-5-110(f). As a BMP(s) is deemed ineffective or inappropriate, the operator shall replace with an appropriate BMP, or remove a BMP, record its location and date of installation or removal on all documentation, and maintain it as required. 
(e)  Maintenance of BMPs. BMPs shall be continuously maintained to their designed functional capacity and restored immediately when damaged. 
(f)  BMP removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously destroy or interfere with any BMP(s) implemented to protect water quality. BMP removal shall be conducted as needed to meet the requirements for final stabilization or as needed in subsection (d). 
(g)  Minor modifications to SWMP. Based on inspections performed by the owner or by Town personnel, minor modifications to the SWMP will be necessary if at any time the specified BMPs do not meet the objectives of this Article. The Director may require equivalent or improved BMPs to be implemented where feasible on a schedule established by the Director in consultation with the owner. All minor modifications shall be implemented immediately and recorded on the owner's on-site copy of the SWMP. The modified SWMP shall be made available to Town personnel during inspections and site visits. 
(h)  Major modifications to SWMP. Whenever there is a significant change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance which has a significant effect on the hydrology or potential for discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or receiving waters, the Director may require submittal of a revised SWMP to the Town for review. The owner or operator shall have an affirmative duty to immediately report any such conditions to the Town. 
(i)  Records of inspection. Records of self-inspections shall be maintained on site with the SWMP, and sent to the Stormwater Program Coordinator as directed in the permit in accordance with subsection (c) of this Section. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-130. - Technical standards and specifications. 
    All BMPs designed to meet the requirements of this Article shall, as applicable, comply with the following technical standards: 
(1)  Town of Windsor's Storm Drainage Criteria Manual, as amended. 
(2)  Any other alternative methodology approved by the Town, which is demonstrated to be effective in meeting the requirements of this Article. Specifications and details, as well as maintenance requirements must be reviewed by the Town's engineering and Stormwater staff for approval prior to use. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-140. - Post-construction requirement of permanent bmps. 
(a)  Post-Construction Permanent BMPs. Land development for both private and public projects that meets the requirements of this Article must address stormwater runoff quality through the use of permanent post-construction BMPs which shall be maintained in perpetuity by the property owner, unless otherwise specifically agreed in writing by the Town. 
(1)  Treatment Structural BMPs, such as but not limited to, inlet inserts, bioretention, grass swales and buffers, extended detention basins, sand filters, permeable pavement, constructed wetland ponds and channels, and underground BMPs located on private property shall be owned and operated by the owner(s) of the property on which the BMP is located, unless the Town in writing agrees that a person or entity other than the owner shall own or operate such BMP. Certification of the BMP by the owner's state-licensed engineer, and a passing final stabilization inspection by the Town's Stormwater Program Coordinator or inspector is required for acceptance by the Town. 
(2)  Nontreatment Nonstructural BMPs, such as site operations, employee training, and site planning incorporating all currently-available technology, as appropriate, to address stormwater quality shall be implemented by the owner or operator in perpetuity. 
(3)  As a condition of approval of the BMP, the owner of a private project shall maintain the BMP to its design capacity and functionality unless or until the Town relieves the property owner of that responsibility in writing. The obligation to maintain the BMP shall be imposed by this Article, and shall not require further notice or recording. 
(b)  Certification of permanent post-construction BMPs. During installation of post-construction structural BMPs, engineering inspections must be conducted by the owner at key installation points to ensure proper installation and functionality of the BMP. Inspection documents will be made available to the Town upon request. Upon completion of a project, and before construction acceptance and/or a certificate of occupancy is granted, the Town shall be provided a written certification by a competent Colorado licensed professional engineer stating that the completed project is in compliance with the approved final plan and the post-construction BMP will function as designed. All applicants shall submit "as built" plans for any permanent treatment post-construction structural BMP after final construction is completed and must be certified by a Colorado licensed professional engineer. A final inspection by the Town is required before the release of any security posted pursuant to Section 13-5-150 will occur. 
(c)  Ongoing inspection and maintenance of permanent BMPs. 
(1)  Maintenance. The owner of a site containing privately-maintained BMPs shall maintain such BMPs in accordance with this Article. The maintenance obligation shall run with the land and shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site containing permanent BMPs. Failure of any owner to receive actual notice of its obligation to maintain BMP's pursuant to this Article shall not absolve any owner of the obligation to meet the BMP maintenance requirement. 
(2)  Publicly owned permanent post-construction BMPs. Publicly owned or maintained permanent post-construction BMPs shall be subject to ongoing inspection by Town inspection staff to ensure the BMP is functioning to designed capacity. 
(3)  Long term inspection and maintenance of permanent post-construction BMPs. Permanent Post-construction BMPs included in a final drainage plan must undergo ongoing inspections by the owner to document maintenance and repair needs and to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Town-approved improvement plans, the written policies and procedures adopted by the Director, and this Article. Inspection reports will be made available to the Town upon request. 
(4)  Substitution of Entity of Perpetual Existence. At the Town's sole election, the maintenance and inspection obligation imposed under this Article may be approved for assignment in writing to an entity of perpetual existence, such as a metropolitan district or other special district with sufficient financial capability. The property owner shall have the burden of establishing financial capability to the Town's satisfaction. 
(d)  Existing BMPs. 
(1)  If review of a land development proposal demonstrates that existing permanent BMPs are in place to address water quality treatment for the site, and are sufficient to maintain water quality, no additional BMPs will be required. 
(2)  If review of a land development proposal demonstrates existing vegetative buffers, or other existing site features provide adequate treatment for the proposed development, and are sufficient to maintain water quality, no additional BMPs will be required. 
(3)  If an existing BMP is modified to accommodate additional stormwater flows from development or redevelopment undertaken pursuant to subdivision or site plan approvals issued by the Town after the effective date of this Article, the entire BMP (including those portions in existence before the effective date of this Article) shall be subject to the maintenance requirements of this Article. 
(e)  [Agreements for perpetual maintenance]. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the Town from entering into agreements for perpetual maintenance of select BMPs to assure ongoing maintenance as contemplated in this Article. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-150. - Security requirement. 
(a)  As a condition for the issuance of a GESCP, applicants shall provide security in the form of cash, a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit, the form of which shall be left to the sound discretion of the Director. The amount of the security will generally be in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of the sediment and erosion materials and structural control measures, and an additional twenty-five percent (25%) of that amount to cover administrative costs required to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Article. After close-out of the GESCP, the security shall be released. 
(b)  If the permittee does not successfully complete all required work or violates any requirement of the permit or this Article, the Town shall have the right to draw on the security to cover all such costs. If the total of such costs exceeds the security, the permittee shall be responsible for payment of the remaining balance within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of an accounting of such from the Town. All amounts due in excess of the security shall bear interest at the annual rate of six percent (6%). 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-160. - Enforcement, abatement, remedies. 
(a)  Violation. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this Section. 
(b)  Enforcement. The Director or designee shall have the power to conduct inspections, give verbal direction, issue notices of violations and implement other enforcement actions under this Section. 
(c)  Determination and investigation. The Director shall have all powers of investigation and verification as set forth in Section 13-5-90 above. 
(d)  Emergency Abatement. In the event the Director concludes a stormwater quality nuisance exists under this Article and presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Authorization. The Director may apply under oath to the Municipal Court for an ex parte order authorizing immediate abatement of the nuisance. The Municipal Judge is empowered to administratively issue ex parte orders for the immediate abatement of any nuisance which presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  Determination administrative. In conjunction with the application for an ex parte order under subsection (1) above, the Police Department may issue a citation to the owner, the operator or both. Notwithstanding the issuance of a citation under this subsection, the determination and issuance of an ex parte order shall remain an administrative matter except as provided below. 
(3)  Contents. Every ex parte order issued pursuant to this subsection shall authorize the immediate abatement of any such nuisance and shall contain a finding by a preponderance of the evidence that a nuisance exists upon the subject property which presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, shall recite the facts supporting such a finding and shall be supported by sworn testimony or affidavit upon personal knowledge. 
(4)  Mailing and posting. The Municipal Court shall mail a copy of every ex parte order issued pursuant to this subsection within twenty-four (24) hours of its issuance to the property owner address as maintained by the County Assessor's Office by first-class mail. The Municipal Court shall further direct the Police Department to post a copy of such ex parte order in a conspicuous location upon the premises. 
(5)  Right to hearing; no citation; administrative procedure. Every ex parte order issued pursuant to this subsection shall contain a notice to the property owner that, upon written request, a hearing before the Municipal Court will be scheduled. Such property owner's request for hearing shall be in writing, shall contain the requestor's mailing address and shall be delivered to the Municipal Court within ten (10) days of the mailing specified in subsection (4) above. Upon receipt of the property owner's request for a hearing, the Municipal Court shall schedule a hearing and provide written notice of the same to the Town Prosecutor, who shall represent the Town in the matter. The Municipal Court shall also provide written notice of the hearing date and time to the requesting property owner by first-class mail to the address appearing on the request for hearing. Failure of the property owner to request a hearing as provided in this subsection within ten (10) days of issuance the ex parte order shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the ex parte order authorized in this Section, and shall be deemed a waiver of any objections to the Town's lien rights for nuisance abatement costs provided in subsection (f) below. In cases in which a citation is issued to the property owner, the determination of guilt or innocence, and the amount, if any, of nuisance abatement costs to which the Town may be entitled, shall be determined as provided in subsection (6) below. At the administrative hearing, the following provisions shall apply: 
(i)  The Municipal Court shall determine whether, based on a preponderance of the evidence, a nuisance existed upon the subject property and, if so, whether the Town should have been authorized to enter upon the subject property for the purpose of abating the nuisance. The property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and present evidence on these questions. Upon a finding in the affirmative on both questions, the Municipal Court shall order determining that the entry and abatement was lawful, assessing the costs of nuisance abatement and authorizing the remedies available under subsection (f) below. 
(ii)  In the event that the administrative hearing results in a finding that no nuisance constituting an imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare existed at the time the ex parte order was issued, the Municipal Court shall make such a finding and shall deny the Town any right to recover nuisance abatement costs incurred by the Town in conjunction with the matter. In this event, the Town shall have no lien rights. 
(6)  Right to hearing; citation issued; criminal procedure. In cases in which a citation has been issued to the property owner or the operator, the determination of a nuisance prohibited by this Article shall be made in conjunction with the usual and customary practices of the Municipal Court presiding in criminal matters. In the event of a conviction, or approval of a deferred sentence, arising out of any citation issued for a violation of this Article, as a condition of sentencing or deferral, the Municipal Court shall order the defendant to pay all costs incurred by the Town for abatement of the nuisance in addition to any other sentence or assessment of court costs. The standard of proof for determination of the amount of nuisance abatement costs shall be by a preponderance of the evidence as a sentencing matter. 
(7)  Determination final, lien rights, citation to owner. In cases in which a citation is issued to the property owner and a conviction, or deferred sentence, results, the Municipal Court's determination of nuisance abatement costs made in accordance with subsection (5) above shall be final and shall entitle the Town to enforcement of such sums as provided in subsection (f) below, including the right to a lien for such sums. 
(8)  Determination final, lien rights, citation to operator. In cases in which a citation is issued to the operator and a conviction, or deferred sentence, results, the Municipal Court's determination of nuisance abatement costs made in accordance with subsection (6) above shall be final and shall entitle the Town to enforcement of such sums as provided in subsection (f) below. In such cases, the Town's enforcement remedies shall include the right to a lien for such sums. 
(e)  Non-emergency Abatement. For all cases in which the Director concludes a stormwater nuisance exists under this Article and is not found to be an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Notice. The Director shall give notice to the owner/operator that a nuisance exists in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. Said notice shall further specify the actions to be undertaken immediately by the owner to comply with the provisions of this Article and to be completed within five (5) days after the date of such notice. Every notice issued pursuant to this subsection shall state that, if the specified work required is not done within the time period set forth herein, the Town shall cause the same to be done at the expense of the owner. The notice required by this subsection shall state that the cost of such work shall constitute a lien upon such property as provided in subsection (f) below. 
(2)  Citation, notice without citation. The Direct may (but shall not be required to) issue a citation to the owner, the operator or both. In cases in which no citation is issued to the owner or occupant, or both, of the property, the notice given pursuant to subsection (1) above shall set forth a date and time certain at which the Director or Town Prosecutor will appear before the Municipal Court to obtain an order for entry into the property and abatement of the nuisance. In cases in which a citation is issued to the owner or operator, or both, the return date on the citation shall serve as the date upon which the Director or Town Prosecutor will appear before the Municipal Court to obtain an order for entry into the property and abatement of the nuisance. 
(3)  Notice, service. Every notice issued pursuant to subsection (2) above shall be served by mailing a copy of the notice via first-class mail to the owner/operator's address as maintained by the County Assessor's Office or by hand-delivery to the owner/operator, and/or by posting on the property in a conspicuous place. Service on one (1) owner/operator of the property shall be deemed service on all owners/operators. 
(4)  Authority to issue administrative orders, mailing and posting. The Municipal Judge is empowered to issue administrative orders for the abatement of any stormwater nuisance determined by the Director to exist, after notice and an opportunity for hearing as described herein. Every such order shall be mailed by the Municipal Court within twenty-four (24) hours of its issuance to the owner address maintained by the County Assessor's Office by first-class mail. At or prior to the time of stormwater nuisance abatement by the Town, a copy of the administrative order for stormwater nuisance abatement shall be posted on the property in a conspicuous place. 
(5)  Disposition of citation. In cases in which a citation has been issued to the owner, the determination of a stormwater nuisance prohibited by this Article shall be made in conjunction with the usual and customary practices of the Municipal Court presiding in criminal matters. In the event of a conviction or approval of a deferred sentence arising out of any citation issued for a violation of this Article, the Municipal Court shall order that the Town may immediately enter into the property for the purpose of stormwater nuisance abatement. As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Court shall order the defendant to pay all costs which may be incurred by the Town for abatement of the stormwater nuisance in addition to any other sentence or assessment of court costs. 
(f)  Town's Lien for Nuisance Abatement Costs. The following provisions shall apply to the establishment and effect of Town stormwater nuisance abatement liens: 
(1)  Lien certification, administrative matters. In all cases in which the determination of stormwater nuisance abatement costs is made by the Municipal Court as an administrative matter, the Municipal Court shall issue a Certification of Nuisance Abatement Costs containing the amount of nuisance abatement costs determined as due and owing to the Town. Such Certification shall be mailed by the Municipal Court by first-class mail to both the owner to the property address if different from the owner's address. Such Certification may be recorded in the books and records of the County Clerk and Recorder as evidence of the principal amount due. 
(2)  Lien certification, disposition of citations. In all cases where the determination of stormwater nuisance abatement costs is made by the Municipal Court in the context of criminal sentencing, the Municipal Court shall issue a Certification of Nuisance Abatement Costs containing the amount of stormwater nuisance abatement costs determined as due and owing to the Town. Such Certification shall be mailed by the Municipal Court by first-class mail to both the owner and to the property address if different from the owner's address. Such Certification may be recorded in the books and records of the County Clerk and Recorder as evidence of the principal amount due. 
(3)  Lien certification, enforcement of sentencing orders. In all cases where the Municipal Court has issued a sentencing order pursuant to subsection (d)(6) above, a person with personal knowledge shall certify under oath, in writing, the costs of stormwater nuisance abatement incurred by the Town in carrying out such order. Such Certification may be recorded in the books and records of the County Clerk and Recorder as evidence of the principal amount due. 
(4)  Lien perpetual. The amount of any stormwater nuisance abatement costs incurred by the Town pursuant to this Article shall constitute a perpetual lien on the property upon which nuisance abatement measures were undertaken in accordance with this Article. 
(5)  First and prior lien; rate of interest. The attachment of any lien established under this Article is not dependent on the recording of written notice, and the lien is prior and superior to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances, whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. The lien remains attached to the property from the date the stormwater nuisance abatement costs are incurred until all nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date the costs were incurred, are paid. 
(6)  Owner responsibility; lien not affected by changes in ownership. The Town is not required to seek payment of stormwater nuisance abatement costs from any person other than the owner. No change of ownership, occupancy or possession affects the application of this Section, and the failure of any owner to discover that property was purchased against which a lien for nuisance abatement costs exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full. 
(7)  Foreclosure rights. The Town may enforce its lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the lien. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid stormwater nuisance abatement costs and allowable court costs in the manner provided for foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(8)  Tax assessment rights. The lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to the treasurer of the county wherein the property is located for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected or by any other means provided by law. 
(9)  Civil suit. Unpaid stormwater nuisance abatement costs, together with simple interest at eight percent (8%) per annum and costs of collection, may also be collected by civil suit against the owner, commenced at any time after the charges become due. 
(g)  Re-inspection fees. Whenever the Director determines that any activity is occurring which is not in compliance with the requirements of this Article, the Director may impose a re-inspection fee of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which fee may be adjusted from time to time by resolution adopted by the Town Board. 
(h)  Stop work order. Whenever the Director determines that any activity is occurring which is not in compliance with the requirements of this Article, the Director may order the activity stopped upon service by certified mail, return receipt requested, of written notice upon the responsible owner and/or operator. In addition, upon issuance of a stop-work order, written notice of the stop-work order shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the area where the activity is occurring and shall state the nature of the violation, and shall take effect immediately after posting. Upon posting, the owner and/or operator shall immediately cease all activity on the site, except as authorized in writing by the Town. It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or operator to fail to comply with a stop work order issued or posted as provided herein. 
(i)  Criminal penalties; enforcement costs. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or permit or cause a violation of this Article or any GESCP issued under this Article. Upon conviction, violators shall be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1-4-20 of the Windsor Municipal Code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(j)  Injunctive Relief. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Article is hereby declared to be a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance. The Town may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin violations of this Article. 
(k)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies set forth in this Article are non-exclusive and cumulative. 
(l)  Attorney fees. In addition to any other relief granted, the Town shall be entitled to an award of its reasonable attorney fees, costs of suit and expert witness expenses associated with any action brought to enforce the terms of this Article. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
Sec. 13-5-170. - Effective date. 
    This Article shall take effect at 12:01 a.m. on May 1, 2019. 
(Ord. 2019-1586 1) 
CHAPTER 15 - Annexations and Master Plans 
ARTICLE I - Annexation Procedures 

Sec. 15-1-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish a procedure to bring land under the jurisdiction of the Town in compliance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended. 
(Prior code 15-1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1268 2) 
Sec. 15-1-11. - Contemporaneous master planning not required. 
    An applicant may petition to bring land under the jurisdiction of the Town by the annexation procedures set forth herein, with or without a contemporaneous application for the master planning of such property. In the event master plan approval is not requested or approved contemporaneously with the annexation of property, approval of a master plan in accordance with the provisions of Article II of this Chapter shall be a condition precedent of any subdivision application for the property. 
(Ord. 2006-1268 2) 
Sec. 15-1-12. - Annexation without master planning. 
    References in this Article to "master plan" or "master plan fee" shall apply only where an applicant desires to submit an annexation petition and request for approval of a master plan contemporaneously. Should an applicant desire to petition for the annexation of land without the approval of a master plan, such references shall not apply. The procedures set forth in Article II of this Chapter shall apply to requests for approval of a master plan submitted after the annexation of property. 
(Ord. 2006-1268 2) 
Sec. 15-1-20. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
    In addition to other duties imposed upon all applicants by this Code and the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, all applicants shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(2)  The applicant shall consult with the Planning Department to discuss any special conditions pertaining to the annexation and to obtain an annexation petition. 
(Prior code 15-2; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1268 2) 
Sec. 15-1-30. - Preliminary steps. 
(a)  Procedure. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the presentation of any annexation petition to the Town Board, the applicant shall submit to the Town in electronic format an annexation petition, the annexation fee, the master plan fee and the master plan and annexation map. The annexation and master plan fee shall be such fees then in effect, as established by resolution of the Town Board. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. 
(1)  The Planning Department shall review all documents submitted for completeness and accuracy. If all documents are complete and accurate, the Planning Department shall submit the annexation petition to the Town Clerk. 
(2)  The Town Clerk shall present the annexation petition and a resolution initiating annexation proceedings to the Town Board, which shall thereafter establish a date for a public hearing. Upon the establishment of a public hearing date, the Town Clerk shall give appropriate notice in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, and shall specifically direct copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation proceedings by certified mail to the Clerk to the Board of County Commissioners and to the County Attorney of the county wherein the territory is located. Copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation proceedings shall also be sent by certified mail to any school district or special district having territory within the annexed area. These copies shall be sent at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the annexation petition by the Town Board, the Planning Department shall furnish to the following entities copies of the annexation map and the master plan. The Planning Department may submit copies of the annexation map and the master plan to additional interested entities as determined by the Planning Department in its sole discretion. Such entities shall be advised by the Planning Department of the scheduled hearing date and shall further be notified that any objections to the annexation and master plan must be submitted in writing no later than seven (7) days after receipt of the annexation map and master plan: 
a.  Telecommunications utility. 
b.  Gas and electric utilities. 
c.  Town Engineer. 
d.  Windsor-Severance Fire Rescue. 
e.  Water and sewer utilities. 
f.  Colorado Department of Transportation. 
g.  Town Recreation Department. 
h.  Respective school district in which the subject property is located. 
i.  Cable television provider. 
(4)  The Planning Department shall submit the annexation map, master plan and zoning request to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the annexation map, master plan and zoning request at a public hearing and shall submit a written recommendation to the Town Board. 
(b)  Annexation map. All annexation maps shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four by thirty-six (24  36) inches. The annexation map shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the annexation map. 
(4)  The legal description (including lot, block, subdivision, section, township, range). 
(5)  Distinction of the boundary that is contiguous to the Town and the length of the same. 
(6)  Lot and block numbers if the area is already platted. 
(7)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way for collector and arterial streets. 
(8)  Existing and requested zoning and acreage of each requested zone. 
(9)  Ownership of all parcels within and adjacent to the annexation. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(11)  Vicinity map. 
(12)  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all annexation maps, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: a) the date of each revision; b) the initials of the person who made the revision; and c) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the annexation map. 
(c)  Master plan. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department the master plan fee, as established by resolution of the Town Board, along with the requirements provided in Subsection (a) above. All master plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The master plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the master plan. 
(4)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way for collector and arterial streets. 
(5)  On each land use-specific section of the plan, identify: 
a.  Projected acreage, minimum lot size and gross and net residential densities; 
b.  Projected acreage designated for parks, open space and other public and semi-public uses; 
c.  Projected acreage for industrial and commercial uses; and 
d.  All of these projected acreages must equal the total acreage of the parcel shown in the land use legend in Subparagraph (6)d. below. 
(6)  Land use legend showing: 
a.  Proposed gross and net residential densities; 
b.  Proposed acreage designated for each specific land use - parks, commercial, industrial, residential, other public and semi-public uses, streets, etc.; 
c.  Proposed zoning classifications; and 
d.  Total acreage of the parcel. 
(7)  Existing watercourses with adequate easements for flood control. 
(8)  Designation of all public sites to be reserved and dedicated. 
(9)  Existing two-foot contours. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(11)  Vicinity map. 
(12)  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all master plans, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: a) the date of each revision; b) the initials of the person who made the revision; and c) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the master plan. 
(d)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Town with the annexation map and master plan. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes: 
(1)  A Town application form provided by the Planning Department. If signed by the authorized representative, written evidence of such authorization signed by the property owner shall be submitted as well. 
(2)  A Town general application overview form provided by the Planning Department. 
(3)  A deed or legal instrument identifying the applicant's interest in the property. 
(4)  A soils description and limitation. This supportive information is not required where contemporaneous approval of a master plan is not requested. 
(5)  Preliminary utility plan. Such utility plan shall include the size and location of all existing utility lines and facilities and the approximate size and location of all proposed utility lines and facilities. A table with estimates of peak hour and maximum day water and wastewater demands shall be included on the utility plan. The supportive information is not required to be submitted where contemporaneous approval of a master plan is not requested. 
(6)  Preliminary drainage plan showing flow patterns, including off-site contributions, detention and retention areas and discharge areas. This supportive information is not required to be submitted where contemporaneous approval of a master plan is not requested. 
(7)  An affidavit concerning the amount and historical use of all water rights owned within the last three (3) years. 
(8)  A statement on community need for the proposed annexation and zoning. 
(9)  For all annexations in excess of ten (10) acres, the applicant shall obtain from the school district serving the area to be annexed a statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district, including an estimate of the number of students generated by the proposed annexation and the capital construction required to serve such students. The school district statement generated pursuant to this Paragraph shall be incorporated into the application materials. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 1) 
Sec. 15-1-40. - Annexation impact report. 
(a)  For all annexations in excess of ten (10) acres, the Town shall prepare an impact report regarding the proposed annexation no less than twenty-five (25) days before the date of the annexation hearing. One (1) copy of the impact report shall be filed with the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed within five (5) days thereafter. The preparation and filing of the annexation impact report may be waived upon approval of the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed. 
(b)  The annexation impact report shall include the following: 
(1)  A map or maps of the Town and adjacent territory showing the following information: 
a.  The present and proposed boundaries of the Town in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
b.  The present streets, major trunk water lines, sewer interceptors and outfalls, other utility lines and ditches and the proposed extension of such streets and utility lines in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
c.  The existing and proposed land use pattern in the areas to be annexed. 
(2)  A copy of any draft or final pre-annexation agreement, if available. 
(3)  A statement of the Town's plans for extending or providing for municipal services within the area to be annexed. 
(4)  A statement of the Town's plans for the financing of municipal services to be extended into the area to be annexed. 
(5)  A statement identifying all existing districts within the area to be annexed. 
(6)  A statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district governing the area to be annexed, as is more fully set forth in Paragraph 15-1-30(d)(11) of this Article. 
(Prior code 15-4; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1268 2) 
Sec. 15-1-50. - Consideration of annexation ordinance. 
    Upon the submission of documentation in accordance with this Chapter and upon compliance with the notice and hearing requirements as set forth in the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, the Town Board may consider the approval of an ordinance annexing the subject property to the Town. In the event the Town Board considers and disapproves such ordinance, no similar request may be heard for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial. 
(Prior code 15-5; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1268 2) 
Sec. 15-1-60. - Final submission. 
    Following final Town Board approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
(Ord. 2017-1553 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-1553 ,  1, adopted Jan. 8, 2018, repealed the former  15-1-60 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  15-1-60 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2009-1344,  1. 
ARTICLE II - Master Plan Procedures 

Sec. 15-2-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish a procedure to provide for the master planning of property annexed to the Town pursuant to Article I of this Chapter. As provided in Article I of this Chapter, master planning in conjunction with the annexation of property is permissive but not required. The foregoing notwithstanding, the approval of a master plan shall be a condition precedent for the subdivision of property in the Town. 
(Ord. 2006-1268 1) 
Sec. 15-2-20. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
    In addition to other duties which may be imposed upon all applicants by this Code, all applicants shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(2)  The applicant shall consult with the Planning Department to discuss any special conditions pertaining to the master plan and to the master planning process as set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. 2006-1268 2) 
Sec. 15-2-30. - Preliminary steps. 
(a)  Procedure. The applicant shall submit in electronic format the master plan and all required supportive information as may be required by the Planning Department. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. Applicants shall pay the master plan fee then in effect as established by resolution of the Town Board. The Planning Department shall review all documents submitted for completeness and accuracy. 
(b)  Master plan. All master plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four by thirty-six (24  36) inches. The master plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the master plan. 
(3)  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the master plan. 
(4)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way for collector and arterial streets. 
(5)  On each land use-specific section of the plan, identify: 
a.  Projected acreage, minimum lot size and gross and net residential densities; 
b.  Projected acreage designated for parks, open space and other public and semi-public uses; 
c.  Projected acreage for industrial and commercial uses; and 
d.  All of these projected acreages must equal the total acreage of the parcel shown in the land use legend in Subparagraph (6)d. below. 
(6)  Land use legend showing: 
a.  Proposed gross and net residential densities; 
b.  Proposed acreage designated for each specific land use - parks, commercial, industrial, residential, other public and semi-public uses; streets, etc.; 
c.  Proposed zoning classifications; and 
d.  Total acreage of the parcel. 
(7)  Existing watercourses with adequate easements for flood control. 
(8)  Designation of all public sites to be reserved and dedicated. 
(9)  Existing two-foot contours. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Planning Department. 
(11)  Vicinity map. 
(12)  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all master plans, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: a) the date of each revision; b) the initials of the person who made the revision; and c) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the master plan. 
(c)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Town with the proposed master plan. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes: 
(1)  An application form provided by the Planning Department. In the event the application form is signed by an authorized representative, written evidence of such authorization shall likewise be provided. 
(2)  A general application overview form provided by the Planning Department. 
(3)  A deed or legal instrument identifying the applicant's interest in the property. 
(4)  A soils description and limitation report. 
(5)  A preliminary utility plan. Such utility plan shall include the size and location of all existing utility lines and facilities and the approximate size and location of all proposed utility lines and facilities. A table with estimates of peak hour and maximum day water and wastewater demands shall be included on the utility plan. 
(6)  A preliminary drainage plan showing flow patterns, including off-site contributions, detention and retention areas and discharge areas. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 2) 
Sec. 15-2-40. - Consideration of master plan approval. 
    Upon the submission of complete documentation in accordance with this Article, the request for the approval of the master plan shall be presented to the Planning Commission for recommendation to the Town Board. Thereafter, the Town Board may consider the approval of a resolution approving the master plan. 
(Ord. 2006-1268 2) 
Sec. 15-2-50. - Final submission. 
    Following final Town Board approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
(Ord. 2017-1553 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-1553 ,  1, adopted Jan. 8, 2018, repealed the former  15-2-50 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  15-2-50 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2009-1344,  2. 
ARTICLE III - Neighborhood Meetings 

Sec. 15-3-10. - Intent and purpose. 
    To facilitate citizen participation early in the development review process, proponents of land use proposals shall be required to conduct neighborhood meetings with citizens and organizations in the neighborhood affected by the proposal. 
(Ord. 2007-1298 1) 
Sec. 15-3-20. - Applicability. 
    Neighborhood meetings shall be required for all oil and gas, mineral extraction, annexation, major subdivision and rezoning applications. 
(Ord. 2011-1407 1) 
Sec. 15-3-30. - Timing and number of neighborhood meetings. 
(a)  For all land use proposals other than those under which oil and gas or mineral extraction activity is contemplated, a minimum of one (1) neighborhood meeting shall be held at least thirty (30) days prior to the first review of the land use proposal by the Planning Commission. The Director of Planning may require additional neighborhood meetings should the Director determine that proposals have substantially changed during the review process, thereby necessitating additional public input, or where other circumstances unique to the proposal require additional neighborhood meetings. 
(b)  For all land use proposals under which oil and gas or mineral extraction activity is contemplated, a minimum of one (1) neighborhood meeting shall be held before the proposal is scheduled for the first review of the land use proposal by the Planning Commission. The Director of Planning may require additional neighborhood meetings should the Director determine that proposals have substantially changed during the review process, thereby necessitating additional public input, or where other circumstances unique to the proposal require additional neighborhood meetings. 
(Ord. 2011-1407 2) 
Sec. 15-3-40. - Responsibilities and costs. 
    Proponents shall be responsible for public notification of the time, location and subject matter of the neighborhood meeting. Proponents shall likewise be responsible for conducting the meeting or meetings, preparing complete minutes thereof and providing evidence to the Planning Department of the scheduling, notice and conduct of all neighborhood meetings. Proponents shall bear all costs incurred in connection with the notification, conduct and reporting of neighborhood meetings as required by this Section. 
(Ord. 2007-1298 4) 
Sec. 15-3-50. - Location. 
    Neighborhood meetings shall be held at a public meeting facility within the Town. Such facilities may include, but shall not be limited to, public schools, the Community Recreation Center and the Town Hall. The proponent shall be responsible for all scheduling and for all facility rental fees, if applicable. 
(Ord. 2007-1298 5) 
Sec. 15-3-60. - Reserved. 
Sec. 15-3-70. - Content of neighborhood meetings. 
(a)  Proponents or their representatives shall present a summary of the land use proposal and shall be available to answer questions and receive comment from meeting attendees. A representative of the Planning Department may attend the meeting, but shall not organize or direct the meeting and shall be present solely for the purpose of gathering information and to explain the rules and regulations of the meeting. 
(b)  The proponents shall provide sign-in sheets so that all attendees may enter their name and address, although such entry shall not be a condition precedent to participation in the meeting. Copies of these sign-up sheets shall be filed with the Planning Department. 
(c)  The proponents shall prepare a written summary of the neighborhood meeting. The written summary shall be made a part of all proceedings on the land use proposal conducted either by the Planning Commission or the Town Board. At a minimum, the written summary shall include the dates and locations of all meetings, the number of attendees, a summary of comments and questions made at the meetings, including the substance of the comments and questions, the proponents' responses and a listing of comments and questions the applicant was unwilling or unable to answer or address, and the reasons therefor. This written summary shall be filed with the Planning Department at least twenty (20) days prior to the first review of the land use proposal conducted by either the Planning Commission or the Town Board. 
(d)  In the event there are no attendees at any meeting, the proponents shall notify the Planning Department of this fact in writing. The proponents shall then be deemed to have satisfied the neighborhood meeting requirement for that particular meeting. 
(Ord. 2007-1298 7) 
Sec. 15-3-80. - Additional regulations concerning neighborhood meetings. 
    The Director of Planning is hereby authorized to promulgate and adopt such additional regulations regarding neighborhood meetings as may be necessary to implement the purposes and intent of this Section. 
(Ord. 2007-1298 8) 
CHAPTER 16 - Zoning 
ARTICLE I - Purpose 

Sec. 16-1-10. - Declaration of purpose. 
    The regulations contained in this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements enacted to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Town. To these ends such regulations have been prepared in accordance with the Comprehensive Development Plan for the Town and are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to conserve the value of buildings; to encourage the most appropriate use of land; and to otherwise provide for the growth of an orderly and viable community. 
(Prior code 16-1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE II - Definitions and Usage 

Sec. 16-2-10. - Rules of construction of language. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, words used herein shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  The particular controls the general. 
(2)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Chapter and the heading of a section or subsection thereof, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense include the future unless the context clearly indicates the future tense. 
(5)  Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(Prior code 16-11; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-2-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Adhesive window advertising means any text, image or graphic which is affixed to either the interior or exterior window glass or door glass surface of any building, the purpose of which is to provide information or warning to the viewer. Such advertising includes window lettering, stickers, clinging film and similar products of no more than sixteen (16) mils in thickness. Adhesive window advertising is not a building-mounted sign under this Article. 
    Basement means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor is more than the vertical distance from normal grade to ceiling. 
    Building means any structure used, designed or intended for the roofed shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals or property. 
    Building, accessory means a detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land and which is located on the same lot with the main building or use and which is not intended for human habitation. 
    Building elevation means the building wall, face or facade as measured to the predominant roofline. For the purpose of sign calculations, the building elevation shall be considered a two-dimensional flat surface as depicted in a site plan drawing, with each building typically having four (4) elevations, regardless of architectural features. The predominant roofline shall not include architectural elements or appurtenances such as clock towers or cupolas. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from ground level to the highest point of the roof surface. Ground level shall be a reference plane representing the average of the finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest point within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the structure and a point six (6) feet from the building. The highest point of roof surface shall not include structures such as: 
a.  Chimneys, smokestacks or flues that cover no more than five percent (5%) of the horizontal surface area of the roof; 
b.  Cooling towers, ventilators and other similar equipment that cover no more than five percent (5%) of the horizontal surface area of the roof; 
c.  Elevator bulkheads and stairway enclosures; 
d.  Fire towers; 
e.  Utility poles and support structures; 
f.  Ornamental structures; or 
g.  Solar energy systems. 
    Business, freestanding means a business occupying a single-tenant building. 
    Clinic, medical or dental means a group of medical or dental offices organized as a unified facility to provide medical or dental treatment as contrasted with an unrelated group of such offices but not including bed-patient care. 
    Complete application means an application wherein all of the required information and submittal materials in the particulars required by this Code have been submitted to and received by the Town department or official specified in this Code, and the zoning officer of the Town or his or her designee has certified the application as complete. 
    Convenience center means a small group of retail stores and service establishments which serves a local neighborhood, including, by way of example but not of limitation, a food store, drug store, hardware store, barber shop, restaurant, shoe repair shop, gas station or Laundromat. 
    Dwelling, multifamily means a structure or portion thereof designed to house two (2) or more families, with each dwelling unit having a separate entrance. 
    Dwelling, single-family attached means a residential structure designed to house a single-family unit from lowest level to roof, with private outside entrance but not necessarily occupying a private lot, and sharing a common wall between adjoining dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, single-family detached means a residential structure designed to house a single-family unit with private outside entrance but without common walls between the dwelling units. 
    Dwelling unit means a housekeeping unit designed and used for occupancy by a single individual or a family containing cooking, living, sleeping and sanitary facilities and having a separate entrance. 
    Easement means an interest in land dedicated for a specified purpose such as, but not limited to, providing access for maintenance of utilities and/or the conveyance of drainage. 
    Enclosed storage facilities means facilities intended or used for the public or private keeping of personal property and which are fully screened from view from public and private streets and neighboring properties, and within which the keeping of personal property is the intended or actual principal use of the property. Enclosed storage facilities include, but are not limited to, fully enclosed storage units (i.e., structures consisting of four [4] walls and a roof). 
    Equivalent performance engineering basis means that, by using engineering calculations or testing, following commonly accepted engineering practices, all components and subsystems will perform to meet health, safety and functional requirements to the same extent as required single-family housing units. 
    Family means an individual living alone, or either of the following groups living together in a single dwelling unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities: 
a.  Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship, unless such number is otherwise specifically limited in this Code; or 
b.  Any unrelated group of persons consisting of (i) not more than four (4) persons; or (ii) not more than two (2) unrelated adults and their related children, if any. 
c.  This definition shall not include individuals living in small group living facilities as defined in this Code. 
    Farmers markets means the sale of agricultural products in a marketplace setting, consisting of multiple booths in a single location on consistent days of operation. 
    Flag means a piece of fabric identifying a single nation, state, municipality or quasi-governmental entity; or any organization of nations, states, municipalities or quasi-governmental entities; or any religious, civic or fraternal organizations, and does not contain a commercial message. 
    Front building corner of a principal structure means each of the two (2) corners of the widest portion of the foundation of the principal structure that face and are parallel to the right-of-way line which defines the front yard (see front yard ). 
    Front yard means the horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the right-of-way line and that right-of-way line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the right-of-way line. The front yard of a corner lot shall be that yard which contains the front lot line marking the boundary between the lot and the shorter of the two (2) abutting street segments, except as otherwise specified by deed restrictions, and usually, but not always, that portion of the yard which is situated in front of the building elevation that contains the building address. 
    Gasoline service station means a place where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, and including facilities for greasing, oiling, washing and minor repair of vehicles on the premises but not including major automatic car washing or any body repair facilities. 
    Gross leasable area (GLA) means the total floor area of commercial buildings, which floor area is designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. 
    Home occupation means a gainful occupation conducted by members of a household within its place of residence and incidental to the residential use of the premises. 
    Hospital means an institution intended primarily for the medical diagnosis, treatment and care of patients being given medical treatment. A hospital shall be distinguished from a clinic by virtue of providing for bed-patient care. 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging with or without meals is offered for compensation but not including kitchen facilities in individual rooms. 
    Individual sewage disposal system means any sewage disposal system not connected to the public sewer system serving no more than one (1) lot and approved and authorized by the Town, the State Department of Health, and any other appropriate state or local agency. 
    Kennel means any establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding, training, selling or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, not, however, including veterinary hospitals, veterinary clinics, veterinary offices or pet shops. If the occupants of any dwelling unit harbor more than four (4) dogs over the age of six (6) months, such occupants shall be deemed to be operating a kennel. 
    Large-scale tenant means any commercial or industrial use that exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross leasable area (GLA). 
    Lot means a single parcel of contiguous land occupied or intended to be occupied by such structures and uses as permitted under this Chapter, together with the open spaces required by this Chapter and abutting on a public street or officially approved way. 
    Lot area means the area of contiguous land bounded by lot lines, exclusive of land provided for public thoroughfare. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
    Major tenant means any use that (1) exceeds 5,000 square feet of gross leasable area (GLA) and (2) if part of a multiple tenant building, the use is the largest tenant, in terms of GLA, in the building that it occupies. 
    Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling which: 
a.  Is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory; 
b.  Is not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in length; 
c.  Is installed on an engineered permanent foundation: 
d.  Has brick, wood, masonite or a cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof; 
e.  Meets or exceeds on an equivalent performance engineering basis standards established by the Building Code of the Town. 
f.  Is certified pursuant to the "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974," 42 U.S.C.  5401, et seq., as amended. 
    Minor tenant means any use that (1) contains gross leasable area (GLA) equal to or less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and (2) if part of a multiple tenant building, the use is not the largest tenant, in terms of GLA, in the building that it occupies. 
    Mobile home means a single-family dwelling which: 
a.  Is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory; 
b.  Is designed for longer-term residential use; 
c.  Is not less than eight (8) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in length; 
d.  Meets or exceeds on an equivalent performance engineering basis standards established by the Building Code of the Town. 
e.  Is certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C.  5401, et seq., as amended. 
    Motel means a building or series of buildings in which lodging is offered for compensation and which is distinguished from a hotel primarily by reason of providing direct independent access to and adjoining parking for each rental unit. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot which does not conform to the lot size regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure which does not conform to the building location regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use of land means a use of any land in a way which does not conform to the use, density or open space regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use of structure means a use carried on within any building which does not conform to the use or density regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Offset means the horizontal distance between any structure and a lot line, other than a street right-of-way line. 
    Off-street parking space means the area on a lot designed to accommodate a parked motor vehicle as an accessory service to the use of said lot and with adequate access thereto from the public street. 
    Oil and gas facility shall include an oil or gas well, a hole drilled for the purpose of producing oil or gas, a well into which fluids are injected, or storage, separation, treating, dehydration, artificial lift, power supply, compression, pumping, metering, monitoring, flow lines and other equipment directly associated with oil wells, gas wells or injection wells. 
    Open house means a temporary event intended to market or advertise the sale of the property at which the open house is located. 
    Open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials means the extraction of construction materials, such as rock, clay, silt, sand, gravel, limestone, dimension stone, marble or shale. 
    Open space includes lawn area, decorative rock, plant material, pavers and landscaped areas. Open space does not include any structures built upon or over the property, including but not limited to: detached garages, carports, sheds, gazebos, pergolas, decks, patios, impervious surfaces, concrete or asphalt driveways, parking areas or pedestrian pathways. 
    Ornamental structure means an attached or unattached steeple, bell tower or other uninhabited architectural feature associated with a large or small place of assembly. 
    Other similar uses means land uses that are determined by the Director of Planning (Director) to be similar in nature, characteristic and impact to those uses that are specifically enumerated under the use regulations within specific zoning districts. If, in the opinion of the Director, any such other similar use as defined herein has the potential of causing imminent harm to the health, safety and welfare of the public, public hearings shall be advertised and scheduled before the Planning Commission and the Town Board. The purpose of such public hearings shall be consideration of any reasonable conditions necessary to mitigate any potential imminent harm to the health, safety and welfare of the public implicated by such use. 
    Outdoor recreational facilities means land and structures, along with accessory equipment, designed and utilized for leisure-time activities of a predominantly outdoor nature and of more specific purposes than passive park-like open areas and further classified as follows: 
a.  Public - Facilities owned and operated by a governmental agency for limited or general public use. 
b.  Private commercial - Facilities owned and operated by an individual or group for profit as a business, whether or not open to general public use. 
c.  Private group - Facilities owned and operated by a group for the exclusive use of the members of such group and their guests and not for profit as a business. 
d.  Private residential - Facilities owned by an individual, located on the same lot as or an adjoining lot to his or her residence and intended solely for the use of his or her family and guests. 
    Outdoor storage, accessory means any outdoor keeping of personal property that is normally auxiliary to the principal industrial use. 
    Parapet means an extended wall or false building front above a roofline. 
    Parking lot means a group of off-street parking spaces which is designed to be used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles. As used in this Section, any such group of off-street parking spaces shall not include any part of any street or alley and shall not include any off-street storage areas for industrial uses which are (a) authorized by the Town through the site-planning process, and (b) shown on the site plan for the respective industrial development. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
    Place of assembly (large) means a building with a seating capacity exceeding four hundred (400) persons, located adjacent to one (1) or more major collector or arterial streets, and intended to be used entirely, or in part, for the gathering together for such purposes as presentations, deliberation, entertainment, amusement or awaiting transportation services. Such uses shall include, but shall not be limited to, religious institutions, lodges, community halls, community centers, funeral parlors and funeral homes, libraries, museums, municipal buildings, meeting halls, auditoriums and theaters. 
    Place of assembly (small) means a building with a seating capacity not to exceed four hundred (400) persons, intended to be used entirely, or in part, for the gathering together for such purposes as presentations, deliberation, entertainment, amusement or awaiting transportation services. Such uses shall include, but shall not be limited to, religious institutions, lodges, community halls, community centers, funeral parlors and funeral homes, libraries, museums, municipal buildings and meeting halls. 
    Private lodge or club means a structure or grounds used for regular or periodical meetings or gatherings of a group of persons organized for a nonprofit purpose but not groups organized to render a service customarily carried on as a business. 
    Professional office means the office of a doctor, dentist, architect, engineer, lawyer or other similar recognized profession. 
    Real estate signage means a temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of the property or premises upon which it is located. 
    Religious institution means any building used for nonprofit purposes by an established religious organization holding either tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or applicable state law, where such building is intended to be used as a place of worship. 
    Retail store means a commercial establishment for the sale of material goods or commodities in relatively small quantities directly to the consumer. 
    Seasonal sales means temporary sales of a product or service which is holiday-specific, such as Christmas tree sales, Halloween pumpkin sales and the like, whether or not such product or service is offered for distribution from a temporary structure. 
    Seasonal sales permit means any approval for seasonal sales issued by the Director of Planning pursuant to the provision of Chapter 16, Article XXXII of this Code, and any approved renewals thereof. 
    Setback means the horizontal distance between any structure and the established street right-of-way line. 
    Sign means any structure or part thereof or any device attached to a structure or any other form of visual communication applied by paint, illumination, embossing or other technique to a structure for the purpose of directing advertising, informing, warning or otherwise conveying information visually to the viewer. 
    Sign, directional means a sign intended solely for the purpose of guiding or directing pedestrian or vehicular traffic within an establishment and not including promotional advertising unnecessary to such directional purpose. Examples of directional signs include "entrance," "exit," "no parking" or "loading only" and other similar directives. Directional signs shall not count toward the overall total number of signs on the site due to their informational nature as opposed to signs used for promotion or advertising. 
    Sign, individual letter means signs which consist of individual letters that are mounted to a wall, or individual letters mounted to a "raceway" base to be mounted to a wall, which utilize the building wall as the background, or freestanding individual letters that are mounted to a monument base. 
    Sign, off-premises means a sign not directly related to the use of the premises on which such off-premises sign is located. 
    Sign, regulatory traffic means traffic control and informational signage typically erected or required to be erected by government agencies such as the Town or the Colorado Department of Transportation. 
    Sign, teardrop means a lightweight, vertically oriented, freestanding, tapered banner-type sign not exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height from the base to the top of the sign. 
    Small group living facilities means state-licensed group homes for the developmentally disabled or mentally ill, nonprofit or owner-occupied group homes for the aged as defined in Section 31-23-303(2), C.R.S., wherein not more than eight (8) unrelated individuals are living together in a single dwelling unit with common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and all facilities for the preparation and serving of food within the dwelling unit. None of the residents of small group living facilities shall receive on-site medical or psychological treatment, therapy or counseling, but some or all of the residents may receive physical assistance with day-to-day living activities. 
    Street means a public or private right-of-way usually affording primary access to abutting property. 
    Street frontage means that portion of a legal lot which abuts a designated public or private street. For the purpose of overall development identification sign calculations, the street frontage shall be calculated as the street frontage that abuts a street classified as an arterial or collector adjacent to the property upon which the overall development is located. 
    Structure means a combination of materials, other than natural terrain or plant growth, erected or constructed to form a shelter, enclosure, retainer, window well, container, support, base or decoration. The word structure includes buildings. 
    Structure, principal means the structure on a lot in which the principal use is conducted (see use, principal). 
    Subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage means the advertisement of a subdivision under construction. 
    Telecommuting means the conduct of business-like activities in a residential dwelling unit that: 
a.  Is clearly incidental to and is associated with a specific employment activity which has its primary address elsewhere; 
b.  Does not include business activities such as visits to the dwelling unit by vendors, customers or clients; and 
c.  Does not entail any commercial shipping and/or receiving activities being conducted at the dwelling unit. 
    Use, accessory means a use subordinate to and customarily incidental to the permitted principal use of the property or buildings and located upon the same lot as the principal use. 
    Use, legal nonconforming means a building or premises lawfully used or occupied at the time of the passage of this Chapter or amendments thereto, which use or occupancy does not conform to the regulations of this Chapter or the amendments thereto. 
    Use, permitted means the utilization of land by occupancy, activity, building or other structure which is specifically enumerated as permissible by the regulations of the zoning district in which said land is located. 
    Use, principal means the main or primary use of property or structures as permitted on such lot by the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Prior code 16-12; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1232 1; Ord. 2006-1233 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1321 A; Ord. 2008-1336 1; Ord. 2009-1344 3; Ord. 2010-1370 1, 2; Ord. 2010-1372 1, 2; Ord. 2010-1386 1; Ord. 2011-1404 2; Ord. 2011-1406 1; Ord. 2011-1420 1, 2; Ord. 2012-1429 1; Ord. 2012-1434 1) 
ARTICLE III - Establishment of Districts 

Sec. 16-3-10. - Official Zoning District Map. 
(a)  The Town is hereby divided into zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning District Map of the Town, which, together with all explanatory material thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. 
(b)  The Official Zoning District Map, which shall be located in the office of the Town Clerk, shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk, and shall bear the seal of the Town under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning District Map referred to in Section 16-3-10 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town," together with the date of adoption of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-21; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-3-20. - Changes in Official Zoning District Map. 
(a)  If, in accordance with the amendment provisions of this Chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters shown on the Official Zoning District Map, such changes shall be made promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Town Board, together with an entry on the Official Zoning District Map noting the date of the change and a brief description of the nature of the change, which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk. The amending ordinance shall provide that such changes or amendments shall not become effective until they have been duly entered upon the Official Zoning District Map. No amendment to this Chapter which involves matter shown on the Official Zoning District map shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on said map. 
(b)  No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning District Map or matters shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this Chapter and punishable as provided in this Code. 
(Prior code 16-22; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-3-30. - Replacement of official map. 
    In the event that the Official Zoning District Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of nature or number of changes and additions, the Town Board may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning District Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning District Map. The new Official Zoning District Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning District Map but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Zoning Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereto. 
(Prior code 16-23; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-3-40. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways shall be construed as following such center lines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be construed as following such Town limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers or canals shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(7)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Paragraphs (1) through (6) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning District Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(8)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning District Map or in circumstances not covered by Paragraphs (1) through (7) above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(Prior code 16-24; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE IV - Administration and Enforcement 

Sec. 16-4-10. - Zoning Officer. 
(a)  The Zoning Officer designated by the Town Board shall administer and enforce this Chapter. The Zoning Officer may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the Town Board may direct. 
(b)  If the Zoning Officer shall find that any of the provisions of this Chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Zoning Officer shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto, or discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or take any other action authorized by this Code to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Prior code 16-31; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-4-20. - Building permits. 
    No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, remodeled, repaired, structurally altered or any work accomplished or undertaken subject to the requirements of Chapter 18 without obtaining a permit therefor, issued by the Zoning Officer. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Code, except after written order from the Board of Adjustment. 
(Prior code 16-32; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-4-30. - Application for building permit. 
(a)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by documents, plans and information as listed on the building permit application in effect at the time of submittal. To ensure the health, safety and welfare of the community, the Building Official has the authority to amend the building permit application submittal requirements at any time. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning Officer after he or she has marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to the same by his or her signature on such copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Zoning Officer. 
(c)  An application for a building permit shall be deemed complete as defined by this Code when: 
(1)  All of the required information and submittal materials, as listed on the building permit application in effect at the time of submittal, have been submitted to and received by the Zoning Officer; 
(2)  All plan review, administrative and building permit fees are paid as set by resolution by the Town Board; and 
(3)  The Zoning Officer has certified the application as complete. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 3) 
Sec. 16-4-40. - Expiration of building permit. 
(a)  If the work described in any building permit has not begun within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire. 
(b)  Subsequent to building permit issuance, if no work is performed for a period of one hundred eighty (180) continuous days, said permit shall expire. In order to verify progress of work, a building inspection is required. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 4) 
Sec. 16-4-45. - Nonobstruction of easements. 
    No structure shall encroach into any easement, and no building permit shall be issued for any structure which is proposed for location within any easement. 
(Ord. 2011-1420 3) 
Sec. 16-4-50. - Compliance with approved plans and applications. 
    Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Officer authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Prior code 16-35; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-4-60. - Public hearings. 
(a)  No regulation, restriction or boundary of this Chapter shall become effective, nor shall any such regulation, restriction or boundary be amended until after a public hearing thereon, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application, petition or other document, the designated hearing authority shall set a date for a public hearing for the purpose of affording the public an opportunity to be heard on the subject matter of the application, petition or document seeking regulation restriction or amendment under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-36; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1271 1; Ord. 2008-1321 G; Ord. 2010-1382 3) 
Sec. 16-4-70. - Neighborhood meetings. 
    Neighborhood meetings shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 15, Article III of this Code. 
(Ord. 2007-1298) 
ARTICLE V - Amendments 

Sec. 16-5-10. - Authority to amend. 
    The Town Board may amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and district boundaries set forth in this Chapter, after public notice and hearing as provided in Section 16-31-10 of this Chapter and after first submitting the proposal to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall submit a written recommendation to the Town Board within forty-five (45) days after receipt of such submittal. Upon failure of the Planning Commission to submit a recommendation within forty-five (45) days, the Town Board may amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and district boundaries set forth in this Chapter, after public notice and hearing as provided in Section 16-31-10. 
(Ord. 2010-1382 4) 
Sec. 16-5-20. - Rezoning applications. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide a procedure for changing the existing zone classification of a parcel of land within the Town. 
(b)  Responsibilities of applicant. 
(1)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings when the request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(2)  The applicant shall meet with the Planning Department to obtain a rezoning petition and to discuss the requirements of rezoning. 
(c)  Preliminary submission to Planning Commission. 
(1)  Procedure. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department in electronic format, as specified by the Town, the rezoning petition, the review fee as established by resolution of the Town Board, the preliminary rezoning map and the required supportive information. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. Such submission shall allow the Planning Department to schedule consideration of the rezoning proposal by the Planning Commission. 
a.  The Planning Department shall distribute application materials to the appropriate referral agencies and offices. 
b.  The Planning Department shall submit the rezoning petition, rezoning map and required supportive information to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing on the request as provided in Section 16-4-60 of this Chapter. The Planning Commission shall submit a written recommendation to the Town Board within the time limit fixed by Section 16-5-10 above. 
(2)  Preliminary rezoning map and data shall be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Town. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. All rezoning maps shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scales to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, shall be on one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four by thirty-six (24  36) inches and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
b.  A legal description of the area proposed for rezoning, including total acreage. 
c.  Each ownership within and adjacent to the property. 
d.  Existing and proposed zone classification. 
e.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
f.  A description of all developed on-site property, including its use and total acreage. 
g.  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted with the rezoning map: 
a.  Complete rezoning petition. 
b.  List of names and mailing addresses of owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the area for which rezoning is requested. 
c.  A statement regarding the justification for rezoning. 
(d)  Final submission to Town Board. 
(1)  Procedure. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department in electronic format, as specified by the Town, the final rezoning map a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Board. 
a.  The Town Board shall give notice and hold a public hearing on the rezoning request as provided in Section 16-4-60 of this Chapter. 
b.  If the rezoning request is approved, the ordinance affecting the rezoning shall become effective thirty (30) days after publication. The official zoning map of the Town shall be changed only upon the approval of the Town Board, in accordance with Section 16-3-20 of this Chapter. 
(2)  Final rezoning map. The final rezoning map shall conform to the preliminary rezoning map as approved. Appropriate certification blocks as required by the Town shall appear on the final rezoning map. 
(3)  Following final Town Board approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 5; Ord. 2017-1553 2) 
Sec. 16-5-30. - Protest of amendments. 
    In case of a protest against a proposed change, signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending one hundred (100) feet therefrom or of those directly opposite thereto extending one hundred (100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Town Board. 
(Prior code 16-53; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE VI - Board of Adjustment and Variances 

Sec. 16-6-10. - Membership. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members, to be appointed by the Town Board. Appointments to the Board of Adjustment shall be for terms of four (4) years. Members of the Board of Adjustment shall be residents of the Town and shall serve without pay. If any member ceases to reside in the Town, his or her membership shall immediately terminate. The initial appointment of alternate members to the Board of Adjustment shall be for staggered terms, the first appointment being for two (2) years, and the second appointment for four (4) years, with the terms of the alternate members being four (4) years thereafter. Alternate members of the Board of Adjustment shall serve in the absence of regular members. 
(b)  No member of the Board of Adjustment shall be eligible to serve on any other board or commission of the Town during that member's tenure on the Board of Adjustment. 
(c)  Members of the Board of Adjustment may be removed from office by the Town Board for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance, upon written notice and after public hearing. 
(d)  The Town Board shall make such appointments as necessary to fill the unexpired terms of vacancies which may occur on the Board of Adjustment, giving preference to alternate members when filling regular member vacancies. 
(Prior code 16-61; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-6-20. - Proceedings. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this Chapter. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(Prior code 16-62; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-6-30. - Decisions of the Board of Adjustment. 
(a)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Officer of the Town or to grant a variance or otherwise decide in favor of an applicant on any matter considered by the Board of Adjustment under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  The Board of Adjustment shall set forth all decisions in writing, including grounds therefor, within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been made at the public meeting where the matter was considered. 
(Prior code 16-63; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-6-40. - Appellate power. 
    The Board of Adjustment is empowered to hear and decide appeals when an error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Officer of the Town in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-64; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-6-50. - Appellate procedure. 
(a)  Filing. 
(1)  Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department or board of the Town affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer of the Town. 
(2)  Such appeals shall be taken within forty-five (45) days of the decision of the Zoning Officer and shall be filed with the Town Clerk in writing, together with the required application fee, to be set by resolution of the Town Board. The Town Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment the application, any materials submitted with the application and all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
(b)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him or her that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, to stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(c)  Hearing. The Board of Adjustment shall give notice and hold a public hearing on the appeal as provided in Section 16-4-60. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by attorney at law representing him or her. 
(Prior code 16-65; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-6-60. - Variances. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustment is empowered to grant variances from the regulations and provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  A variance, if granted, will constitute a change in the zoning provisions of this Chapter as distinct from a conditional use grant which allows for inclusion within the zones established by this Chapter certain anticipated uses of a unique nature or character justified by temporary conditions. Variances may be considered where, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. Variances will not be granted contrary to the public interest and will only be considered when the spirit of this Chapter can be observed and public safety and welfare secured. 
(c)  For the purposes of this Article, unnecessary hardship shall be defined as a situation where the property cannot be reasonably used under the conditions allowed by this Code. The situation shall result from circumstances unique to the property and shall not be created by the landowner. The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the surrounding neighborhood. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute an unnecessary hardship if a reasonable use for the property exists under the provisions of this Code. It is the responsibility of the landowner to prove that an unnecessary hardship exists. 
(Prior code 16-66; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1241 1) 
Sec. 16-6-70. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Application. An application for a variance shall be submitted to the Town Clerk in writing, together with the required application fee. 
(b)  Determination by Board of Adjustment. The Town shall give notice and hold a public hearing on all variance applications in accordance with Section 16-31-10 of this Chapter. The Board of Adjustment shall consider the application for variance at said public meeting. 
(Prior code 16-67; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2010-1382 5) 
Sec. 16-6-80. - Conditions on granting variances. 
    In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions and requirements with respect to location, construction, maintenance and operation in addition to any which may be stipulated by this Chapter as deemed necessary for the protection of the adjacent properties and the public interest and welfare. Violation of such conditions and requirements, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Code. Any variance approval with conditions requiring affirmative action by the applicant prior to the variance becoming effective shall remain valid for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date the Board of Adjustment approves the variance and imposes the conditions requiring affirmative action. It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to satisfy all such conditions of approval within the eighteen-month period, or the grant of variance shall be deemed null and void. 
(Prior code 16-68; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1252 1) 
Sec. 16-6-90. - Zoning officer authorized to administratively approve minor variances. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is to allow the zoning officer to administratively grant minor variances up to a maximum of ten percent (10%) or as noted from zoning district standards in cases where an unintended deviation therefrom exists relative to existing structures or existing lots. Relief under this Section shall not be available for the following: 
(1)  Any application for proposed construction. 
(2)  A building permit application. 
(3)  A plot plan application. 
(4)  An improvement location certificate. 
(5)  Any minor variance that would result in any of the following: 
a.  An increase in permitted maximum development density or intensity. 
b.  A change in permitted uses or mix of uses. 
c.  A decrease in the amount of required open space or landscaping. 
d.  A conflict with another requirement. 
e.  An additional or subsequent minor variance request. 
f.  A lot line adjustment, minor subdivision or subdivision. 
(b)  Application. The applicant shall submit to the zoning officer a variance application, together with such supporting documentation as the zoning officer may require, and a variance application fee. 
(c)  Appeal. The zoning officer shall review the application and initially determine whether or not the application is eligible for relief under this Section. In the event the zoning officer determines that the application should be denied, appeal of the zoning officer's decision to the Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(d)  Notice. Notice of the variance request shall be provided to adjacent neighboring property owners pursuant to within three hundred (300) feet of any boundary of the subject property, at the time the application is accepted by the Town. The notice shall state that any comments or objections must be received by the Planning Department within ten (10) days of the date of the Notice. If an objection is received by the Town, the applicant shall address the objection within ten (10) days of the Notice of Objection provided to the applicant by the Town. If the objection cannot be resolved within the ten ( 10) days, the variance request shall be forwarded to the Board of Adjustment for a decision. 
(e)  Approval criteria. Upon complete submission of the application as aforesaid and approval thereof by the zoning officer, the zoning officer shall grant the minor variance unless it is in conflict with either the goals of the Comprehensive Plan or the purposes of the zoning code. Administrative approval of minor variances shall be limited as follows: 
1.  Setback or offset: A reduction in distance of ten percent (10%) or one (1) foot, whichever is Jess. 
2.  Maximum building height: An increase in height of ten percent (10%) or one (1) foot whichever is less. 
3.  Distance between structures: ten percent (10%) or one (1) foot reduction, whichever is less, subject to requirements of the International Building Code. 
4.  Lot area: two percent (2%) reduction in the minimum lot area required. 
5.  Lot Coverage: two percent (2%) increase in the maximum lot coverage. 
6.  A variance is necessary to correct a legally established condition. 
(Ord. 2018-1569 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-1569 ,  1, adopted Aug. 13, 2018, repealed the former  16-6-90 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  16-6-90 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code 16-76; Ord. 2004-1193,  1; and Ord. 2006-1236,  1. 
ARTICLE VII - Conditional Use Grants 

Sec. 16-7-10. - Intent of conditional use grants. 
    The conditional use classification is intended to allow consideration of uses which are unique in nature or character and, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, not specifically included as uses by right in any specific zoning districts. It is the specific intent of this Article, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, to prohibit the granting of conditional uses in any zone when such use is allowed as a use by right in any other zone. 
(Ord. 2012-1436 1) 
Sec. 16-7-20. - Approval of conditional use grants. 
(a)  Subject to final approval and acceptance by the Town Board, uses listed as conditional uses may be permitted upon a petition to the Planning Commission for a conditional use grant and subject to approval by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall base its determination on general considerations as to the effect of such permit on the health, safety, welfare and economic prosperity of the Town and specifically on the effect of such use upon the immediate neighborhood in which it would be located, including the considerations listed in Section 16-7-50 below. 
(b)  An application for a conditional use grant pursuant to Paragraph 16-20-20(d)(4) of this Code shall be referred for determination of approval and acceptance to the Town Board within ninety (90) days of the Zoning Officer's determination that the application therefor is complete in all respects, unless the applicant voluntarily and expressly waives the deadline set forth in this Subsection. 
(Ord. 2010-1395 1) 
Sec. 16-7-30. - Application to existing uses. 
    A use which existed lawfully on a lot at the time said lot was placed in a district where such use would be permitted only upon approval of a conditional use grant shall automatically be granted conditional use status. In such cases, the grant of conditional use status shall be based upon the existing conditions at that time, and any expansion or change in use shall require changing of the conditional use grant. Petition may be made at any time for expansion or other change of the conditional use grant, and such petition shall not prejudice the existing grant as herein authorized. 
(Ord. 2006-1232 2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-7-40. - Termination of conditional uses. 
    Where a permitted conditional use does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the original approval or where a use is no longer compatible with the surrounding area, the conditional use grant may be terminated by the Town Board upon referral to the Planning Commission and public hearing thereon. Such use shall thereafter be classified as a legal nonconforming use; except that, where the action is due to failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use grant, the Town Board may require complete termination of the use. 
(Ord. 2006-1232 2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-7-50. - Standards and requirements for conditional use grants. 
(a)  Approval of a conditional use grant shall be based on the evaluation of such factors as the following: 
(1)  The character and quality of the area in which the use will be located. 
(2)  The physical appearance of the use, including suitability of architectural and landscaping treatment. 
(3)  Appropriate location of the building or buildings on the lot. 
(4)  Adequate provision of parking, loading and circulation facilities. 
(5)  Potential effect of the use upon off-site vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation, with particular reference to potential traffic congestion. 
(6)  Potential effect of the use on storm drainage in the area. 
(7)  Adequacy of planting screens where necessary. 
(8)  Provision of operational controls where necessary to avoid hazardous conditions or eliminate potential air or water pollutants or other noxious influences. 
(9)  The general compatibility of the proposed use with the area in which it is to be located. 
(b)  Conformity with regulations. Except as may be specifically otherwise provided, any conditional use shall conform to the lot size, building location, building size, open space and height limitation regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Uses and structures accessory to a principal conditional use shall be subject to appropriate regulations in the same manner as herein set forth for the principal conditional use. 
(Ord. 2006-1232 2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-7-60. - Oil and gas facilities. 
(a)  Oil and gas facilities, as defined in this Chapter, shall be permitted as a conditional use in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Oil and gas facilities as conditional uses shall be subject to approval by the Town Board of the conditions hereinafter specifically set forth in lieu of those conditions applicable to conditional uses generally, as set forth in Section 16-7-50 of this Article. 
(c)  Based upon specific site characteristics, which shall include but shall not be limited to: nature and proximity of adjacent development; prevailing weather patterns, including wind direction; vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; and topography of the site, the Town Board may, as a condition of approval of any conditional use grant, require any or all of the following methods to mitigate adverse impacts on surrounding properties: 
(1)  Visual requirements. To the maximum extent practical, abatement of negative visual impacts of oil and gas facilities shall be addressed through one (1) or more of the following methods: 
a.  Use structures of minimal size to satisfy present and future functional requirements. 
b.  The facilities shall be kept clean and otherwise properly maintained. 
c.  Construction of buildings or other enclosures may be required where facilities create visual impacts that cannot be mitigated because of proximity, density and/or intensity of adjacent residential land use. 
(2)  Landscape requirements. Groundcover, shrubs and trees shall be established and maintained in order to adequately buffer the facility. 
(3)  Floodplain requirements. The oil and gas facilities shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations when located in a regulatory floodway or a special flood hazard area. All equipment at oil and gas facilities located within a special flood hazard area shall be anchored as necessary to prevent flotation, lateral movement or collapse. Any activity or equipment at any oil and gas facility within a special flood hazard area shall comply with the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), 44 C.F.R. Parts 59, 60, 65 and 70, and shall not endanger the eligibility of residents of the Town to obtain federal flood insurance. 
(Ord. 2006-1232 2; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2010-1372 5) 
Sec. 16-7-70. - Open or surface mining operations for development or extraction of solid materials. 
(a)  Open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials (surface mining), as defined in this Chapter, shall be permitted as a conditional use in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Surface mining as a conditional use shall be subject to approval by the Town Board of the conditions hereinafter specifically set forth in lieu of those conditions applicable to conditional uses generally, as set forth in Section 16-7-50 of this Article. 
(c)  Based upon specific site characteristics, which shall include but shall not be limited to: nature and proximity of adjacent development; prevailing weather patterns, including wind direction; vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; and topography of the site, the Town Board may, as a condition of approval of any conditional use grant, require any or all of the following methods to mitigate adverse impacts on surrounding properties, water quality, soil stability, wildlife and vegetation, geologic hazards, cultural and historic resources and recreational resources: 
(1)  Hours of operation. Hours of operation may be defined in order to mitigate negative impacts on neighboring properties. 
(2)  Noise mitigation. Noise mitigation measures may be defined in a noise mitigation plan. 
(3)  Dust mitigation. Dust mitigation measures may be defined in a dust mitigation plan. 
(4)  Haul routes. Based upon the specific site location, specific haul routes may be defined in order to mitigate negative traffic impacts. 
(5)  Transportation infrastructure improvements. Based upon the specific site location, certain transportation infrastructure improvements may be necessary to safely integrate the increased truck traffic with the surrounding traffic patterns. Improvements may include, but may not be limited to: dedicated acceleration and deceleration lanes, dedicated turn lanes, roadway expansion, traffic signalization, etc. 
(6)  Visual requirements. To the maximum extent practical, abatement of negative visual impacts of surface mining shall be addressed through one (1) or more of the following methods: 
a.  Use structures of minimal size to satisfy present and future functional requirements. 
b.  The facilities shall be kept clean and otherwise properly maintained. 
c.  Construction of buildings or other enclosures may be required where facilities create visual impacts that cannot be mitigated because of proximity, density and/or intensity of adjacent residential land use. 
(7)  Landscape requirements. 
a.  In accordance with the Town's landscape requirements, groundcover, shrubs and trees shall be established and maintained in order to adequately buffer the facility during the mining activity, as well as in conjunction with reclamation plans. 
b.  In addition to minimum landscape requirements associated with any reclamation plan, the Town shall require that any reclaimed reservoir be landscaped in accordance with the Town's landscape requirements. 
c.  In addition to minimum landscape requirements associated with any reclamation plan, the Town shall require that any reclaimed reservoir be designed and shaped to include curvilinear shore lines, islands and other amenities in order to appear as naturally occurring ponds. 
(8)  Fencing. A fencing plan shall be submitted for review based upon: 
a.  Security and safety needs of the mining operation. 
b.  Quality and aesthetic compatibility with the neighboring properties. 
(9)  Floodplain requirements. The surface mining activities and facilities shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations when located in a regulatory floodway or a special flood hazard area. All equipment at surface mining facilities located within a special flood hazard area shall be anchored as necessary to prevent flotation, lateral movement or collapse. Any activity or equipment at any surface mining facility within a special flood hazard area shall comply with the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), 44 C.F.R. Parts 59, 60, 65 and 70, and shall not endanger the eligibility of residents of the Town to obtain federal flood insurance. 
(Ord. 2010-1372 6) 
Sec. 16-7-80. - Small group living facilities. 
    Small group living facilities, as defined in this Chapter, shall be permitted as a conditional use in all residential zoning districts. Such conditional use shall be subject to approval by the Town Board of the conditions hereinafter specifically set forth, rather than those conditions applicable to conditional uses generally as set forth in Section 16-7-50 of this Article. 
(1)  Such conditional use shall conform to the lot size, building location, building size, open space, height limitations, setback limitations, lot coverage limitations and exterior signage requirements applicable to this District. Such conditional use shall be architecturally compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)  Such conditional use shall not permit the conducting of ministerial activities of any private or public organization or agency, or the rendering of services in a manner substantially inconsistent with the activities otherwise permitted in this District. 
(3)  Appropriate consideration shall be given to the specific location of the small group home facility and the availability and proximity of commercial services, transportation and public recreation facilities. 
(4)  Such conditional use shall comply with all applicable regulations of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment or other state or local regulations pertaining to the proposed conditional use. 
(5)  Adequate provision for parking, loading and circulation facilities. 
(6)  Evaluation of the operator of the proposed small group living facility for the purposes of ensuring the cleanliness and safety of the residents of the facility and a minimum level of comfort for such residents. 
(Ord. 2010-1372 7) 
Sec. 16-7-85. - Home occupations involving tutoring or instruction. 
    Pursuant to Section 16-10-20(1)(i), home occupations involving tutoring or instruction are limited to instructing two (2) students at any one time without the approval of a conditional use grant. Additional students shall be permitted as a conditional use in all residential zoning districts. In addition to those conditions applicable to conditional uses generally as set forth in Section 16-7-50, every conditional use grant for tutoring of more than two (2) students shall be subject to approval by the Town Board of the conditions specifically set forth herein. 
    Any conditional use grant for instruction or tutoring of more than two (2) students shall: 
(1)  Be limited to tutoring or instruction of children under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
(2)  Not exceed eight (8) students present at the dwelling unit at any one (1) time; 
(3)  Have available one (1) on-site parking space for every two (2) students present at the dwelling at any one (1) time; 
(4)  Be limited to hours of operation between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; 
(5)  Be limited to no more than fifteen (15) hours per week of instruction; 
(6)  Comply with all State of Colorado child care licensing requirements, including requirements for licensing exemption status; and 
(7)  Be subject to inspection in order to ensure that all applicable building and fire codes are met. 
(Ord. 2016-1518 ) 
Sec. 16-7-90. - Procedure for conditional use grants. 
(a)  Filing. A petition for a conditional use grant shall be submitted in writing and filed with the Town Clerk, who shall promptly refer such petition to the Planning Commission. Such petition shall be accompanied by building site and operational plans and by such other data and information as necessary for proper evaluation of the request. 
(b)  Decision. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a determination and set forth its decision in writing, indicating conditions of approval or, if the petition is disapproved, indicating the reasons for disapproval. The determination of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted forthwith in writing to the Town Board, which shall, at the next regular meeting, finally approve or disapprove the decision of the Planning Commission. 
(c)  Recording. When a conditional use grant is approved, such approval shall be appropriately noted on building permits and zoning certificates. 
(Ord. 2010-1372 8; Ord. 2010-1382 3) 
ARTICLE VIII - General Application of Regulations 

Sec. 16-8-10. - Compliance with regulations. 
    Within the Town, the use of any land, the size and placement of lots, the use, location and type of structure thereon and the provision of open spaces shall be in compliance with the regulations established herein and made applicable to the district or districts in which such land or structure is located. 
(Prior code 16-101; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-8-20. - Structures other than buildings. 
(a)  Structures less than six (6) inches in height. Structures not classified as buildings and less than six (6) inches in height from the surface of the ground shall not be subject to the setback, offset, building size or open space requirements of this Chapter, except as may be specifically otherwise provided. 
(b)  Structures six (6) inches or more in height. Structures not classified as buildings and six (6) inches or more in height from the surface of the ground shall be subject to the setback, offset, height limitation and open space requirements of this Chapter, except as may be specifically otherwise provided. 
(Prior code 16-102; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-8-30. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  General. Any accessory use or structure shall conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as specifically provided in this Code. 
(b)  Permanent structures. 
(1)  With the exception of the following restrictions, limitations and additional provisions applicable to nonindustrially zoned property, fences, walls and other architectural screening devices shall be permitted within the Town. For the purposes of this Article, all references to fences, walls or architectural or other screening devices shall be deemed to include all such fences, walls and devices. 
a.  Unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, no fence, wall or other architectural screening device shall exceed six (6) feet in height. 
b.  Where applicable, all fences, walls and other architectural screening devices shall conform to all setback, offset and height requirements of the zoning district wherein such devices are located. 
c.  No solid fences, walls or other solid architectural screening devices, including but not limited to solid wooden or vinyl fences, solid and continuous hedgerows and other natural or artificial barriers in excess of four (4) feet in height shall be permitted in the front yard of properties. 
d.  Screening devices may be erected and extended from each of the front building corners of the principal structure into the front yard for a maximum distance of eight (8) feet. From that point forward, no such screening devices shall exceed four (4) feet in height. 
e.  Chain-link fences shall not be permitted in the front yard of properties. 
f.  All permitted screening devices of whatever kind or nature shall conform to the visibility requirements of Section 16-10-10 of this Code. 
(2)  The following additional provisions, restrictions and limitations shall apply to fences, walls and other architectural screening devices in limited industrial zones in the Town. 
a.  No fences in excess of six (6) feet in height shall be permitted in the front yard of properties. 
b.  Except as approved through the conditional use process as set forth in this Code, no screening devices in excess of eight (8) feet in height shall be permitted in the side or rear yard of any property. 
c.  Where applicable, all fences, walls and architectural screening devices shall conform to all setback, offset and height requirements of the zoning district where such devices are located. 
d.  All permitted screening devices of whatever kind or nature shall conform to the visibility requirements of Section 16-10-10 of this Chapter. 
e.  All chain-link fencing materials shall be vinyl clad, or the equivalent, with the color scheme of the fabric and any slats to be contained within the fabric, shown on the site plan for the property. 
f.  No more than three (3) strands of smooth wire or barbed wire shall be added to the height of a chain-link security fence. Such strands of wire shall not be less than six and one-half (61/2) feet above the ground and shall not extend more than eighteen (18) inches above the maximum height permitted herein. Such strands shall also be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Wire strands shall not project beyond any property line. 
2.  Use of razor wire, concertina wire, Constantine wire or similar wiring materials is prohibited, unless approved through the conditional use process as set forth in this Code. 
3.  All materials shall conform with the applicable federal or state regulations, if any. 
(3)  The following additional provisions, restrictions and limitations shall apply to fences, walls or other architectural screening devices in heavy industrial zones in the Town. 
a.  No fences in excess of six (6) feet in height shall be permitted in the front yard of properties. 
b.  Where applicable, all fences, walls and architectural screening devices shall conform to all setback, offset and height requirements of the zoning district where such devices are located. 
c.  All permitted screening devices, of whatever kind or nature, shall conform to the visibility requirements of Section 16-10-10 of this Chapter. 
d.  Except as approved through the conditional use process as set forth in this Code, no fences, walls or other architectural screening devices in excess of ten (10) feet in height shall be permitted in the rear or side yard of any property. 
e.  All chain-link fencing materials along public rights-of-way or within front yards shall be vinyl clad, or the equivalent, with the color scheme of the fabric and any slats to be contained within the fabric shown on the site plan for the property. 
f.  No more than three (3) strands of smooth wire or barbed wire shall be added to the height of a chain-link security fence. Such strands of wire shall not be less than six and one-half (61/2) feet above the ground and shall not extend more than eighteen (18) inches above the maximum height permitted herein. Such strands shall also be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Wire strands shall not project beyond any property line. 
2.  Use of razor wire, concertina wire, Constantine wire or similar wiring materials are prohibited, unless approved through the conditional use process as set forth in this Code. 
3.  All materials shall conform with the applicable federal or state regulations, if any. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any fence, wall or architectural screening device equipped with or having an electric charge sufficient to cause shock. 
(d)  Accessory buildings which are not any larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area, as measured around the perimeter of the building, and do not exceed eight (8) feet in height, as measured as the vertical distance from the ground level adjacent to the structure to the highest point of the roof surface, shall be permitted without a building permit. Accessory buildings which have dimensions in excess of either or both of these requirements shall conform to the location requirements of the zoning district in which the building is located and shall be required to have a building permit. However, no accessory building, regardless of its size, shall be located any closer to the front property line than the rear corners of the principal building; that is, accessory buildings are only allowed in rear yards. Additionally, all accessory buildings shall also conform to the visibility requirements of Section 16-10-10 of this Chapter and the open space requirements of the zoning district in which the building is located. 
(Prior code 16-103; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2007-1297 1; Ord. 2012-1425A 2) 
Sec. 16-8-40. - Basic location regulations. 
(a)  Building must be on a lot. Every building hereafter erected, structurally altered or relocated shall be placed on a lot as herein defined. 
(b)  One (1) building per lot. Except as otherwise provided for multifamily dwellings, accessory dwelling units and planned unit developments, only one (1) principal residence structure shall be permitted on a lot. 
(c)  Street access. No lot shall hereafter be created nor any building placed on a lot which does not abut on a public street or approved way, except as hereinafter provided for planned unit developments. 
(Prior code 16-104; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2014-1481 2) 
Sec. 16-8-50. - Legal nonconformity. 
    The existing lawful use of a building or premises at the time of the enactment of this Chapter or any amendment applicable thereto which is not in conformity with the provisions established by this Chapter may be continued in the manner and for the purposes then existent, subject to the conditions hereinafter stated. For the purpose of administration, such nonconformity shall be classified and regulated as follows: 
(1)  Nonconforming structure. 
a.  No such structure shall be expanded or enlarged except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
b.  When such structure is damaged to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its current local assessed value, it shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Nonconforming use of structures. 
a.  No such use shall be expanded or enlarged. 
b.  Upon petition to and approval by the Planning Commission, such use may be changed to another use, provided that the Planning Commission determines that the new use would result in greater or no less degree of conformity, and provided further that such new use shall thereafter determine the degree of legal nonconformity. 
c.  Where any such use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive or eighteen (18) accumulative months during any three-year period, any future use of the structure shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
d.  Where the structure in which such use is carried on is damaged to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its current local assessed value, it shall not be restored for use except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
e.  Structural repairs and alterations to a structure housing such use shall not, as long as such use continues, exceed fifty percent (50%) of the local assessed value of the structure at the time the use became nonconforming. 
(3)  Nonconforming lots. 
a.  No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with Article IV of this Chapter. 
b.  The size and shape of such lot shall not be altered in any way so as to increase the degree of nonconformity, except with the approval of the Planning Commission. 
(4)  Nonconforming use of land. 
a.  No such use shall be expanded or enlarged. 
b.  Upon petition to and approval by the Planning Commission, such use may be changed to another use, provided that the Planning Commission determines that the new use would result in greater or no less degree of conformity, and provided further that such new use shall thereafter determine the degree of legal nonconformity. 
c.  Where any such use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive or eighteen (18) accumulative months during any three (3) year period, any future use of the land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Prior code 16-105; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE IX - Sign Regulations 

Sec. 16-9-10. - Intent. 
    The regulations contained in this Article are intended to protect property values, create a more attractive business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of commercial and industrial areas, prevent the deterioration of areas of scenic and natural beauty and, in general, promote a desirable community environment through the regulation of existing and proposed outdoor signs. These regulations are further intended to reduce potential traffic hazards from distracting and obstructing signs and to reduce hazards that may be caused by signs projecting over public rights-of-way. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-20. - Application of regulations. 
    The general regulations contained in this Article shall apply to all signs in all zoning districts, regardless of zoning designation, of the Town. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-30. - Sign area. 
(a)  The sign area of any sign, including building-mounted and freestanding signs, shall be considered to be the entire advertising area of the sign containing text, decorative artwork, logos or other displayed information, including the space within and between such text and information. Only one (1) side of freestanding signs with back-to-back sign areas shall be considered in calculating the sign area, with such signs being limited to a maximum of two (2) sides per any one (1) sign. The sign area of building-mounted signs shall not include structural elements used to attach or support the sign that do not contribute to the display. The sign area of freestanding signs shall not include the monument base. 
(b)  Calculation of sign area. The following methods shall be used to calculate the total square footage of the sign area of any sign: 
(1)  Cabinet signs and signs other than individual letter signs. Sign area shall be determined by the outer edge of the sign background, frame or cabinet that encompasses all text, decorative artwork, logos or other information displayed. In instances where the background, frame or cabinet is an irregular shape, the sign area shall be calculated as the entire area within a continuous rectangular box drawn with straight lines at perpendicular angles to encompass the entire perimeter of the extreme limits of the background, frame or cabinet encompassing the background material. 
(2)  Individual letter signs. Signs which consist of individual letters that are mounted to a wall, or "raceway-type" signs that consist of individual letters that are mounted to a base that is mounted to a wall, which utilize the building wall as the background, and freestanding individual letters that are mounted to a monument base shall be considered individual letter signs. The sign area of such signs shall be calculated as the entire area contained within a continuous rectangular box drawn with straight lines at perpendicular angles to encompass the entire perimeter of the extreme limits of each line of text, decorative artwork, logos or other displayed information, calculated cumulatively as the total square footage of all of the aforementioned elements, including the space within and between letters, text and other displayed information in each respective line. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-40. - Sign height. 
(a)  Calculation of sign height. The methods in this Section shall be used to calculate the height of any sign. 
(b)  Freestanding signs. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average finished grade of the ground below the sign excluding any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purposes of increasing the height of the sign, to the top edge of the highest portion of the sign. For the purposes of this Section , average finished grade shall be considered the lower of: 
(1)  The lowest elevation where the base of the sign meets ground level; or 
(2)  The top of the curb of the nearest public street adjoining the property upon which the sign is erected or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the lot on which the sign is located. 
The height of freestanding signs shall include the monument base. 
(c)  Building-mounted signs. The height of any sign attached to or painted on a wall or parapet of a building that is mounted flush or parallel to the building wall shall be measured as the lowest point at the bottom of individual letters, the sign background, frame or cabinet that encompasses all text, decorative artwork, logos or other information displayed to the top of the highest point on the sign. In cases involving multiple sign elements on any one (1) building elevation, the cumulative height of all sign elements located directly above or below (vertically) any portion of another sign element on the same building elevation shall be used to calculate the total sign height. Sign elements not located directly above or below any portion of another sign element shall be calculated individually. The height of the building elevation shall be measured as the vertical distance between the finished floor elevation of the building and the predominant roofline of the building elevation upon which the sign is mounted, not including the architectural elements or appurtenances such as clock towers of cupolas. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2010-1386 2) 
Sec. 16-9-50. - Sign setbacks and offsets. 
(a)  Any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to an arterial street shall be set back and offset a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet from the property line. 
(b)  Any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a collector or local street shall be set back and offset a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the property line. 
(c)  Freestanding signs within the Central Business (CB) Zoning District shall maintain a minimum setback distance of two (2) feet from the back of the sidewalk which, for the purposes of this Section, shall be defined as the edge of the sidewalk that is farthest away from the curb, gutter and street. In no event shall any sign be located within the public right-of-way or outside of the property boundary. 
(d)  Commercial and industrial freestanding directional signs as allowed by this Section shall be set back and offset a minimum distance of five (5) feet from all property lines. 
(e)  Distance separation. Distance separation between freestanding signs shall be measured along the street frontages adjacent to the subject monument signs. Distance between freestanding monument signs located on different street frontages shall be measured along the street frontage to the point of intersection of both street frontages. Freestanding signs shall be separated by at least one hundred (100) feet. 
(f)  All freestanding signs shall be located in accordance with the sight visibility requirements of Section 16-10-10 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-60. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Freestanding, ground-mounted signs shall be constructed with a monument-type base consisting of materials that are complementary and compatible with the architectural elements of the project. The height of the monument base of any sign shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the overall height of the sign. The width and length of such base shall be at least as wide and long as the bottom edge of the sign area. 
(b)  Freestanding signs shall be incorporated into a landscape planting bed with low landscape elements placed in front of signage to soften the sign and taller landscape placed behind single-sided signs to offer a backdrop. 
(c)  All freestanding signs which incorporate lighting shall be served by underground utility service. 
(d)  Vertical clearance. Any projecting sign or awning mounted sign which projects over the public right-of-way, sidewalk or pedestrian area shall maintain a minimum of eight (8) feet of unobstructed vertical clearance. 
(e)  Building-mounted signs shall be sensitively designed to be integrated with the architecture and scale of the building on which they are mounted. 
(f)  Electronic message centers. The provisions and limitations of this Subsection are adopted to minimize driver distraction, protect corridor and community aesthetics, and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
    For the purposes of this Section, electronic message center shall mean the portion of an on-premise freestanding sign capable of displaying words or images that can be electronically changed by remote or automatic means. Electronic message center shall not include temporary Town-owned messaging facilities. Permanent Town-owned messaging facilities shall be subject to the limitations set forth herein. 
    Signs containing an electronic message center shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Electronic message center signs shall be permitted in the following zoning districts only: General Commercial (GC), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Limited Industrial (I-L), Heavy Industrial (I-H), and the commercial portions of Residential Mixed Use (RMU). 
(2)  The maximum allowed size of an electronic message center in a freestanding sign shall be no greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total allowed sign area. 
(3)  The electronic message center must be programmed so that the displayed message does not change more frequently than once every two (2) minutes from one (1) static display to another instantaneously and without the use of scrolling, flashing, fading or other similar effects. The message or image displayed must be complete without continuation in content to the next message. 
(4)  The electronic message center: 
a.  Shall not produce glare, the effect of which constitutes a traffic hazard or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare; 
b.  Shall not have moving text, images or varying light intensity; 
c.  Shall not exceed six hundred (600) candelas per square meter between dusk to dawn and eight hundred (800) candelas per square meter during all other times, as measured at the sign's face; 
d.  Shall contain a mechanism for the sign to revert to a black screen if the sign malfunctions; 
e.  Shall be integrated harmoniously into the design of the larger sign face and structure; 
f.  Shall not be the predominant element of the sign and, if located at the top of a sign, must include a substantial cap feature above the electronic message center consisting of the same material, form, color and texture as is found on the sign face or structure. 
(5)  No temporary signs as provided in Section 16-9-130 shall be permitted for any business for which a freestanding electronic message center has been approved by the Town. 
(6)  The electronic message center must be provided with automatic dimming software, solar sensors or a comparable method as approved by the Town to control brightness for nighttime viewing and variations in daytime light conditions. Each application for electronic message center approval shall include the manufacturer's specifications programmed to meet this requirement, along with a description of the proposed dimming method. 
(7)  In no event shall a freestanding electronic message center sign be allowed within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the nearest residential district or development, with this distance being measured from the nearest portion of the sign to the nearest property line contained within any such residential district or development. 
(8)  Building-mounted electronic message centers shall only be permitted when displaying time and temperature or when displaying fuel pricing on a fueling station canopy, and shall remain subject to the size limitations of Section 16-9-100(b) for building-mounted signs, or not to exceed twenty (20) square feet, whichever is less. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2014-1488 1 ) 
Sec. 16-9-70. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected on the roof of any building. 
(b)  Except as provided in Subsection 16-9-60(f) of this Code and in this Subsection, no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent rotating or moving light or lights. Signs displaying time and temperature are permitted. 
(c)  Except as outlined in Section 16-9-135 of this Article, no sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of strings of lights, ribbons, streamers, spinners, pennants or similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices. 
(d)  Except as outlined in Section 16-9-135 of this Article, searchlights (whether stationary or revolving), beacons or other similar illuminating devices used for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Unpainted signs, broken signs and signs on vacated buildings shall be removed from the premises or repaired or renovated by the owners of the premises on order of the Zoning Officer. 
(f)  No sign shall obscure vision or views of the natural landscape or the larger urban area along arterial and collector streets and roads, nor shall any such sign be distracting to motorists. 
(g)  No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street or road in such manner as to obstruct clear vision, nor shall any sign be erected at a location where, by reason of its position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any traffic sign, signal or control device. 
(h)  Off-premises signs. No outdoor advertising sign, billboard or other advertising media not directly related to the use of the premises on which it is located shall be permitted in any district except as a conditional use in such districts as are hereinafter provided. Any off-premises sign permitted as a conditional use shall be in harmony with the spirit and intent of these regulations. Temporary signs advertising open houses shall be allowed in accordance with Paragraph 16-9-131(2) below. 
(i)  Signs pertaining to special events which refer to particular periods or points of time, such as garage sales, shall not be erected any sooner than the day before the event and shall be completely removed no later than two (2) hours after the end of the event. 
(j)  Pole-mounted signs are prohibited. 
(k)  No sign shall be mounted to or otherwise applied to trees or other landscaping, regulatory traffic signage, utility and light poles or other similar structures, and shall not be located within road rights-of-way or private street easements. 
(l)  Mobile signs are prohibited. 
(1)  Mobile sign is defined as any sign painted or otherwise mounted on a vehicle, trailer or boat; fixed or attached to a device for the purpose of transporting from site to site. This definition includes vehicles placed or parked for the purpose of drawing attention to a service, product, object, person, organization, institution, business, event, location or message, but not signs or lettering installed on vehicles such as buses, taxicabs or other commercial vehicles operating during the normal course of business. On-premises signs mounted to construction trailers directly related to construction on a site shall be allowed to be located on the site for the duration of construction, and shall be removed immediately upon the receipt of the last certificate of occupancy for the site. Trailers that are unrelated to the construction activities on the site shall not be allowed to be located on any site solely for the purpose of mounting signage. 
(2)  Any sign attached to, painted on or mounted on any construction trailers that are permitted in Subparagraph a. above shall be allowed if such signs meet the following conditions: the signs are magnetic, decals or painted in a professional manner on an integral part of the construction trailer as originally designed by the manufacturer and do not extend beyond the profile of the construction trailer. 
(3)  Banners are prohibited on construction trailers. 
(m)  No sign or other advertising device shall consist of any air- and/or wind-dancing configurations. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1336 2-4; Ord. 2010-1386 3; Ord. 2014-1488 2 ) 
Sec. 16-9-80. - Residential district signs. 
    No sign shall be erected or maintained in the Single-Family Residential SF-1, Single-Family Attached Residential SF-2, Estate E-1 or E-2, Multifamily Residential MF-1, High-Density Multifamily Residential MF-2, Recreation and Open Space zoning district or a residential component of a Residential Mixed Use RMU zoning district (commercial and industrial uses within a Residential Mixed Use RMU zoning district as approved by the Town shall comply with the applicable commercial and industrial district sign regulations), except in conformity with the following regulations: 
(1)  A sign identifying the property or the name of the owner or occupant of property, provided that such sign is not in excess of two (2) square feet in area, and provided further that not more than one (1) such sign is erected on any single lot or parcel. 
(2)  Signs identifying any of the following uses in a residential district shall be allowed, subject to a maximum sign area of twenty-four (24) square feet, and, further, not more than one (1) such sign per street frontage shall be erected on any single lot or parcel, not to exceed a total of two (2) such signs. Such freestanding signs identifying the following uses shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and shall be located in accordance with the offset and setback requirements of this Section: 
a.  Public or private school. 
b.  Places of assembly (small). 
c.  Nursing or rest home. 
d.  Public park or recreation area. 
e.  Conditional use grants and home occupations which have obtained all appropriate approvals from the Town. 
f.  Any entry feature signage identifying a platted residential subdivision within a Residential Mixed Use (RMU) zoning district. All such developments shall be allowed to erect such entry feature signs at separate entrances to the development. In the event that such signs are proposed for both sides of the street at any one (1) entrance, this "set" of signs shall be considered as one (1) development entrance sign. 
(Ord. 2010-1386 4; Ord. 2011-1406 3) 
Sec. 16-9-90. - Commercial and industrial district signs. 
    No sign shall be erected or maintained in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Central Business (CB), General Commercial (GC), Limited Industrial (I-L) or Heavy Industrial (I-H) zoning districts, except to identify only the name of the owner, trade name, trademark or product symbol, products sold and/or the business activity conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located, in conformity with the following general regulations, unless otherwise specified in the subarea requirements of this Article. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-100. - Building-mounted signs. 
(a)  Maximum number of building-mounted signs allowable. 
(1)  Minor tenant. One (1) building-mounted sign per building elevation shall be allowed for any one (1) minor tenant in a multiple tenant building, not to exceed a maximum of two (2) building elevations. Freestanding minor tenants shall be allowed to erect multiple building-mounted signs, subject to the cumulative maximum sign area limitation contained in this Section. 
(2)  Major tenant. Major tenants shall be allowed to erect multiple building-mounted signs, subject to the cumulative maximum sign area limitation contained in this Section. 
(3)  Large-scale tenants. Large-scale tenants shall be allowed to erect multiple building-mounted signs, subject to the cumulative maximum sign area limitation contained in this Section. 
(4)  In no event shall any illuminated building-mounted sign be allowed within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the nearest residential district or development, with this distance being measured from the nearest portion of the sign to the nearest property line contained within any such residential district or development. 
(b)  Maximum sign area. Building-mounted signs shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total area of the building elevation on which they are mounted. In cases of multiple signs on a single building elevation, the cumulative total of all signs on any one (1) building elevation shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total area of the building elevation on which the signs are mounted. 
(c)  Maximum sign height. 
(1)  Minor tenant. The height of building-mounted signs for minor tenants shall not exceed either twenty-five percent (25%) of the height of the building elevation upon which the sign is mounted or five (5) feet in height, whichever is less. 
(2)  Major tenant. The height of building-mounted signs for major tenants shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the height of the building elevation upon which the sign is mounted. However, in no event shall such sign exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(3)  Large-scale tenant. The height of building-mounted signs for large-scale tenants shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the height of the building elevation upon which the sign is mounted. However, in no event shall such sign exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
(d)  Awning-mounted signs. 
(1)  Sign bands shall be allowed on a free-hanging valance attached to canvas or soft vinyl awnings. Such signs shall be limited to a sign area no greater than six (6) inches in height and not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. 
(2)  Additional advertising shall be permitted on each canvas and soft vinyl awning elevation not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the respective awning elevation. 
(3)  Awning signs that meet the criteria outlined in this Subsection shall be permitted to have interior illumination, provided that said lighting source is: 
a.  Mounted parallel to the elevation of the building upon which the awning is located; 
b.  Concealed within the interior portion of the awning so as not be seen except from directly below the awning; and 
c.  Directed downward so as much as practical to prevent the emitted light from spilling beyond the extended planes of the sides of the awning. 
(4)  Acrylic and plastic awning signs are prohibited. 
(e)  No building-mounted sign shall project higher than the eave or parapet line of the wall upon which the sign is mounted. 
(f)  Adhesive window advertising shall not require sign permit approval. Adhesive window advertising may be adhered to the inside or outside surface of the window glass or door glass. Adhesive window advertising shall not be applied to any window trim, walls or other surfaces beyond the window glass or door glass surfaces. 
(Ord. 2010-1385 C1; Ord. 2012-1434 2) 
Sec. 16-9-110. - Freestanding signs. 
(a)  Shopping center development identification signs. Shopping centers, typically containing multiple tenants such as retail or other commercial centers which meet the following square footage requirements, shall be eligible for one (1) freestanding development identification sign per street frontage classified as an arterial or collector adjacent to the property upon which the shopping center development is located. The street frontage for a shopping center development which is designed to have individual freestanding tenants on platted lots or tracts that are included within the shopping center shall be calculated based upon the cumulative arterial or collector street frontage of such lots or tracts which are part of the respective shopping center development. Multiple buildings planned as part of the same shopping center development may use the cumulative total square footage of such buildings; however, any building used in such total shall then be ineligible for any additional freestanding signage. 
(1)  Maximum sign area. 
a.  Shopping center developments exceeding a total of seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of total gross leasable area shall be eligible for a development identification sign. Such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area per side of sign for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage of the lot upon which the development is located, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet per side of sign. 
b.  Shopping center developments exceeding a total of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of total gross leasable area shall be eligible for a development identification sign. Such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area per side of sign for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage of the lot upon which the development is located, not to exceed seventy-two (72) square feet per side of sign. 
(2)  Maximum sign height. 
a.  A shopping center development identification sign for multiple tenant developments exceeding a total of seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of total gross leasable area shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. 
b.  A shopping center development identification sign for multiple tenant developments exceeding a total of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of total gross leasable area shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
(3)  Identification signs for shopping center developments containing multiple tenants shall be required to be designed to accommodate space for a minimum of two (2) secondary tenants in addition to the primary major tenant in the development. 
(b)  Large-scale tenants. Large-scale tenants shall be eligible for one (1) freestanding sign per street frontage adjacent to the lot upon which the use is located, up to a maximum number of two (2) freestanding signs for any single commercial or industrial use. 
(1)  Maximum sign area. 
a.  The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to an arterial street shall be seventy-two (72) square feet per side of sign if the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed one hundred (100) feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be eighty-four (84) square feet per side of sign. 
b.  The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a collector street shall be sixty (60) square feet per side of sign if the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed one hundred (100) feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be seventy-two (72) square feet per side of sign. 
c.  The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a local street shall be forty-eight (48) square feet per side of sign if the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed one hundred (100) feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be sixty (60) square feet per side of sign. 
(2)  Maximum sign height. 
a.  The maximum height of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to an arterial street shall be fourteen (14) feet. 
b.  The maximum height of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a collector or local street shall be twelve (12) feet. 
c.  In any multiple tenant development, a large-scale tenant sign shall be required to be designed to accommodate space for a minimum of two (2) minor tenants in addition to the large-scale commercial or industrial tenant. 
(c)  Major tenants shall be eligible for one (1) freestanding sign per street frontage adjacent to the lot upon which the use is located, up to a maximum number of two (2) freestanding signs for any single commercial or industrial use. In the event that a major tenant is included on a shopping center development identification sign, such sign shall count towards the total number of major tenant freestanding signs allowed. 
(1)  Maximum sign area. 
a.  The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to an arterial street shall be forty-eight (48) square feet per side of sign if the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed one hundred (100) feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be sixty (60) square feet per side of sign. 
b.  The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a collector street shall be thirty-six (36) square feet per side of sign if the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed one hundred (100) feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be forty-eight (48) square feet per side of sign. 
c.  The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a local street shall be twenty-four (24) square feet per side of sign if the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed one hundred (100) feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be thirty-six (36) square feet per side of sign. 
(2)  Maximum sign height. 
a.  The maximum height of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to an arterial street shall be eight (8) feet. 
b.  The maximum height of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a collector or local street shall be six (6) feet. 
c.  In any multiple tenant development, a major tenant sign shall be required to be designed to accommodate space for a minimum of two (2) minor tenants in addition to the major tenant. 
d.  In addition to the aforementioned major tenant freestanding sign criteria, industrial major tenants which exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in GLA shall be allowed to erect a freestanding major tenant sign in accordance with the requirements of this Section, even if the industrial major tenant is not the largest tenant, in terms of GLA, in the multiple tenant building that it occupies. 
(d)  Minor tenant freestanding signs. 
(1)  Minor tenants in multiple tenant shopping center developments shall be limited to a portion of the shopping center development identification sign, not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total sign area. 
(2)  Minor tenants, including individual single-use minor tenant buildings and multiple tenant buildings which are freestanding on their own lot, shall be allowed to erect one (1) freestanding monument sign to accommodate all tenants subject to the following limitations, unless otherwise specified in the subarea standards contained in this Section. 
a.  No such sign shall exceed six (6) feet in height. 
b.  No such sign shall exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in sign area per side of sign, exclusive of monument base. 
(e)  Development entrance signs shall be considered to be any freestanding, wall-mounted sign or sign which is constructed on a monument base intended to identify a large-scale residential subdivision or a large-scale commercial or industrial corporate campus-type development, not to be confused with shopping center development identification signs for retail or other commercial shopping centers. For the purposes of this Section, large-scale residential subdivisions or developments shall be defined as any subdivision which contains at least fifty (50) lots or contains a land mass of at least twenty-five (25) acres, and large-scale industrial subdivisions or developments shall be defined as any industrial development which contains at least two (2) lots and five (5) acres. Such development entrance signs shall be subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Maximum number of development entrance signs. All large-scale developments shall be allowed to erect development entrance signs at separate entrances to the development. In the event that development entrance signs are proposed for both sides of the street at any one (1) entrance, this "set" of signs shall be considered as one (1) development entrance sign. 
(2)  Maximum heights of walls and monument bases. The height of any wall or monument base upon which a development entrance sign is mounted shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(3)  Maximum heights of signs, letters, numerals and characters. The height of any development entrance sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Additionally, this maximum height shall include the wall or the monument base upon which the sign is mounted and shall also include any logos associated with the development entrance sign. The maximum heights of letters, numerals and characters contained within the sign area of development entrance signs shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height. 
(4)  Maximum sign area. The maximum sign area of development entrance signs which are located adjacent to arterial or major collector streets shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage of the development, but in no event shall the total sign area of any development entrance sign exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. Development entrance signs shall not be permitted along minor collector or local streets. 
(5)  Construction materials. All walls or monument bases shall be constructed of masonry or similar materials, and all sign components shall be constructed of steel, aluminum, alucabond or similar materials. 
(6)  Setbacks and visibility restrictions. Development entrance signs shall be located in accordance with the sign setback and offset requirements and sight visibility at intersections requirements contained in this Article. 
(f)  Directional signs. Directional signs shall be allowed as necessary. Such signs shall be constructed of materials and colors that are consistent with the materials, colors and architectural elements of the project. The sign area of such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area per side of sign, not to exceed two (2) sides per any one (1) sign, and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. Such signs shall be set back and offset a minimum distance of five (5) feet from all property lines. 
(Ord. 2010-1385 2) 
Sec. 16-9-120. - Subarea requirements. 
    In addition to the general sign requirements for commercial and industrial signs which apply to all commercial and industrial signs, any sign located within one (1) of the following subareas shall be subject to the following subarea requirements. In cases where a subarea requirement conflicts with a general requirement, the subarea requirement shall control. 
(1)  Interstate 25 (I-25) Corridor subarea requirements. In addition to all other sign criteria contained in this Section, the I-25 Corridor, defined as that one-mile area east of I-25 to Larimer County Road 5, shall also be subject to the following subarea requirements: 
a.  Maximum sign area. The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to an arterial street within the I-25 Corridor subarea shall be forty-eight (48) square feet per side if the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed one hundred (100) feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be sixty (60) square feet per side. 
b.  Maximum sign height. 
1.  The maximum height of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to an arterial street within the I-25 subarea shall be ten (10) feet. 
2.  The maximum height of any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a collector or local street within the I-25 subarea shall be eight (8) feet. 
(2)  Downtown Corridor subarea requirements. In addition to all other sign criteria contained in this Section, signs within the downtown corridor, as defined in the Town's Downtown Corridor Plan, shall also be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  East Town Center, Northwest Commercial and West Town Center subareas. 
1.  Building-mounted signs. Each tenant shall be allowed building-mounted signs in accordance with the general sign requirements for commercial and industrial signs contained in this Section. 
2.  Freestanding signs. 
a)  Multiple tenant development identification signs. Each multiple tenant development or complex of multiple buildings shall be permitted to have one (1) freestanding project identification sign. Such sign shall primarily identify the name of the development. Secondarily, such sign shall contain smaller signage for individual tenants which are located within the development or complex. 
b)  Individual tenant freestanding sign. Individual tenants which are not part of a multiple tenant development are allowed one (1) individual tenant freestanding sign or one (1) freestanding hanging sign constructed of a single post and perpendicular bracket design. 
b.  Old Town Windsor and Windsor Lake subareas. 
1.  Building-mounted signs. 
a)  Each tenant shall be allowed one (1) building-mounted sign for each building elevation (not including window signs). Building signs shall be subordinate in size to the other elements of the building elevation and shall be positioned so as not to obscure existing architectural details. Signs mounted to building elevations shall fit within existing features of the building elevation and shall be designed to integrate with the building architecture. 
b)  A building-mounted projecting sign. In addition to the building-mounted signs, each business shall also be allowed one (1) building-mounted projecting sign. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and twelve (12) square feet in sign area per side of sign, not to exceed two (2) sides. In the downtown area where buildings are constructed on the property line, such projecting signs may extend above the sidewalk, provided that a minimum of eight (8) feet of unobstructed vertical clearance is maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 
2.  Freestanding signs. Individual tenants shall be allowed one (1) individual tenant freestanding sign, or one (1) freestanding hanging sign constructed of a single post and perpendicular bracket design. 
c.  General criteria. In addition to all other sign criteria contained in this Section, the following criteria shall apply to the entire Downtown Corridor subarea: 
1.  Lettering shall be legible and well-proportioned for clear communication. 
2.  Sign colors shall be compatible with the colors of the building. 
3.  Illumination. In the event illumination is proposed, the level of illumination of a sign shall not overpower other signs on the street or the facades of nearby buildings. Signs shall be illuminated with discreetly placed spotlights from the front, top or sides or internally illuminated. The following sign lighting types are allowed: 
a)  Internal illumination of signs if letters are individually illuminated using routed or push-through type letters. 
b)  Ground-mounted lighting if the light source is concealed through planting, screening or a light shield. 
c)  Indirect lighting if the light source is concealed or is compatible with the building architecture. 
d)  Neon lighting. 
d.  Freestanding sign criteria. In addition to all of the freestanding monument sign criteria contained in this Section, the following criteria shall apply to the entire Downtown Corridor subarea: 
1.  Sign height. Multiple tenant development identification signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, including the monument base. Individual tenant freestanding signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height including the monument base. 
2.  Sign area. The maximum sign area of a multiple tenant development identification sign shall be forty-eight (48) square feet per side. The maximum sign area of an individual tenant freestanding sign shall be twenty-four (24) square feet per side. Such area is exclusive of the sign base. 
3.  Freestanding hanging signs. Such signs shall be constructed of a single post and perpendicular bracket design. The height of the sign post shall not exceed six (6) feet. The sign area of such signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and six (6) square feet in sign area per side of sign, not to exceed two (2) sides. All such hanging signs shall incorporate a landscape planting bed with low landscape elements placed in front of signage to soften the sign and taller landscape placed behind single-sided signs to offer a backdrop. 
4.  Setbacks. Freestanding signs shall be located in accordance with the setback and "sight visibility at intersections" requirements of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-130. - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs shall include banners, H-frame real estate-type signs that advertise special events and any other signs that are not of a permanent nature, not including those signs advertising the sale or lease of the property. The use of temporary signs shall be limited to the promotion of special events associated with particular periods or points in time, including but not limited to meetings, sales, exhibitions and vacancy announcements. Such temporary signs shall require permit approval to be obtained from the Planning Department. Temporary signs shall be subject to the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Sixty-day limit. Except as provided in Subparagraph (5)c. below, with respect to signs for daily specials, no temporary sign shall be erected or displayed for longer than sixty (60) days per calendar year. Such sixty (60) days may be utilized consecutively or on intermittent dates as specified in the approved sign permit. The applicant shall remove any temporary signs on or before the expiration date specified in the approved permit. 
(2)  Temporary signs shall be directly related to the use of the lot on which the sign is located. 
(3)  Signs constructed of nondurable materials such as cardboard, paper or the like are prohibited. Furthermore, all signs shall be maintained so as not to deteriorate in wind and bad weather conditions. 
(4)  Temporary signs shall not be mounted to trees or other landscaping, regulatory traffic signage, utility or light poles, fences or other similar structures and shall not be located within road rights-of-way or easements. 
(5)  Except as provided in Section 16-9-135 of this Article, each freestanding business shall be limited to the following types of temporary signs per business: 
a.  Temporary banner-type signs. 
1.  No more than two (2) banner-type signs mounted flush to either a building wall or the building facade. In the case of a banner being mounted flush to a building facade, no portion of any such banner shall extend beyond the leading edge of the building facade. 
2.  Banner-type signs shall not be mounted between building columns, latticework or other architectural features of the building. 
3.  Banner-type signs shall be limited to a maximum of forty-five (45) square feet and shall not exceed three (3) feet tall by fifteen (15) feet wide. If the building elevation on which the sign is mounted is less than fifteen (15) feet wide, the sign shall not exceed the width of such elevation. 
4.  Banner-type signs shall be made of high-quality material. 
5.  Freestanding banner signs tied between stakes, trees, regulatory traffic signage, utility or light poles or other structures in landscape areas or elsewhere on the property are prohibited. 
b.  Temporary freestanding H-frame real estate-type signs that advertise special events, not including those signs advertising the sale or lease of the property. 
1.  Freestanding real estate-type signs shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) square feet in area per side, up to a maximum of two (2) sides per any one (1) sign. 
2.  Freestanding real estate-type signs shall be constructed of high-quality materials. 
c.  Temporary signs for daily specials. 
1.  Signs for daily specials, such as menu boards, sandwich boards or A-frame-type signs, shall be allowed for the purpose of advertising nonrecurring daily specials. 
2.  Signs for daily specials shall not be limited to any fixed number of days per calendar year, nor shall signs for daily specials require a temporary sign permit. However, such signs for daily specials shall be removed from display each day at the close of business. 
3.  Signs for daily specials shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) square feet in area per side, up to a maximum of two (2) sides per any one (1) sign. 
4.  Signs for daily specials shall be limited to an area within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance to the subject business and shall not impede pedestrian sidewalk circulation. Such signs are prohibited from being located within landscape buffer areas. 
d.  Teardrop signs. 
1.  Teardrop signs may be displayed in commercial zoning districts by the following types of businesses: 
a)  Individual, freestanding businesses. 
b)  The principal anchor tenant(s) of a shopping center, as depicted on the site plan for any such shopping center development. 
c)  A tenant located within a multiple-tenant building who occupies more than fifty percent (50%) of the total square footage of the entire building. 
2.  Any business meeting the criteria set forth in Subparagraphs d.1.a), b) and c) above shall be entitled to display the following number of teardrop signs during the sixty-day advertising period for temporary signs described in Paragraph (1) above: 
a)  Major and large-scale tenants exceeding seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet in area and which are located along arterial or collector streets: five (5). 
b)  Major and large-scale tenants exceeding fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in area but less than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet in area and which are located along arterial or collector streets: four (4). 
c)  Major tenants exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet in area but less than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in area and which are located along arterial or collector streets: three (3). 
d)  Minor tenants which are located along arterial, collector or local streets: two (2). 
e.  Inflatable devices. 
1.  Small inflatable devices. A small inflatable device is an inflatable device not greater than two (2) feet in diameter. Businesses shall be allowed to display small inflatable devices subject to the following criteria: 
a)  Such devices are limited only to the property upon which the displaying business is located. 
b)  Such devices are securely attached to the principal building on the property. 
c)  Such devices are not tethered any farther than twenty (20) feet from the building upon which the devices are being displayed. 
d)  Any small inflatable device attached to vehicles for sale at locations zoned for automobile dealerships shall be tethered to vehicles no higher than two (2) feet above the roof lines of vehicles. 
2.  Large inflatable devices. A large inflatable device is an inflatable device which exceeds two (2) feet in diameter. Businesses shall be allowed to display large inflatable devices, subject to the following criteria: One (1) large inflatable device shall be permitted for any single business for a period of seven (7) days within any six-month period of time, so long as: 
a)  Any such display is limited only to the property upon which the business is located; 
b)  Any such display is securely attached only to a building associated with the respective business; 
c)  The business meets all federal, state, local and International Fire Code rules and regulations pertaining to the use and display of all such devices; and 
d)  The business has obtained a temporary sign permit. 
3.  No inflatable devices described in Subparagraphs 1. and 2. above, nor any rigging for such devices, shall be placed across any street, sidewalk, alley or avenue or on any utility pole, traffic device or in a public or private right-of-way. 
f.  Multiple tenants on a single property. 
1.  Except as otherwise permitted in this Chapter, each tenant or business located within a building containing multiple tenants on a single property shall be allowed to display one (1) of the following types of temporary signs in accordance with the advertising periods set forth in this Chapter for the respective type of temporary signs: a banner-type sign; a freestanding H-frame real-estate type sign; or a temporary sign for daily specials. 
2.  All such temporary signs shall be made of high-quality materials and shall meet all size, location and display criteria set forth in this Chapter for each respective type of temporary sign. 
(6)  Real estate signs that advertise the sale or lease of the commercial or industrial property upon which the sign is located. Subject to all of the temporary sign requirements regarding required sign materials, mounting and location contained in this Section, such real estate signs shall adhere to the following requirements: 
a.  Notwithstanding any other requirements of this Section, no sign pertaining to the sale or lease of any commercial or industrial property or building shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area and a maximum of six (6) feet in height. 
b.  Downtown subarea requirements. Each property or building shall be allowed one (1) of the following options: 
1.  One (1) building-mounted sign per building elevation, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in sign area. 
2.  One (1) freestanding sign per street frontage, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in sign area and a maximum of six (6) feet in height, provided that no such sign shall be located on any sidewalk or other pedestrian way. 
(7)  Temporary signs advertising a construction company utilized during construction of a new business shall be exempt from Paragraphs (1) and (5) above of the temporary sign requirements. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet (four [4] feet high by eight [8] feet wide) and shall include a lattice or similar base material to give the appearance of a monument base. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage, not to exceed two (2) such signs, for the general contractor, including all subcontractors. Such signs shall be removed immediately upon the receipt of any certificate of occupancy for the new business. 
(8)  Temporary signs advertising a new business "coming soon" utilized during construction of the new business shall be exempt from Paragraphs (1) and (5) above of the temporary sign requirements. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet (four [4] feet high by eight [8] feet wide) and shall include a lattice or similar base material to give the appearance of a monument base. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage, not to exceed two (2) such signs, for the new business, including all tenants. Such signs shall be removed immediately upon the receipt of any certificate of occupancy for the new business. 
(9)  Temporary signs exempt from this Section. The provisions of this Subsection (g) shall not apply to the following signs, provided that such signs conform to all other sign regulations contained in this Section: 
a.  Traffic control and informational signs erected by national, state, county or municipal government agencies, specifically including school districts and fire protection districts. 
b.  Community event signs as authorized by the Town. 
c.  Window signs and other signs erected within the interior of the business. 
d.  Open house signs, subject to the requirements of Paragraph (10) below. 
(10)  Open house signs shall be allowed to be located off-premises subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Open house signs shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) square feet in area per side, up to a maximum of two (2) sides per any one (1) sign. 
b.  Open house signs shall not be erected any sooner than the day before the event and shall be completely removed no later than two (2) hours after the end of the open house. For the purposes of this Section, open houses shall be considered a temporary event, for example during a weekend, rather than taking place for an extended, continuous period of time. 
c.  Open house signs shall be either freestanding A-frame type signs or mounted in a freestanding manner on either a single stake or on two (2) stakes, with the top of such sign not exceeding four (4) feet in height and placed so as not to obstruct traffic or create an impediment to visibility at street intersections. Such signs shall not be mounted to trees or other landscaping, regulatory traffic signage, utility or light poles or other similar structures. 
(Ord. 2008-1336 5; Ord. 2009-1341 1; Ord. 2010-1386 5) 
Sec. 16-9-131. - Real estate signage. 
    Real estate signage is for the advertisement of the sale or lease of a property upon which the sign is located. Such real estate signage does not require a permit but must adhere to the regulations set forth in this Chapter. 
(1)  Commercial and industrial real estate signage. 
a.  Commercial and industrial real estate signage is for the advertisement of the sale or lease of a commercial or industrial property upon which the sign is located. Commercial and industrial real estate signage is subject to all the temporary sign requirements regarding sign materials, mounting and location contained in Section 16-9-130 above and shall in addition adhere to the following requirements: 
1.  Notwithstanding any other requirements of this Section, no sign pertaining to the sale or lease of any commercial or industrial property or building shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in sign area and ten (10) feet in height. 
2.  Temporary signs advertising a construction company or a new business "coming soon" utilized during construction of a new business shall be exempt from Paragraphs 16-9-130(1) and (5). Such signs shall be limited to a maximum of sixty-four (64) square feet in sign area and a maximum of ten (10) feet in height. Such signs shall be mounted on durable posts that are secured in the ground. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage, not to exceed two (2) such signs, for the general contractor, including all subcontractors. Such signs shall be removed immediately upon the receipt of any certificate of occupancy for the new business. 
b.  Downtown subarea requirements. Each property or building shall be allowed one (1) of the following options: 
1.  One (1) building-mounted sign per building elevation, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in sign area. 
2.  One (1) freestanding sign per street frontage, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in sign area and a maximum of six (6) feet in height, provided that no such sign shall be located on any sidewalk or other pedestrian way. 
(2)  Residential real estate signage. 
a.  Signs pertaining to the lease or sale of the property on which they are located or any building thereon shall be permitted, provided that such signs do not exceed six (6) square feet in area per side, and further provided that no more than two (2) such signs are located on any single lot or parcel. 
b.  Open house signs shall be allowed to be located off-premises subject to the following minimum requirements: 
1.  Open house signs shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) square feet in area per side, up to a maximum of two (2) sides per any one (1) sign. 
2.  Open house signs shall not be erected any sooner than the day before the event and shall be completely removed no later than two (2) hours after the end of the open house. For the purposes of this Section, open houses shall be considered a temporary event, for example during a weekend, rather than taking place for an extended, continuous period of time. 
3.  Open house signs shall be either freestanding A-frame type signs or mounted in a freestanding manner on either a single stake or on two (2) stakes, with the top of such sign not exceeding four (4) feet in height and placed so as not to obstruct traffic or create an impediment to visibility at street intersections. Such signs shall not be mounted to trees or other landscaping, regulatory traffic signage, utility or light poles or other similar structures. 
(3)  Subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage. 
a.  Subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage is for the advertisement of a subdivision under construction. Subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage is subject to all the temporary sign requirements regarding sign materials, mounting and location contained in Section 16-9-130 above and shall adhere to the following requirements: 
1.  Notwithstanding any other requirements of this Section, no sign pertaining to subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in sign area and a maximum of ten (10) feet in height and shall be mounted on durable posts that are secured in the ground. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage. Such signs shall be removed immediately at the time the last available home is sold. 
2.  Subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage shall be allowed to locate only on land within the boundaries of said subdivision. 
3.  A maximum of one (1) teardrop sign per every five (5) acres, not to exceed six (6) teardrop signs per residential subdivision. 
(Ord. 2010-1386 6) 
Sec. 16-9-135. - Grand opening signs. 
(a)  Upon receipt of either a temporary certificate of occupancy or a permanent certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first, temporary signs shall be allowed for grand openings, subject to all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The business owner has satisfied all requirements for sales tax licensing from the Town; and 
(2)  The business owner has received a temporary sign permit. 
(b)  Upon satisfaction of the criteria set forth in Subsection (a) above, the business owner may use, install and display any two (2) of the following types of temporary signs to advertise a grand opening: 
(1)  Two (2) building-mounted banner signs, each of which must meet all of the criteria for temporary banner-type signs set forth in Subparagraph 16-9-130(5)a. above. 
(2)  Teardrop signs, all of which must meet all of the criteria set forth for teardrop signs in Subparagraph 16-9-130(5)d. above. 
(3)  No more than two (2) strings of one (1) of the following: strings of lights, ribbons, streamers, spinners, pennants or similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices, provided that: 
a.  All such strings shall be mounted only from the principal building on the property; 
b.  All strings shall be securely fastened at both ends at all times; and 
c.  No portion of any such fluttering or revolving devices shall encroach into any public or private street right-of-way or obstruct passage along any public sidewalk, private walkway, pedestrian route or vehicular thoroughfare. 
(4)  Small inflatable devices, all of which must meet all of the criteria for and limitations upon small inflatable devices set forth in Subparagraphs 16-9-130(5)e.1. and 3. above. 
(5)  One (1) large inflatable device which must meet all of the criteria for and limitations upon large inflatable devices set forth in Subparagraph 16-9-130(5)e.2., subparts a), b), c) and d) only and Subparagraph 16-9-130(5)e.3. 
(6)  One (1) searchlight unit (whether stationary or revolving, and whether it contains a single or multiple beacons), beacon or other similar illuminating device used for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention to a business, provided that the following limitations on any such device shall apply: 
a.  Any such device shall, notwithstanding the fourteen-day display period set forth in Subsection (c) below, be displayed no more than three (3) consecutive days; 
b.  No such device shall be illuminated after scheduled business closing hours, or after 10:00 p.m., whichever is earlier; and 
c.  No such device shall be placed or directed in such a manner as to encroach into any public or private street right-of-way, or obstruct passage along any public sidewalk, private walkway, pedestrian route or vehicular thoroughfare. 
(c)  Except as set forth in Paragraph (b)(6) above with respect to searchlights, beacons and similar illuminating devices, the foregoing types of temporary signs for grand openings may be displayed for a period of fourteen (14) consecutive days. The applicable grand opening advertising period shall not be included in the sixty-day advertising period for temporary signs set forth in Paragraph 16-9-130(1) of this Article. 
(Ord. 2008-1336 6) 
Sec. 16-9-140. - Public agency signs. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any regulatory signs erected by national, state, county or municipal government agencies. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-150. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Signs erected prior to the date of enactment of this Chapter, which signs do not conform to the sign regulations contained in this Chapter, shall not be expanded, enlarged, modified or changed in any way except in conformity with these sign regulations. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-160. - Removal of signs. 
    Any signs existing on or after the date of enactment of this Chapter, which signs identify a business or activity which no longer exists or a product which is no longer sold on the premises, shall be removed by the owner of the premises upon written notice of the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer, upon determining that such sign exists, shall notify the owner of the premises in writing to remove such sign within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-170. - Sign criteria plan. 
    All new site plan applications shall submit a sign criteria plan for review as part of the site plan submittal. Such sign criteria plan shall ensure a consistent sign theme, design and material palate for the entire development. Sign criteria plans may specify standards more restrictive or specific than this Section, but shall not contain standards less restrictive or less specific. Sign criteria plans shall contain the following information for all signs, including on-site directional and informational signs: 
(1)  The design materials of construction, colors (graphically depicted), lighting and dimensions shall be clearly depicted. 
(2)  A plot plan depicting all improved areas, including landscaping and signs drawn to scale to depict the location of each sign. 
(3)  Elevations. All signs are to be illustrated and dimensioned in elevation drawings. When a sign is attached to a building, the illustration shall be a composite of the sign and the building, rendered to scale. 
(4)  Side view and any other illustrations required for clarity. 
(5)  Size standards, if more restrictive than the size standards contained in this Section. 
(6)  Types of signs and materials allowed. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-180. - Sign permits. 
(a)  No sign, as signs are defined in Section 16-12, shall be erected, enlarged, modified or changed within the Town without a sign permit first being obtained. 
(b)  Any person, business, association or corporation desiring to erect, modify, enlarge or change a sign shall first submit an application for a sign permit setting out, in such detail as may be reasonably established or requested by the Town, a description of the sign, the nature of the change, enlargement or modification, if applicable, and a drawing of said sign as proposed. 
(c)  The petition for permit shall be accompanied by a fee to defray the costs of processing the petition and issuing the permit, said fee to be set by resolution by the Town Board from time to time. 
(Prior code 16-126; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-9-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1510 , adopted Nov. 9, 2015, repealed the former  16-9-190, which pertained to permit requirements for temporary advertising intended to promote residential development and derived from Ord. 2011-1410 1. 
ARTICLE 9.5 - Reserved[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1509 , adopted Oct 26, 2015, repealed the former Art. 9.5,  16-9.5-10, 16-9.5-100, which pertained to election signs and derived from Ord. 2009-1360 2-10. 

ARTICLE X - Supplementary District Regulations 

Sec. 16-10-10. - Visibility at intersections. 
    No substantial impediment to visibility between the heights of three (3) and eight (8) feet shall be created or maintained at street intersections within a triangular area described as follows: beginning at the point of intersection of the edges of the driving surface, then to points forty (40) feet along both intersecting edges and then along a transverse line connecting these points. 
(Prior code 16-121; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-10-20. - Home occupations. 
    Intent. The intent of this Section is to provide for limited business uses within dwellings when such uses will clearly not alter the character or appearance of the residential neighborhood. Telecommuting, as defined in this Chapter, is exempt from home occupation registrations. 
(1)  Home occupations shall be permitted as an accessory use of any dwelling unit in any Single-Family Residential Zoning District, whether or not authorized as a named accessory use by this Code, if the following conditions are met and continuously exist: 
a.  Home occupations shall be incidental and secondary to the residential purpose of the dwelling unit, and occupational activity shall be harmonious with the residential use. 
b.  The exterior appearance of the dwelling and lot shall not be altered, nor shall any home occupation within the dwelling be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character. 
c.  Home occupations shall not alter the exterior appearance by the use of colors, materials, construction or lighting, or by the emission of sounds, noises, dust, odors, fumes, smoke or vibrations detectable outside the dwelling. 
d.  There shall be no advertising display or signage or other indications of a home occupation on the premises. 
e.  All persons carrying on the home occupation must be regular inhabitants of the dwelling unit, with not more than one (1) additional noninhabitant employee or co-worker per home occupation. 
f.  The total square footage devoted to home occupations shall not exceed either twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of the dwelling unit or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less, and in no event shall more than fifty percent (50%) of the total square footage of any building on the property be used for storage of materials, inventory or equipment related to the home occupation. 
g.  There shall be no sale, display or distribution of merchandise which requires customers to visit the property to transact business. On-site retail or wholesale transactions cannot be the primary activity of the home occupation. All such sales must remain incidental and secondary to the home occupation. 
h.  Home occupations may be conducted within the dwelling which shall be the principal building and use on the lot, as long as the home occupation is in compliance with the square footage requirement identified in Subparagraph f. above. 
i.  In the event a home occupation involves tutoring or instruction, no more than two (2) students may be present at the dwelling unit at any one (1) time without prior approval of a conditional use grant in accordance with Article VII of this Chapter. 
j.  In the event a home occupation involves child care, the number of children cared for at the dwelling unit at any one (1) time shall be limited to the lawful number permitted by the rules and regulations for the day care homes then in effect and issued by the Department of Social Services of the State. The home occupation of child care shall be exempt from the square footage conditions as set forth in paragraph f. above. 
k.  Vehicular traffic flow associated with the home occupation shall not adversely affect traffic flow and parking in the surrounding residential area. 
l.  There shall be no exterior storage of material and/or equipment used as part of the home occupation on the property. 
m.  The use of utilities shall be limited to that normally associated with the use of the property for residential purposes. Electrical or mechanical equipment that creates audible interference in radio receivers or visual or audible interference in television receivers or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit shall be prohibited. 
n.  Home occupations shall not be transferable to alternate locations or persons. 
o.  Activities conducted and buildings, equipment and material used or stored in coordination with the home occupation shall comply with all building and fire codes, as adopted by the Town. 
(2)  Prior to the establishment of any home occupation, an application for such home occupation shall be registered with the Planning Department. Such application shall include the name and address of the persons conducting the home occupation and a description of said occupation. Upon completion of an application and verification by the Town that said home occupation meets the provisions identified in this Section, staff shall issue to the property a copy of the approved home occupation registration. There shall be no fee for the registration of the home occupation set forth herein. 
(3)  If the Town determines that the use does not meet all of the requirements of a home occupation, then the home occupation application shall be refused, and the use shall either be brought into full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter for home occupation registrations, or the use shall be abandoned and all operations ceased. 
(4)  Revocation. In the event any activities associated with a home occupation registration no longer meet the provisions of this Chapter for home occupation registrations, this noncompliance may result in revocation of the Town's approval of the home occupation, denial of building permits and/or certificates of occupancy, injunctive relief prohibiting use of the property and other remedies available to the Town under this Code and other applicable laws of the State. 
(5)  All home occupations lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this Section shall be allowed to continue at their present levels of activity and in their present form, and, if hereafter changed, those home occupations must conform to the requirements of this Section. 
(Ord. 2008-1321 B; Ord. 2016-1518 ) 
Sec. 16-10-30. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Buildings and Uses outside of Downtown Parking District. Off-street parking space shall be provided for buildings and uses outside of the Downtown Development Authority boundary as follows: 
(1)  Applicability. Provision of parking space shall not be required for uses in existence as of the date of enactment of this Section but shall be required for any expansion of such use by the addition of primary floor area or other special expansion of building use or property use generating new parking demand. 
(2)  Location. Parking areas shall be provided upon the same lot containing the use for which they are required or on separate lots or structures located within a one-thousand-foot radius of the lot containing the use for which they are required. A Town-approved parking agreement is required for all off-site parking. This agreement shall be recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder, and shall be a covenant running with the land upon which parking is provided. All shared parking lots must be paved. All shared parking lots and shared parking structures shall have sidewalk connections to the subject property. 
(3)  Surfacing. All parking lots which are designed to be used for employee parking, visitor parking, customer parking and tenant parking, and all interior drives connecting such parking lots, which are designated for multifamily uses, business uses, commercial uses, industrial uses, offices and places of assembly shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. In addition, all parking lots must also conform to all of the following requirements: 
a.  Each parking space shall be identified by striping using paint or other durable application; 
b.  Shall conform to all Town landscaping guidelines and requirements; 
c.  Shall be constructed to allow for proper drainage; 
d.  Shall be designed so as to prevent vehicles from backing into any public or private street; and 
e.  Shall not provide ingress or egress any closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any intersecting street or alley right-of-way line. 
(4)  Screening. Every off-street parking area, other than that provided for a single-family residence, shall provide a planting screen, landscaped fence or wall at least four (4) feet in height along any side abutting or fronting on a residential district. Plans for such screening shall be submitted to the Planning Department for referral to the Planning Commission for approval before installation. 
(5)  Standard dimension. Each individual parking space shall be at least nine (9) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long and, if covered, shall have a minimum height clearance of seven (7) feet. 
(6)  Determination of need. The number of parking spaces required shall be based upon the anticipated parking demand of individual uses and shall be as designated for specific uses and situations as follows: 
Use Parking Requirements Single-family residence 2 spaces per dwelling unit Multifamily dwelling residence*:  1 bedroom or studio 1.5 parking spaces  2 bedroom 1.75 parking spaces  3 bedroom 2.0 parking spaces  4+bedroom 3.0 parking spaces Public assembly facilities, provided for seated audiences (churches, theaters, auditoriums, etc.) 1 space for every three seats Elementary schools (If the elementary school includes an auditorium, the auditorium requirement above shall govern if it is greater.) 2 spaces for every classroom Junior and senior high schools Auditorium requirement above or 1 space for every 5 students of maximum occupant capacity Hospitals 1 space for every 2 beds Clinics 5 spaces for every practitioner on the staff Industrial uses 1 space for every 2 employees Commercial office 1 space for every 300 square buildings feet of Gross Leasable Area (GLA) Retail stores, customer service establishments, shopping centers and other similar uses 1 space for every 250 square feet of GLA Eating and drinking establishments 1 space for every 200 square feet of GLA, plus 1 space for every 2 employees, computed on the maximum service capacity Hotel or motel 1 space for every room to be rented, plus 1 space for every 2 employees, computed on the maximum service capacity  
*MultifamiIy development shall receive a credit towards the requirements of this sub-section on one (1) parking space for every twenty-five (25) feet of the subject lot's frontage on a public street which is designed to accommodate on-street parking. Such credit shall not exceed 10% of the total required parking of any one development. 
(7)  Uses not enumerated. In any case where there is a question as to the parking requirements for a use or where such requirements are not specifically enumerated, the Planning Commission shall convene a public hearing to determine the appropriate application of the parking requirements to the specific situation, applying the criteria set forth above and in keeping with sound land use planning principles. 
(b)  Downtown Parking District Requirements. The Downtown Parking District (District) is hereby defined as the area falling within the boundaries of the Windsor Downtown Development Authority, as the boundaries currently exist and as may later be amended pursuant to the statutory powers of the Windsor Downtown Development Authority. Within the District, off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  A change of use is not required to provide new or additional parking except when a residential use is converted to a non-residential use. In such cases parking must be provided on-site in accordance with Section 16-10-30(b). 
(2)  Building additions under one thousand (1,000) square feet and/or the provision of outdoor seating are not required to provide new or additional parking. This exemption shall be applied on a cumulative basis to each property within the District, and one thousand (1,000) square feet shall be the total exemption for any and all construction, expansion or modification projects within the property, whenever occurring. Mixed-use projects containing residential units may add up to one thousand (1,000) square feet of commercial use and up to two (2) residential units without adding parking. 
(3)  New buildings and additions to existing buildings of between one thousand one (1,001) and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet will require two (2) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of new or additional floor area. 
(4)  New buildings and additions to existing buildings of over 20,000 square feet shall submit a Parking Management Plan ("Plan") at the time of application. The Plan shall outline the project's total parking demand, shared parking agreements, parking management strategies, and transportation demand management programs. The Planning Commission shall convene a public hearing to review the Plan and shall determine if the proposed parking is appropriate for the specific situation, subject to a maximum of two (2) parking spaces per 500 square feet. 
(5)  The area measured for purposes of this sub-section (b) shall include the entire Gross Leasable Area of a building, as defined by Section 16-2-20. 
(6)  On-site parking requirements may be provided on another lot or structure containing shared parking availability within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property, subject to the following: 
a.  Up to eighty percent (80%) of the on-site parking requirement may be provided on an off-site lot or structure for new buildings up to five thousand (5,000) square feet and additions containing one thousand one (1,001) to five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
b.  Up to fifty percent (50%) of the on-site parking requirement may be provided on an off-site lot or structure for new buildings between five thousand one (5,001) and ten thousand (10,000) square feet and additions containing five thousand one (5,001) and ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
c.  Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the on-site parking requirement may be provided on an off-site lot for new buildings between ten thousand one (10,001) to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and additions containing ten thousand one (10,001) to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
A Town-approved parking agreement is required for all off-site parking. This agreement shall be recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder, and shall be a covenant running with the land upon which parking is provided. All shared parking lots must be paved. All shared parking lots and shared parking structures shall have sidewalk connections to the subject property. 
(7)  For every twenty-five (25) feet of the subject lot's public street frontage, building additions between one thousand one (1,001) and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall receive a credit of one (1) parking space against the requirements of this sub-section (b). 
(8)  Improved lots containing on-site parking ratios exceeding two (2) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet are permitted to remove on-site parking spaces in excess of that ratio ("Excess Parking Spaces"), so long as an on-site parking ratio of no less than two (2) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet is maintained. Remaining Excess Parking Spaces may be applied toward new buildings or building additions. New building construction or building additions may be built over Excess Parking Spaces, and are eligible for the provision of required parking spaces in accordance with sub-section (5) for any new square footage added. 
(9)  Surfacing. All parking lots which are designed to be used for employee parking, visitor parking, customer parking and tenant parking, and all interior drives connecting such parking lots, which are designated for multifamily uses, business uses, commercial uses, industrial uses, offices and places of assembly shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. In addition, all parking lots must also conform to all of the following requirements: 
a.  Each parking space shall be identified by striping using paint or other durable application; 
b.  Shall conform to all Town landscaping guidelines and requirements; 
c.  Shall be constructed to allow for proper drainage; 
d.  Shall be designed so as to prevent vehicles from backing into any public or private street; and 
e.  Shall not provide ingress or egress any closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any intersecting street or alley right-of-way line. 
(10)  Screening. Every off-street parking area, other than that provided for a single-family residence, shall provide a planting screen, landscaped fence or wall at least four (4) feet in height along any side abutting or fronting on a residential district. Plans for such screening shall be submitted to the Planning Department for referral to the Planning Commission for approval before installation. 
(11)  Standard dimension. Each individual parking space shall be at least nine (9) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long and, if covered, shall have a minimum height clearance of seven (7) feet. 
(12)  The following table will be used for new residential units when building additions are (a) larger than two thousand (2,000) square feet and/or (b) add more than two (2) new residential units: 
All Residential Uses Required parking 1-bedroom unit Minimum: 1 space per unit 2-bedroom unit Minimum: 2 spaces per unit 3-or-more-bedroom unit Minimum: 2.0 spaces per unit Additional guest-parking 
[ See Note ] 1 space per 8 dwelling units in addition to the minimum off-street parking spaces.  
Note to Table 1: On-street parking spaces abutting the property line(s) of the primary building containing housing units may apply a ratio of one (1) space per twenty-five (25) feet of the subject lot's street frontage for streets within the District toward the guest-parking requirement. 
(Ord. 2015-1501 ; Ord. 2018-1568 1, 2) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1501 , adopted Aug. 8, 2015, repealed the former  16-10-30 and enacted a new  16-10-30 as set out herein. The former  16-10-30 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the prior code 16-123 and Ord. 2006-1236, 1. 
Sec. 16-10-40. - Off-street loading requirements. 
(a)  Space required. In any commercial or industrial district, off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided, in addition to the required off-street parking area, for every building used for commercial or industrial purposes, which building is in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet in area exclusive of storage areas. 
(b)  Standard dimension. An individual loading space shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide by forty-five (45) feet long and have a minimum height clearance of fourteen (14) feet. 
(c)  Determination of need. The number of such spaces provided shall be based upon the operating characteristics of the individual use and shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission upon submittal of site and operational plans. 
(d)  Street servicing prohibited. No building for commercial or industrial purposes shall hereafter be erected or placed on a lot in a manner requiring servicing directly from the abutting public street. 
(Prior code 16-124; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-10-50. - Building height regulations. 
(a)  Intent. The following regulations are intended to preserve the comprehensive development plan of the Town, create a desirable architectural effect, contribute to fire safety and, generally, to promote a desirable community environment. 
(b)  General regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all buildings and structures within the boundaries of the Town, with the exception of ornamental structures associated with large or small places of assembly. The height regulations for ornamental structures are otherwise addressed in this Section. 
(1)  In zones classified as Residential and Estate Residential, no building or structure shall exceed a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  In zones classified as High-Density Multi-Family Residential MF-2 District, Neighborhood Commercial NC District and General Commercial GC District, no building or structure shall exceed a maximum height of fifty-five (55) feet. 
(3)  In zones classified as Central Business CB District or Industrial I-H and I-L Districts, no building or structure shall exceed a maximum height of seventy-five (75) feet. 
(4)  In zones classified as Residential Mixed Use RMU District, the maximum height requirements as established by this Code for such zones shall apply. 
(c)  Modification of building height regulations. 
(1)  Purpose. 
a.  The purpose of this Section is to establish a process to review proposals for buildings or structures exceeding the maximum building height allowed by the provisions of this Section or other ordinances, rules or regulations of the Town. The intent of this Section is to encourage creativity and diversity of architecture and site design within a context of harmonious neighborhood planning and coherent environmental design, to protect access to sunlight and to preserve desirable views. 
b.  Any building or structure proposed to exceed the maximum building height allowed in the respective zoning district pursuant to this Section, or by other ordinances, rules or regulations of the Town, shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, and thereafter to approval or disapproval by the Town Board pursuant to the provisions of this Section. 
(2)  Standards for review. Any building or structure proposed to be greater than the maximum building height allowed in the respective zoning district pursuant to this Section, or by other ordinances, rules or regulations of the Town, must meet the following review criteria: 
a.  Views. A building or structure shall not substantially alter the opportunity for, and quality of, desirable views from public places, streets and parks within the community. Techniques to preserve views may include, but are not limited to, reducing building or structure mass, changing the orientation of buildings or other structures and increasing open space setbacks. 
b.  Light and shadow. Any building or structure proposed to be greater than the maximum building height allowed in the respective zoning district pursuant to this Section, or by other ordinances, rules or regulations of the Town, shall be designed so as not to have a substantial adverse impact on the distribution of natural and artificial light on adjacent public and private property. Adverse impacts include, but are not limited to, casting of shadows on adjacent property sufficient to preclude the functional use of solar energy technology; creating glare, such as reflecting sunlight or artificial lighting at night, that contributes to the accumulation of snow and ice during the winter on adjacent property; and shading of windows or gardens for more than three (3) months of the year. Techniques to reduce the shadow impacts of a building may include, but are not limited to, repositioning of a structure on the lot, increasing the setbacks, reducing building or structure mass, or redesigning a building or structure's shape. 
c.  Privacy. Any building or structure proposed to be greater than the maximum building height allowed in the respective zoning district pursuant to this Section, or by other ordinances, rules or regulations of the Town, shall be designed to avoid infringing on the privacy of adjacent public and private property, particularly adjacent residential areas and public parks. Techniques to improve the level of privacy in a neighborhood may include, but are not limited to, providing landscaping, fencing and open space, and changing building or structure orientation away from adjacent residential development. 
d.  Neighborhood scale. Any building or structure proposed to be greater than the maximum building height allowed in the respective zoning district pursuant to this Section, or by other ordinances, rules or regulations of the Town, shall be compatible with the scale of the neighborhoods in which it is situated in terms of relative height, height to mass, length to mass and building or structure scale to human scale. 
(3)  Submittal requirements. All development plans proposing building or structure heights proposed to exceed the maximum building height allowed in the respective zoning district pursuant to this Section or by other ordinances, rules or regulations of the Town shall, at a minimum, include the following information, unless such information is waived by the Town: 
a.  A shadow analysis that indicates on the project development site plan the location of all shadows cast by the building or structure (with associated dates of the year). 
b.  A visual analysis that: 
1.  Identifies the extent to which existing views may be blocked; 
2.  Depicts in graphic form views before and after the project, utilizing photographs of the area and neutral drawings derived from at least two (2) points from which the proposal will be commonly viewed; and 
3.  Indicates the points of observation on an inset map or plan of the area. 
c.  A summary of the key conclusions of the shadow and visual analysis, as well as steps to be taken to comply with the review standards set forth above. 
(4)  Notice and public hearing. Prior to consideration of any proposal for modification under this Section, public hearings shall be held before both the Planning Commission and the Town Board in accordance with the provisions of Section 16-31-10 of this Chapter. 
(d)  Height regulations applicable to ornamental structures. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection is to establish height regulations for ornamental structures as defined by this Code. 
(2)  Height limitations. 
a.  An ornamental structure associated with a large place of assembly shall not exceed eighty (80) feet in height measured from ground level, as defined in this Code, to the highest point of said structure. The aforesaid limitations shall not be subject to modification under the provisions of this Chapter. Each large place of assembly shall be limited to one (1) such structure. 
b.  An ornamental structure associated with a small place of assembly shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height measured from ground level, as defined in this Code, to the highest point of said structure. The aforesaid limitations shall not be subject to modification under the provisions of this Chapter. Each small place of assembly shall be limited to one (1) such structure. 
(Prior code 16-125; Ord. 2005-1221 1; Ord. 2006-1233 2; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2010-1382 6, 7; Ord. 2011-1406 4, 5) 
Sec. 16-10-60. - Industrial areas; performance standards. 
(a)  As a condition precedent to the approval of any site plan or the issuance of any building permit for a use in any new or existing industrial area of the Town, the user must establish continuing compliance with the performance standards hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The performance standards are as follows: 
(1)  Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be conducted within an enclosed building or with other effective screening in such a manner as to make such glare or heat completely imperceptible from any point along the property line. 
(2)  Vibration. Industrial operations shall cause no inherent and recurring generated vibration perceptible without instruments at any point along the property line. Transportation facilities or temporary construction are excluded from this restriction. 
(3)  Smoke emissions. 
a.  No person shall emit or cause to be emitted into the atmosphere from any contamination source of emission whatsoever any air contaminant which is of such a shade or density as to obscure an observer's vision to a degree in excess of twenty percent (20%) opacity. 
b.  Exceptions. 
1.  No person shall emit or cause to be emitted into the atmosphere from any pilot plant and experimental operations any air contaminant for a period or periods aggregating more than three (3) minutes in any sixty (60) consecutive minutes which is of such a shade or density as to obscure an observer's vision to a degree in excess of forty percent (40%) opacity. This emission standard for pilot plants and experimental operations shall be in effect for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) operating days, cumulative total, from the date such operations commence; thereafter, the twenty percent (20%) opacity limitations provided in Subparagraph (3)a. above shall apply to emissions from pilot plants and experimental operations. 
2.  Emissions from fireplaces used for noncommercial or recreative purposes shall be exempt from Subparagraph (3)a. above. 
3.  Subparagraph (3)a. above shall not apply to emissions during the building of a new fire, cleaning of fires, soot blowing, start-up, any process modification or adjustment or occasional cleaning of control equipment, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than and equivalent opacity so as to obscure an observer's view to a degree not greater than forty percent (40%) for a period or periods aggregating no more than three (3) minutes in any one (1) hour. 
4.  Subparagraph (3)a. herein shall not apply to fugitive dust. 
(4)  Odor emissions . No person, wherever located, shall cause or allow the emission of odorous air contaminants from any single source such as to result in detectable odors which are measured in excess of the following limits: 
a.  For areas used predominantly for residential or commercial purposes, it is a violation if odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with seven (7) or more volumes of odor-free air. 
b.  In all other land use area, it is a violation if odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted within fifteen (15) or more volumes of odor-free air. 
c.  When the source is a manufacturing process or agricultural operation, no violation of Subparagraphs a. and b. above shall be cited by the Town, provided that the best practical treatment, maintenance and control currently available shall be utilized in order to maintain the lowest possible emission of odorous gases, and, where applicable, in determining the best practical control methods, the Town shall not require any method which would result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or in the practical closing of any lawful business or activity if such would be without corresponding public benefit. 
d.  For all areas, it is a violation when odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with one hundred twenty-seven (127) or more volumes of odor-free air, in which case provisions of Subparagraph c. above shall not be applicable. 
(5)  Particle emission. No particles of fly ash shall exceed two-tenths (0.2) grain per cubic foot of flue gas at a stack temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Prior code 16-127; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2012-1425A 3) 
Sec. 16-10-70. - Charitable drop-off locations, donation receptacles; intent. 
    The intent of Sections 16-10-70, 16-10-80 and 16-10-90 of this Article is to provide a mechanism by which the Town may regulate the establishment, maintenance and removal of charitable drop-off locations and charitable donation receptacles in appropriate locations within the Town, including Town-owned property. On and after January 1, 2011, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of a charitable drop-off location or donation receptacle outside of any building except as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2010-1383) 
Sec. 16-10-80. - Charitable drop-off locations and donation receptacles; private property. 
(a)  Charitable drop-off locations and donation receptacles; permit application requirements. Prior to the installation or operation of any charitable drop-off location or donation receptacle upon private property, the following permit requirements shall be met: 
(1)  Submission of a written application upon a form approved by the Director of Planning, which application shall contain an applicant acknowledgement that overflowing receptacles, items left outside of the receptacle and/or unsightly debris which accumulates around any receptacle shall be grounds for the permit to be revoked and all receptacles removed from the site solely at the applicant's expense. 
(2)  Submission of a written narrative describing the proposed length of time the charitable drop-off location or donation receptacle is to be used, nature of the use, a maintenance schedule and pickup schedule. 
(3)  Written and signed authorization from the property owner upon whose property the proposed charitable drop-off location or donation receptacle is to be located, confirming that the applicant has the right to use the subject property for the entire duration listed on the application. 
(4)  A new or revised sketch plan including the proposed location, size and number of charitable drop-off locations or donation receptacles. 
(5)  Photographs or professional illustrations of any proposed charitable drop-off location or donation receptacles, illustrating accurate color and materials and illustrating compliance with Subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Tamper- and access-resistant receptacles required. The contents or goods of charitable drop-off locations or receptacles shall be secured, so that such contents or goods are accessible only by the organization for which the contents or goods are intended. No charitable drop-off location or receptacle shall consist of a container designed or intended primarily for the collection of trash or refuse. 
(c)  Charitable drop-off locations and donation receptacles; numerical and corridor plan limitations. A maximum of two (2) charitable donation receptacles, each of which shall adhere to the requirements of this Section, or one (1) charitable drop-off location will be allowed on an improved lot, tract or parcel of land. Each charitable donation receptacle shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in size, with no side exceeding eight (8) feet in length, and shall not exceed six (6) feet in overall height, as measured as the vertical distance from the ground level adjacent to the structure to the highest point of the roof surface. If the proposed charitable drop-off location or donation receptacle is located within any area subject to the requirements of a Town-approved corridor plan, the charitable drop-off location or donation receptacle shall be placed in an inconspicuous location per the corridor plan requirements. 
(d)  Revocation of charitable drop-off locations and donation receptacles permit. The Director of Planning shall have the authority to revoke any permit for a charitable drop-off location or donation receptacle for any or all of the following reasons: 
(1)  The presence of overflowing receptacles, items left outside of the receptacle and/ or unsightly debris which accumulates around any receptacle. 
(2)  Operation of a charitable drop-off location or donation receptacle in violation of any of the permit requirements set forth in Subsections (a) through (c) above. 
(Ord. 2010-1383) 
Sec. 16-10-90. - Charitable drop-off locations and donation receptacles within or upon Town-owned property. 
(a)  The establishment, installation, operation and removal of charitable drop-off locations and donation receptacles within or upon property owned by the Town shall be authorized only upon approval of the Town Manager pursuant to specifications issued in the form of a request for proposals in such number and for such properties as the Town Manager shall in his or her sole discretion determine. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to require the Town Manager to make Town-owned property available for charitable drop-off locations and donation receptacles. 
(b)  The requirements of Subsection 16-10-80(c) above shall apply to charitable drop-off locations and donation receptacles within and upon Town-owned property within any area subject to the requirements of a Town-approved corridor plan. 
(Ord. 2010-1383) 
Sec. 16-10-100. - Site lighting. 
(a)  Intent. The following regulations are intended to: 
(1)  Meet functional safety and security needs without adversely affecting adjacent properties or neighborhoods. 
(2)  Reduce light pollution. 
(3)  Promote protection of the night sky. 
(4)  Provide clear guidance regarding exterior lighting to property owners. 
(b)  General regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all zoning districts: 
(1)  Outdoor lighting installations shall not be permitted closer than three (3) feet from an abutting property line and, where not specifically otherwise regulated, shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(2)  Light sources shall be concealed or shielded so as to minimize uplight, spill-light, glare and unnecessary diffusion on neighboring properties. 
(3)  Exterior lighting, except for overhead street lighting and warning, emergency or traffic signals, shall be installed in such a manner that the light source will be sufficiently obscured to prevent glare on public streets and walkways or into any residential area. The installation or erection of any lighting which may be confused with warning signals, emergency signals or traffic signals shall be unlawful. 
(4)  Lighting may be used to illuminate the face of a building so long as the light does not spill outside the building faade. 
(c)  Lighting for commercial and industrial uses. The following regulations shall apply to all commercial and industrial uses in zoning districts that allow for such commercial and industrial uses: 
(1)  Parking lot lighting shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
(2)  Pole-mounted lighting shall utilize round poles of a color that minimizes reflectance of light. Decorative light poles that may be proposed to contribute to a specific design theme in a development may be proposed for review and approval by the Planning Commission. Appeals of a Planning Commission decision pursuant to this Paragraph are subject to review by the Town Board. 
(3)  The style of light standards and fixtures shall be consistent with the style and character of architecture proposed on the site. 
(4)  All exterior and security lighting shall have underground service. 
(5)  All lighting fixtures, including wall pack lighting and other service area and security lighting, shall be full cutoff fixtures and mounted so that light is directed directly downward. Under-canopy fueling areas shall feature flush-mount, flat lens light fixtures. The only exception shall be for decorative lighting, such as lanterns and wall sconces, which may be allowed as long as the fixtures do not exceed a maximum of three thousand two hundred (3,200) lumens and do not emit light directly upward. 
(Ord. 2012-1425A 1) 
Sec. 16-10-110. - Mobile food vending. 
(a)  Mobile food vending is defined as the use of a motorized wheeled vehicle, or a towed wheeled vehicle, or pushcart, or other temporary operation designed and equipped to prepare and/or serve food and/or non-alcoholic beverages. Mobile food vending is permitted, subject to the following: 
(1)  Mobile food vending shall not take place in locations that are no less than two-hundred (200) feet from the main entrance of any restaurant while the restaurant is open to the public for business, unless the restaurant proprietor has otherwise consented. 
(2)  Mobile food vending shall take place only on a site that has received the appropriate site plan approval and the required site plan improvements comply with said approved site plan. 
(3)  Mobile food vending outlets shall not be open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(4)  Litter must be picked up and refuse containers must be provided for customers. 
(5)  Mobile food vendors shall comply with all applicable Town Ordinances as well as state, county, and federal laws and licensing requirements. 
(6)  All signage associated with mobile food vendors shall be in conformance with Article IX of this Chapter. Additionally, all mobile food vendor signs must be mounted flush against the mobile food establishment, except that one temporary sign for daily specials shall be allowed in accordance with Section 16-9-130(5)c. 
(7)  Mobile food vending shall not operate, be stored, or parked on public right-of-way. 
(8)  Use of private property. Mobile food vendors may operate on private property provided they meet the following requirements: 
a.  Mobile food vending shall operate only with the property owner's continuous permission. Revocation of owner permission at any time shall terminate mobile food vending on the site in question. 
b.  Mobile food vending shall not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, parking lot use or circulation, or access to any public right-of-way. 
c.  If left on-site at the end of the business day, all mobile food vending equipment and signage shall be located in an inconspicuous location when not in operation. 
(b)  Mobile food vending taking place at Town-sponsored special events, or within public parks, recreational facilities or trails, is subject to review and permitting by the Parks and Recreation department and is not subject to this Section. 
(Ord. 2015-1503 , 1) 
ARTICLE XI - Application of Individual Lot Regulations 

Sec. 16-11-10. - General. 
    The regulations set by this Chapter within each district shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall apply to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code 16-141; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-11-20. - Use regulations. 
    No structure or land shall be used and no structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or relocated except for a use as permitted in compliance with the regulations hereinafter established for the district in which it is located. 
(Prior code 16-142; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-11-30. - Minimum lot size. 
    No building shall be erected on a lot of less size than hereinafter specified by the regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(Prior code 16-143; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-11-40. - Density. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulatory techniques controlling the distribution of population throughout the community are intended to achieve the desired environmental character as set forth in the Comprehensive Development Plan and to achieve a practical, economic and functional relationship between the residential use of land and its consequent impact upon traffic circulation, public utilities, community facilities and other service demands. 
(b)  Method. In single-family residential development, the density is established by the minimum required lot size. In multifamily residential development, the determination of the number of allowable dwelling units on a given property being developed shall be made by dividing the net area of the parcel to be developed by the number of square feet required per dwelling unit. 
(Prior code 16-144; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-11-50. - Building location. 
(a)  Setback. 
(1)  No building shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or relocated so that any portion thereof is closer to the base setback line than the minimum setback distance hereinafter specified by the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(2)  The only structures permitted within such setback area shall be necessary highway and traffic signs, public utility lines, fences, screens and mailboxes. 
(b)  Offsets. No building shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or relocated so that any portion thereof is closer to any lot line than the offset distance hereinafter specified by the regulations for the district in which it is located, except in any case of multifamily, commercial or industrial use structures, where two (2) or more buildings on adjoining lots may be erected with common or directly adjoining walls, provided that the requirements of building codes relative to such construction are complied with and provided that, at both ends of such row-type buildings, the applicable offset requirements shall be complied with. 
(c)  Maintenance and use of setback and offset areas. 
(1)  All setback and offset areas which are not fully contained within and concealed by a solid fence, wall or other similar screening device shall be landscaped and kept clean and free from the accumulation of debris and refuse and shall not be used for the storage or display of equipment, products, vehicles or any other material, except as may be specifically otherwise permitted under this Chapter; and 
(2)  In addition to the requirements outlined in Paragraph (1) above and regardless of whether or not any such setback or offset area is fully contained within and concealed by a solid fence, wall or other similar screening device, a clear, open passageway no less than ten (10) feet wide shall be maintained in all setback and offset areas in order to provide for ingress and egress of emergency vehicles. 
(Prior code 16-145; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2013-1454) 
Sec. 16-11-60. - Open space. 
(a)  Minimum open space per dwelling unit. No building used in whole or in part for residential purposes shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or relocated on a lot so as to reduce the usable livable open space of such lot to less than that thereinafter specified by the regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(b)  Usability of required open space. To be considered usable, livable open space shall be readily accessible and of a size and shape which can be reasonably considered to provide for amenities and the necessities of light, air, play space, yard area, garden, etc., but shall not include parking area and drives. 
(Prior code 16-146; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-11-70. - Minimum exterior and interior standards. 
(a)  All single-family detached dwellings shall meet the following minimum exterior and interior standards: 
(1)  All dwellings shall be set on and attached to a permanent recessed foundation and shall include a crawl space. 
(2)  The pitch of the roof shall be not less than three (3) inches of rise for each one (1) foot of horizontal run. 
(3)  Roofing materials shall be asphalt shingles or the equivalent. 
(4)  All dwellings shall face the public street. 
(5)  The exterior finish of all dwellings shall be of brick, wood, masonite or a cosmetically equivalent finish and shall be of acceptable similarity to the surrounding residential dwellings. 
(6)  All dwellings shall have a minimum usable living area of one thousand (1,000) square feet excluding garages. 
(7)  All newly constructed dwellings shall require an enclosed garage with a minimum usable area of two hundred (200) square feet. Building additions, decks, remodeling and similar improvements to existing nonconforming dwellings as defined in this Chapter shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(8)  All dwelling sites shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. All parking surfaces shall be hard surfaced. 
(b)  All non-residential buildings that are not subject to Commercial Corridor Plan baseline design criteria shall meet the following minimum exterior standards: 
(1)  Use of metal as the predominant finish material is permitted only when an architectural wainscot, or similar architectural feature, is included in the building design. The wainscot shall be installed as follows: 
a.  In all zoning districts other than Heavy Industrial (I-H), the wainscot shall extend the entire length of all building facades facing a public or private street. 
b.  In the Heavy Industrial (I-H) zone, the wainscot shall be applied to the primary entrance to the building, administrative offices, and other portions of the building visible to visitors using the primary building entrance or administrative offices; 
c.  All wainscot shall extend a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in height from the building grade; 
d.  The wainscot shall wrap around the adjoining sides of the building for a minimum distance of five (5) feet before terminating, unless the building architecture dictates a lesser distance. 
e.  Wainscot material shall either be brick; stone or high quality stone veneer; concrete masonry units of an architectural grade, such as split-face, ground face, or fluted block; or any other material that is consistent in terms of high quality, durability, and compatibility with the abovementioned materials. 
(Ord. 2015-1502 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1502 , adopted Aug. 8, 2015, repealed the former  16-11-70 and enacted a new  16-11-70 as set out herein. The former  16-11-70 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the prior code 16-147, Ord. 2006-1236, 1, Ord. 2007-1296, 1. 
Sec. 16-11-80. - Minimum setback requirements from existing oil and gas wells for low-density development. 
    The minimum setback distance between property included in any new land use proposal for low-density surface development and existing oil and gas wells shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet, measured from the nearest exterior property line of any proposed lot. For purposes of this Article, low-density areas shall include those areas zoned Estate Residential (E-1) and Limited and Heavy Industrial (I-L and I-H), and new land use proposal shall be defined as any proposal that has not yet received preliminary plat approval. 
(Prior code 16-148; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-11-90. - Minimum setback requirements from existing oil and gas wells for high-density development. 
    The minimum setback distance between property included in any new land use proposal for high-density surface development and existing oil and gas wells shall be three hundred fifty (350) feet, measured from the nearest exterior property line of any proposed lot. For purposes of this Article, high-density areas shall include all zoning districts, with the specific exception of those areas identified as low-density in this Article, and new land use proposal shall be defined as any proposal that has not yet received preliminary plat approval. 
(Prior code 16-149; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-11-100. - Landscaping and buffering requirements for new land use proposals for surface development of property adjacent to existing oil and gas wells. 
    As a condition of approval for any new land use proposal for the surface development of any property adjacent to existing oil and gas wells, the Town Board, after consideration by the Planning Commission, may impose reasonable landscaping and other buffering requirements for such proposals to ensure the safety of the citizens of the Town and to mitigate any noise or visual impacts created thereby. 
(Prior code 16-150; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XII - Single-Family Residential SF-1 District 

Sec. 16-12-10. - Intent. 
    The Single-Family Residential SF-1 District is intended to provide for the development of single-family dwellings with a full complement of accessory uses. It is intended that such development be served by institutional uses and community facilities compatible with the character of the district. 
(Prior code 16-161; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-12-20. - Use regulations. 
    A building or lot may be used for the following uses and no other: 
(1)  Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
a.  All single-family detached dwellings, including manufactured homes, which otherwise meet the minimum standards set forth in Section 16-11-70 of this Chapter. 
b.  Public parks and recreation areas. 
c.  Public and private schools. 
d.  Places of assembly (small). 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  Private garages, carports and paved parking areas. 
b.  Private residential and private group outdoor recreational facilities, including, by way of example but not of limitation, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
c.  Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 16-10-20 of this Chapter. 
d.  Service buildings and facilities normally incidental to the use of a public park or recreation area. 
e.  Any other structure or use clearly incidental to and commonly associated with the operation of a principal use permitted by right. 
(3)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this District upon approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
a.  Child care centers. 
b.  Nursing and rest homes. 
c.  Private commercial outdoor recreational facilities. 
d.  Public administrative offices and service buildings. 
e.  Public utility installations, including transmission lines and substations. 
f.  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII pertaining thereto. 
g.  Small group living facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII pertaining thereto. 
h.  Any use which is compatible for inclusion within this District and which meets the standards and requirements of conditional use grants as set forth in Article VII. 
i.  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials as defined in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-162; Ord. 2006-1232 3, 4; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2010-1372 4; Ord. 2011-1406 6, 7) 
Sec. 16-12-30. - Density. 
    Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-163; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-12-40. - Building location. 
    Minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet. Minimum offset shall be five (5) feet. 
(Prior code 16-164; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-12-50. - Open space. 
    As a part of the minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet per dwelling unit, a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet thereof shall be livable open space. 
(Prior code 16-165; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-12-60. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-166; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XIII - Single-Family Attached Residential SF-2 District 

Sec. 16-13-10. - Intent. 
    The Single-Family Attached Residential SF-2 District is intended to provide for residential development of single-family attached dwellings of the duplex or townhouse type where all dwelling units have ground level occupancy and private entrances at relatively low density and where such development would be compatible with surrounding residential uses. 
(Prior code 16-181; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-13-20. - Use regulations. 
    A building or lot may be used for the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
a.  Single-family attached dwellings of two (2) or more units but not more than six (6) dwelling units per structure. 
b.  Public parks and recreation areas. 
c.  Public and private schools. 
d.  Places of assembly (small). 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use permitted in the Single-Family Residential District. 
(3)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this District upon approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII: 
a.  Any conditional use permitted in the Single-Family Residential District. 
b.  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
c.  Small group living facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
d.  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-182; Ord. 2006-1232 5; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1321 D; Ord. 2010-1372 3; Ord. 2011-1406 8) 
Sec. 16-13-30. - Density. 
    Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-183; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-13-40. - Building location. 
    Minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet. Minimum offset shall be five (5) feet. 
(Prior code 16-184; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-13-50. - Open space. 
    As a part of the minimum lot area of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet per dwelling unit, a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet thereof shall be livable open space. 
(Prior code 16-185; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-13-60. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-186; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XIV - Estate Residential Districts 
Division 1 - Estate Residential E-1 District 

Sec. 16-14-10. - Intent. 
    The Estate Residential E-1 District (E-1 District) is intended to provide for large lot residential subdivisions permitting the keeping of certain large domestic animals as accessory uses and providing for the maximum usage of topographic features to promote a balance of residential zoning by creating a semi-rural environment. 
(Prior code 16-201; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-20. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Public parks and recreation areas. 
(3)  Public and private schools. 
(4)  Places of assembly (small). 
(5)  Golf courses. 
(Ord. 2011-1406 9) 
Sec. 16-14-30. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    As defined by this Code, all of the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the Estate Residential E-1 District: 
(1)  All permitted accessory uses set forth in Article XII of this Chapter as outlined in the Single-Family Residential SF-1 District. 
(2)  Keeping of animals. Contrary provisions of this Code notwithstanding, large domestic animals shall be permitted as an accessory use in the Estate Residential E-1 District. 
(3)  For the purpose of this Section only, large domestic animals are defined as and shall be limited to horses, ponies, mules, donkeys and llamas. For each permitted animal, one (1) acre of lot area inclusive of improvements shall be required. Offspring shall be allowed until the weaning process is complete. 
(Prior code 16-203; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-40. - Conditional uses. 
    The following shall be permitted conditional uses in the Estate Residential E-1 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
(1)  Public utility installations, including transmission lines and substations. 
(2)  Private commercial outdoor recreation facilities. 
(3)  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII pertaining thereto. 
(4)  Small group living facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII pertaining thereto. 
(5)  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(6)  Business and commercial uses within parcels of no less than three (3) acres. 
(Ord. 2011-1406 10; Ord. 2012-1436 2) 
Sec. 16-14-60. - Building location. 
    No building or structure may be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line. The foregoing notwithstanding, no accessory building housing domestic animals may be located within thirty-five (35) feet of any property line, and such accessory buildings may not be located closer than seventy-five (75) feet from any residential dwelling. 
(Prior code 16-206; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-70. - Minimum exterior and interior standards. 
    All single-family detached dwellings in the Estate Residential E-1 District shall meet the following minimum exterior and interior standards: 
(1)  All dwellings shall be set on and attached to a permanent recessed foundation and shall include a crawl space. 
(2)  The pitch of the roof shall not be less than three (3) inches of rise for each one (1) foot of horizontal run. 
(3)  Roofing materials shall be asphalt shingles or the equivalent. 
(4)  All dwellings shall face the public street. 
(5)  The exterior finish of all dwellings shall be of brick, wood, masonite or a cosmetically equivalent finish, and shall be of acceptable similarity to the surrounding residential dwellings. 
(6)  All dwellings shall have a minimum useable living area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, excluding garages. 
(7)  All dwellings shall have an enclosed two-car garage. 
(Prior code 16-207; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-50. - Density. 
    Minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the E-1 District shall be one (1) acre, except where individual sewage disposal systems have been authorized and approved, the minimum lot size of two and one-half (21/2) acres.  
(Prior code 16-205; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-80. - Curb, gutter and sidewalk. 
    The Town may, in its sole discretion, approve the construction of public streets in the Estate Residential E-1 District without accompanying curbs, gutters or sidewalks. All streets constructed in the Estate Residential E-1 District, regardless of whether or not curbs, gutters and sidewalks are constructed in conjunction therewith, shall meet all specifications of construction as set forth in this Code. 
(Prior code 16-208; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-90. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-209; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-100. - Individual sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  The Town may, in its sole discretion, approve individual sewage disposal systems in the Estate Residential E-1 District subject to approval of such systems by the State Department of Health and such other state or local agencies whose approval may be required for the installation of such systems. The Town may consider the following criteria in approving individual sewage disposal systems: 
(1)  Proximity of public sewer. 
(2)  The topography, size and location of the property. 
(3)  Practicality and economic feasibility of connecting to public sewer. 
(4)  Engineering and technological issues which may impact the use and safety of individual sewage disposal systems. 
(b)  Approval of individual sewage disposal systems by the State Department of Health or other appropriate state or local agencies shall be a condition precedent to the approval of such systems by the Town, but shall not require the Town to approve the use of such systems in the Town. No building permit shall be issued by the Town until an individual sewage disposal system permit is obtained from the State Department of Health or other appropriate state or local agency; and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Town until a final inspection and approval of the system by the State Department of Health or other appropriate state or local agency has been obtained. 
(Prior code 16-210; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Division 2 - Estate Residential E-2 District 

Sec. 16-14-210. - Intent. 
(a)  The Estate Residential E-2 District (E-2 District) is intended to provide for single-family residential subdivision development which utilizes public water and sewer services and provides for such development to be served by community facilities which are compatible with the District, while at the same time providing for the maximum usage of topographic features to promote a balance of residential zoning, open space features and a semi-rural environment which will utilize urban-level services and improvements which are required in the Single-Family Residential District. 
(b)  The use of the E-2 District is also intended to encourage the clustering of homes on lots which may be smaller than one (1) acre in size to encourage both open space areas and active and passive recreational uses, provided that any such lots meet all of the density requirements outlined in Section 16-14-250 herein. 
(Prior code 16-211; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-220. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
(1)  All single-family dwellings permitted as uses by right in the SF-1, SF-2 and E-1 zoning districts set forth in Articles XII, XIII and XIV of this Chapter. 
(2)  Public parks and recreation areas. 
(3)  Public and private schools. 
(4)  Places of assembly (small). 
(5)  Golf courses. 
(Ord. 2011-1406 11) 
Sec. 16-14-230. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    As defined by this Code, all permitted accessory uses set forth in Article XII of this Chapter as outlined in the Single-Family Residential SF-1 District shall be permitted accessory uses in the Estate Residential E-2 District. 
(Prior code 16-213; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-240. - Conditional uses. 
    The following shall be permitted conditional uses in the Estate Residential E-2 District, subject to the approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
(1)  Public utility installations, including transmission lines and substations. 
(2)  Private commercial outdoor recreation facilities. 
(3)  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII pertaining thereto. 
(4)  Small group living facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII pertaining thereto. 
(5)  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2011-1406 12) 
Sec. 16-14-250. - Density. 
    The following uses shall be permitted by right in the Estate Residential E-2 District: 
(1)  The minimum net lot area per dwelling unit in the E-2 District shall be one (1) acre, with this minimum net lot area only including the land mass situated entirely within the boundary of the subject lot. This minimum net lot area shall not include any tracts, easements or rights-of-way which are shown on the master plan or subdivision plat for any public or private streets, alleys, detention areas, etc., which are required and earmarked to serve the entire development. However, the area of any drainage and/or utility easements which are situated entirely within the boundary of any individual dwelling lot shall be included in the calculation of the minimum net lot area for any such individual dwelling lot. To encourage the clustering of homes along with open space and/or passive and active recreational uses within the E-2 District, bonus units may be granted which will allow more than one (1) dwelling unit per acre. For the purposes of this Section, the term open space and/or passive and active recreational uses shall only include common open space and/or passive and recreational use areas not included within individual building lots. The criteria for granting the bonus units within a master plan or a preliminary plat are as follows: 
Amount of Open Space and/or Recreational Uses Amount of Bonus Units Granted Less than 10% 0 Equal to or greater than 10% 5% Equal to or greater than 20% 10% Equal to or greater than 30% 15% Equal to or greater than 40% 20% Equal to 50% 25% Greater than 50%* * In the event more than 50% of the land mass of any development is earmarked for open space and/or recreational uses, the amount of bonus units which may be granted will be determined by the Planning Commission.  
(2)  In no event shall the minimum net lot area for any single-family detached dwelling be less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, with this minimum net lot area only including the land mass situated entirely within the boundary of the subject lot. This minimum net lot area shall not include any tracts, easements or rights-of-way which are shown on the master plan or subdivision plat for any public or private streets, alleys, detention areas, etc., which are required and earmarked to serve the entire development. 
(3)  In no event shall the minimum net lot area for any single-family attached dwelling be less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, with this minimum net lot area only including the land mass situated entirely within the boundary of the subject lot. This minimum net lot area shall not include any tracts, easements or rights-of-way which are shown on the master plan or subdivision plat for any public or private streets, alleys, detention areas, etc., which are required and earmarked to serve the entire development. 
(4)  Common areas and public parks or facilities are excluded from the minimum lot size requirement set forth herein. 
(Prior code 16-215; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-260. - Building location. 
(a)  For single-family detached dwelling units: minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet; minimum offset shall be five (5) feet. 
(b)  For single-family attached dwelling units: minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet; minimum offset for any wall not adjoining another dwelling unit wall shall be five (5) feet; and there shall not be any minimum offset requirement for any walls which adjoin any other dwelling unit wall. 
(Prior code 16-216; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-270. - Open space. 
    Minimum livable open space as defined in Article II of this Chapter per dwelling unit shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-217; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-280. - Minimum exterior and interior standards. 
(a)  All single-family detached dwellings in the Estate Residential E-2 District shall meet the following minimum exterior and interior standards: 
(1)  All dwellings shall be set on and attached to a permanent recessed foundation and shall include a crawl space. 
(2)  The pitch of the roof shall not be less than three (3) inches of rise for each one (1) foot of horizontal run. 
(3)  Roofing materials shall be asphalt shingles or the equivalent. 
(4)  All dwellings shall face, abut and have access to a public or private street approved by the Town. 
(5)  The exterior finish of all dwellings shall be of brick, wood, masonite or a cosmetically equivalent finish, and shall be of acceptable similarity to the surrounding residential dwellings. 
(6)  All dwellings shall have a minimum usable living area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, excluding garages. 
(7)  All dwellings shall have an attached enclosed garage with a minimum usable area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(b)  All single-family attached dwellings in the Estate Residential E-2 District shall meet the following minimum exterior and interior standards: 
(1)  All dwellings shall be set on and attached to a permanent recessed foundation and shall include a crawl space. 
(2)  The pitch of the roof shall not be less than three (3) inches of rise for each one (1) foot of horizontal run. 
(3)  Roofing materials shall be asphalt shingles or the equivalent. 
(4)  All dwellings shall face, abut and have access to a public or private street approved by the Town. 
(5)  The exterior finish of all dwellings shall be of brick, wood, masonite or a cosmetically equivalent finish, and shall be of acceptable similarity to the surrounding residential dwellings. 
(6)  All dwellings shall have a minimum usable living area of one thousand (1,000) square feet, excluding garages. 
(7)  All dwellings shall have an attached enclosed garage with a minimum usable area of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-218; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-14-290. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    All dwelling units shall have a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. 
(Prior code 16-219; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XV - Multifamily Residential MF-1 District 

Sec. 16-15-10. - Intent. 
    The Multifamily Residential MF-1 District is intended to provide for residential development of multifamily dwellings in areas where such development would be compatible with surrounding uses and where such intensive use would not create service problems. 
(Prior code 16-221; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-15-20. - Use regulations. 
    A building or lot may be used for the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
a.  Multifamily dwellings of two (2) or more units. 
b.  Public parks and recreation areas. 
c.  Places of assembly (small). 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  Private garages, carports and paved parking areas. 
b.  Signs, subject to the provisions of Article IX of this Chapter. 
c.  Private residential and private group outdoor recreational facilities. 
d.  Service buildings and facilities normally incidental to the use of a public park or recreation area. 
e.  Any other structures or use clearly incidental to and commonly associated with the operation of a principal use permitted by right. 
(3)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this District upon approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
a.  Private commercial outdoor recreational facilities. 
b.  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII pertaining thereto. 
c.  Small group living facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII pertaining thereto. 
d.  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-222; Ord. 2004-1183 1; Ord. 2006-1232 10, 11; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1321 D; Ord. 2010-1372 3; Ord. 2011-1406 13, 14) 
Sec. 16-15-30. - Density. 
    Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-223; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-15-40. - Building location. 
    Minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet. Minimum offset shall be six (6) inches for every foot of building height. 
(Prior code 16-224; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-15-50. - Open space. 
    Minimum livable open space per dwelling unit shall be nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-225; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-15-60. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-226; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XVI - High-Density Multifamily Residential MF-2 District 

Sec. 16-16-30. - Density. 
    Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-243; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 

Sec. 16-16-10. - Intent. 
    The High-Density Multifamily Residential MF-2 District is intended to provide for more intensive development of multifamily residential district in areas where such development would be compatible with surrounding areas and where such intensive use would not create service problems. 
(Prior code 16-241; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-16-20. - Use regulations. 
    A building or lot may be used for the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
a.  Multifamily dwelling of four (4) or more units. 
b.  Public parks and recreation areas. 
c.  Places of assembly (small). 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use permitted in the Multifamily Residential District. 
(3)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this District upon approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
a.  Any conditional use permitted in the Multifamily Residential District. 
b.  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
c.  Small group living facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
d.  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials as defined in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-242; Ord. 2006-1232 12; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1321 D; Ord. 2010-1372 3; Ord. 2011-1406 15) 
Sec. 16-16-40. - Building location. 
    Minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet. Minimum offset shall be six (6) inches for every foot of building height. 
(Prior code 16-244; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-16-50. - Open space. 
    Minimum livable open space per dwelling unit shall be four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-245; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-16-60. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-246; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XVII - Neighborhood Commercial NC District 

Sec. 16-17-10. - Intent. 
    The Neighborhood Commercial NC District is intended to provide for appropriately located groups of retail stores and service establishments serving the daily needs of a local neighborhood and of such character, scale, appearance and operation as to be compatible with the character of the surrounding residential areas. 
(Prior code 16-261; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-17-20. - Use regulations. 
    A building or lot may be used for the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
a.  Retail stores, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Food store, supermarket. 
2.  Food store, convenience. 
3.  Delicatessen. 
4.  Bakery goods store. 
5.  Liquor store. 
6.  Hardware store. 
7.  Drug store. 
b.  Customer service establishments, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Barber and beauty shops. 
2.  Restaurant and bar. 
3.  Laundromat and coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment. 
4.  Laundry and dry-cleaning pick-up station. 
5.  Fine art studio. 
c.  Business, professional or public service offices, not in excess of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per establishment. 
d.  Seasonal sales and farmers markets, subject to the provision of Article XXXII of this Chapter. 
e.  Places of assembly (small). 
f.  Other similar uses as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Chapter. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of a business. 
b.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
c.  Signs, subject to the provisions of Article IX of this Chapter. 
d.  Residential quarters for the owner, proprietor, commercial tenant, employee or caretaker, located in the same building as the business. 
e.  Any other structure or use clearly incidental to and commonly associated with the operation of a principal use permitted by right. 
f.  Temporary greenhouse structures in which growing plants are kept for sale to the public. 
g.  Mobile food vending as set forth in Section 16-10-110. 
(3)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this District upon approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
a.  Gasoline service stations. 
b.  Public utility installations. 
c.  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
d.  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-262; Ord. 2006-1232 13; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1321 D, F; Ord. 2010-1372 3; Ord. 2011-1404 3, 4; Ord. 2011-1406 16) 
(Ord. 2015-1503 , 2) 
Sec. 16-17-30. - Size and location criteria. 
    The size and location of Neighborhood Commercial NC Districts shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Evidence of justifiable community need. 
(2)  Adequate customer potential. 
(3)  Satisfactory relationship to the pedestrian and vehicular circulation system. 
(4)  Potential contribution to the economic welfare of the community. 
(Prior code 16-263; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-17-40. - Lot size. 
    Minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-264; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-17-50. - Building location. 
    Minimum setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Minimum offset shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Prior code 16-265; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-17-60. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-266; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-17-70. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-40. 
(Prior code 16-267; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XVIII - Central Business CB District 

Sec. 16-18-10. - Intent. 
    The Central Business CB District is intended to provide for the development of a concentration of commercial, office, recreational, cultural, entertainment and governmental facilities serving as a center of community activity. It is the further intent of this District to conserve and enhance the existing central business area for the benefit of the community as a whole. 
(Prior code 16-281; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-18-20. - Use regulations. 
    A building or lot may be used for the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
a.  Any principal use permitted by right in the Neighborhood Commercial District. 
b.  Retail stores. 
c.  Customer service establishments. 
d.  Business and professional offices. 
e.  Banks and saving and loan offices. 
f.  Medical and dental clinics. 
g.  Public administrative offices and service buildings. 
h.  Public utility offices and installations. 
i.  Public libraries. 
j.  Places of assembly (small). 
k.  Commercial lodging. 
l.  Theaters. 
m.  Minor repair, rental and servicing establishments. 
n.  Passenger transportation terminals, not including truck terminals. 
o.  One-family residential dwellings subject to the regulations set forth in Sections 16-11-70, 16-12-20(2), 16-12-30, 16-12-40, 16-12-50 and 16-12-60 of this Chapter. 
p.  Automobile sales. 
q.  Plumbing and heating contractors. 
r.  Other similar uses as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Chapter. 
s.  Residential uses on the upper floors of commercial buildings. 
(2)  Permitted accessory uses. 
a.  Any accessory uses permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial District. 
b.  Signs, subject to the provisions of Article IX of this Chapter. 
c.  Mobile food vending as set forth in Section 16-10-110. 
(3)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this District upon approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
a.  Commercial parking facilities. 
b.  Gasoline service stations. 
c.  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
d.  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2013-1458) 
(Ord. 2015-1503 , 3) 
Sec. 16-18-30. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-283; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-18-40. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-40. 
(Prior code 16-284; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XIX - General Commercial GC District 

Sec. 16-19-10. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
(1)  Drive-in restaurants. 
(2)  Grocery stores and supermarkets. 
(3)  Gasoline service stations. 
(4)  Car washes. 
(5)  Commercial lodging. 
(6)  Restaurants and bars. 
(7)  Outdoor sales areas, such as garden shops. 
(8)  Automobile sales and service establishments, including used car lots. 
(9)  Lumber and building supply yards. 
(10)  Public, private, commercial and private group outdoor recreational facilities. 
(11)  Bowling alleys. 
(12)  Business and professional offices. 
(13)  Places of assembly (small). 
(14)  Places of assembly (large). 
(15)  Other similar uses as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses: 
(1)  Any accessory use permitted in the Central Business CB District. 
(2)  Mobile food vending as set forth in Section 16-10-110. 
(3)  Accessory outdoor storage: 
a.  Shall be used only for storage of materials, inventory or equipment used or offered for sale in the ordinary course of the business activity occurring on-premises, including overstock or bulk items. 
b.  Outdoor storage areas shall be located in the rear or side of the building and shall not abut or face arterial or major collector streets as defined by the Town's street standards. 
c.  Shall not displace any off-street parking spaces depicted on the approved site plan for the premises. 
d.  Items located in outdoor storage areas shall be permanently and fully screened from adjacent residential property, public rights-of-way and private drives by opaque structural walls, opaque fencing and/or a combination thereof that is at least as tall as the tallest items in storage. Screening materials shall conceal all items in storage, shall be opaque and consist predominately of colors and materials generally matching the principal building on the premises. Chain link screening material, with or without slats, is prohibited. 
e.  If site constraints preclude items in storage from being fully concealed as required in sub-section (d) above, a proposed screening plan shall be reviewed and subject to approval based on the conditional use grant standards and requirements applicable to the Conditional Use Grant process as elsewhere provided in this Chapter. 
(4)  Outdoor display of merchandise for sale on-site: 
a.  Outdoor display of merchandise shall be incidental to the primary retail use. 
b.  Merchandise on outdoor display shall consist only of inventory offered for sale within the principal building on the premises. 
c.  Outdoor merchandise display shall be adjacent to the principal building and shall be within forty (40) feet of a customer entrance to the principal building, while maintaining at all times no less than four (4) feet of clear width on the sidewalk for pedestrian use. 
d.  Outdoor merchandise display shall not displace any off-street parking spaces depicted on the approved site plan. 
(5)  Seasonal sales: 
a.  Outdoor display of merchandise for seasonal sales shall be located in the site plan-approved parking area for the premises. 
b.  The seasonal sales outdoor display area shall not displace more than five percent (5%) of site-plan required off-street parking spaces or impede parking lot circulation. 
c.  All seasonal sales inventory, structures and improvements shall be removed upon the conclusion of the seasonal sale period, and the parking surface shall be restored to its former condition. For purposes of this Section, seasonal sales shall mean temporary sales of inventory or services offered for sale on a seasonal basis in the principal building for a duration of no longer than ninety (90) consecutive days for each seasonal display, whether or not such inventory or service is displayed in a temporary structure. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this District upon approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
(1)  Outdoor theater. 
(2)  Nonaccessory signs. 
(3)  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
(4)  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-301; Ord. 2005-1213 1; Ord. 2006-1232 15; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1321 D, F; Ord. 2010-1372 3; Ord. 2011-1406 18) 
(Ord. 2015-1503 , 4; Ord. 2018-1572 1) 
Sec. 16-19-20. - Lot size. 
    Minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-302; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-19-30. - Building location. 
    Minimum setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Minimum offset shall be twenty (20) feet unless a lesser offset distance is approved by the Planning Commission. With the exception of approved common or directly adjoining walls in accordance with Paragraph 16-11-50(b)(1) of this Chapter, the minimum offset distance shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
(Prior code 16-303; Ord. 2005-1213 2; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-19-40. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-304; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-19-50. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-40. 
(Prior code 16-305; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XX - Heavy Industrial I-H District 

Sec. 16-20-10. - Intent. 
    The Heavy Industrial I-H District is intended to identify and preserve land suitable for heavy industrial use and to provide for the orderly grouping of such uses in an appropriate setting. The further intent of this District to establish such regulatory controls as are deemed necessary to promote a harmonious relationship between heavy industrial uses and the community at large. 
(Prior code 16-321; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-20-20. - Use regulations. 
(a)  All uses in this zone are conditioned upon the Town's approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as set forth elsewhere in this Code. In addition to the site plan requirement, proposed users shall submit evidence satisfactory to the Town that the proposed use will comply in all respects with the performance standards for industrial zones as set forth in this Chapter. The proposed user shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the Town in the evaluation and analysis of the evidence presented by the user of compliance with the performance standards for industrial zones. This shall include, but shall not be limited to, costs incurred for services rendered by the respective health department of either Weld County or Larimer County or similar public or private agencies. 
(b)  Uses by right. Subject to the requirements set forth in Subsection (a) above, the following uses shall be permitted in the Heavy Industrial I-H District: 
(1)  Petrochemical industries. 
(2)  Rubber refining industries. 
(3)  Primary metal and related industries. 
(4)  Trucking operations. 
(5)  Slaughterhouses. 
(6)  Foundries. 
(7)  Automobile, farm equipment and machinery sales. 
(8)  Places of assembly (small). 
(9)  Places of assembly (large). 
(10)  Any use otherwise permitted in a Limited Industrial I-L Zoning District. 
(11)  Any use otherwise permitted in a General Commercial GC Zoning District. 
(12)  Other similar uses as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Assuming approval of designated uses by right as aforesaid, the following shall be permitted accessory uses in the Heavy Industrial I-H District: 
(1)  Office, power supply and other such uses normally auxiliary to the principal industrial use. 
(2)  Parking and service areas. 
(3)  Accessory signs as otherwise regulated by this Code or state laws. 
(4)  Residential quarters for guards or caretakers. 
(5)  Accessory outdoor storage that is normally auxiliary to the principal industrial use of the property. Such outdoor storage areas may be surfaced with aggregates or recycled asphalt meeting CDOT Class 5 or 6 aggregate base course gradation, or any subsequent amendments thereto. Such surface materials shall require a plan for perpetual maintenance and dust abatement to be approved by the Engineering Department. However, all areas which are designed to be used for parking of vehicles and all interior drives connecting such parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. 
(6)  Any other structure or use clearly incidental to and commonly associated with the operation of a principal use permitted by right, conditioned upon the approval of such accessory use pursuant to the site plan requirements set forth herein. 
(7)  Mobile food vending as set forth in Section 16-10-110. 
(d)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Kennels. 
(2)  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
(3)  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(4)  Adult businesses. 
(Ord. 2010-1395 2; Ord. 2011-1406 19; Ord. 2012-1429 2) 
(Ord. 2015-1503 , 5) 
Sec. 16-20-30. - Lot size. 
    Minimum lot area shall be sixty thousand (60,000) square feet. 
Sec. 16-20-40. - Building location. 
minimum setback shall be thirty (30) feet, and minimum offset shall be twenty (20) feet. Should a Heavy Industrial I-H District adjoin any residential district, all structures located in the Heavy Industrial I-H District shall be set back or offset a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet and shall be permanently screened with a planting screen at least six (6) feet wide and fifteen (15) feet high. 
Sec. 16-20-50. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Uses in the Heavy Industrial I-H District shall comply in all respects with the off-street parking requirements as set forth in Section 16-10-30 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-325; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-20-60. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    Uses in the Heavy Industrial I-H District shall comply in all respects with the off-street loading requirements as set forth in Section 16-10-40 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-326; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-20-70. - Landscaping requirements. 
    Appropriate landscaping shall be required in accordance with this Code and any regulations adopted by the Town. All landscaping plans shall be submitted as part of the site plan herein required and shall be subject to approval by the Town. 
(Prior code 16-327; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXI - Limited Industrial I-L District 

Sec. 16-21-10. - Intent. 
    The Limited Industrial I-L District is intended to identify and preserve land suitable for limited industrial use and to provide for the orderly grouping of such uses in an appropriate setting. The intent of this District is to establish such regulatory controls as are deemed necessary to promote a harmonious relationship between limited industrial uses and the community at large. 
(Prior code 16-341; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-21-20. - Use regulations. 
(a)  All uses in this zone are conditioned upon the Town's approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the Site Plan Regulations of the Town as set forth elsewhere in this Code. In addition to the site plan requirement, proposed users shall submit evidence satisfactory to the Town that the proposed use will comply in all respects with the Performance Standards for Industrial Zones as set forth in this Chapter. 
(b)  Uses by right. Subject to the requirements set forth in Subsection (a) above, the following uses shall be permitted in the Limited Industrial I-L District: 
(1)  Manufacture of electronic instruments. 
(2)  Preparation of food products. 
(3)  Pharmaceutical manufacturing. 
(4)  Research and scientific laboratories. 
(5)  Manufacturing, assembly, processing and fabrication plants. 
(6)  Transportation terminals. 
(7)  General warehousing. 
(8)  Enclosed storage facilities. 
(9)  Printing and publishing houses. 
(10)  Automobile body repair shops. 
(11)  Plumbing and heating contractors. 
(12)  Painting and decorating contractors. 
(13)  Electrical contractors. 
(14)  Glazing, insulation, carpentry and masonry contractors. 
(15)  Public utility offices and installations. 
(16)  Places of assembly (small). 
(17)  Places of assembly (large). 
(18)  Any use otherwise permitted in the General Commercial GC District. 
(19)  Other similar uses as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Assuming approval of designated uses by right as aforesaid, the following shall be permitted accessory uses in the Limited Industrial I-L District: 
(1)  Office, power supply and other such uses normally auxiliary to the principal industrial use. 
(2)  Parking and service areas. 
(3)  Accessory signs as otherwise regulated by this Code or the laws of the State. 
(4)  Residential quarters for guards and caretakers. 
(5)  Accessory outdoor storage that is normally auxiliary to the principal industrial use of the property. The total square footage of accessory outdoor storage in the Limited Industrial I-L District shall not exceed sixty-five percent (65%) of the total square footage of the property. Any such storage located adjacent to a public or private street shall utilize screen walls, earth berms, landscaping, opaque fencing and/or a combination thereof to completely screen the storage, and no such storage shall be visible above or between said methods of screening. Chain-link fencing with slats shall not be considered adequate opaque fencing. Additionally, such outdoor storage areas may be surfaced with aggregates or recycled asphalt meeting CDOT Class 5 or 6 aggregate base course gradation, or any subsequent amendments thereto. Such surface materials shall require a plan for perpetual maintenance and dust abatement to be approved by the Engineering Department. However, all areas which are designed to be used for parking of vehicles and all interior drives connecting such parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. For the purposes of this Section, portions of the aggregate surface outdoor storage area may be utilized for parking of company-owned vehicles with a valid state license plate upon identification and Town approval of a site plan application. Such areas for parking of company-owned vehicles as identified on the approved site plan shall not be included in the calculation of outdoor storage for the site. 
(6)  Any other structure or use clearly incidental to and commonly associated with the operation of a principal use permitted by right, conditioned upon the approval of such accessory use pursuant to the site plan requirements set forth herein. 
(7)  Mobile food vending as set forth in Section 16-10-110. 
(d)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
(2)  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(e)  Set forth below is a listing of addresses for parcels of land which shall be deemed exempt from the requirements and limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-21-20(c)(5) above. Such exemption shall be deemed to run with the land identified below: 
(1)  7250 Greenridge Road; 
(2)  4477 Greenfield Drive; 
(3)  780 Garden Drive; and 
(4)  620 Technology Circle. 
(Prior code 16-342; Ord. 2006-1232 17; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1321 D, F; Ord. 2010-1372 3; Ord. 2011-1406 20; Ord. 2012-1429 3, 4; Ord. 2014-1475) 
(Ord. 2015-1503 , 6) 
Sec. 16-21-30. - Lot size. 
    Minimum lot area shall be the equivalent of two (2) times the total floor area of constructed improvements, but in no event shall such area be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-343; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-21-40. - Building location. 
    Except as otherwise specified in this Section, minimum setback shall be thirty (30) feet and minimum offset shall be twenty (20) feet. Should a Limited Industrial I-L Zoning District adjoin any residential zoning district or residential property, all of the following requirements shall be met for all such lots which adjoin any such residential zoning district or residential property: 
(1)  Any property line abutting a residential zoning district or residential property shall maintain a minimum setback and offset distance of thirty (30) feet, with said thirty-foot setback or offset distance being used for a substantial landscape buffer that adequately protects the adjoining residential properties from any negative impacts associated with the limited industrial use; 
(2)  The maximum height of any structure located within two hundred (200) feet of the respective residential zoning district boundary shall not exceed either the maximum height permitted for structures in the adjoining residential zoning district or, where applicable, the maximum height permitted for structures in any applicable Corridor Plan of the Town, whichever height is less; 
(3)  Gravel surfaces shall be allowed, subject to all of the following conditions being met: a) no such surface shall be permitted to be used in lieu of the paving requirements for parking and circulation areas on the site or within the subdivision which are currently required by this Code; b) no such surface shall be permitted to be any closer than two hundred (200) feet from the nearest residential zoning district boundary; c) in accordance with all county health department regulations and approvals, all such surfaces will be required to be treated on an ongoing basis for dust control and abatement; and d) decorative rocks and stones that are fully contained within landscaping islands and that are permitted by the Town's landscaping requirements will not be defined as gravel surfaces; 
(4)  With the exception of vehicles entering or exiting through open overhead doorways and the respective overhead doors being closed immediately following each such event of ingress and egress, all overhead doors which face the respective residential zoning district shall remain closed at all other times; 
(5)  To allow for landscape buffers and tree lawns, all paved areas for parking lots, interior drives which connect parking lots and any paved storage areas shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty-five (35) feet from any property lines which abut state highways, and shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from all other property lines; 
(6)  As part of the landscaping requirements of Section 16-21-70 of this Article, the applicant shall provide a detailed drawing of a landscaping buffer strip, which shall include all associated specifications, that will be planted along the entire length of any property line which adjoins any residential zoning district. Said landscaping buffer strip shall be approved by the Town as part of the site plan review process and shall also: a) be planted entirely within the property lines of the limited industrial zoning district lot; b) be required to be planted regardless of any fencing that may be installed on the lot; and c) be supplemental to, and not in lieu of, all other landscaping requirements associated with the limited industrial zoning district lot; and 
(7)  Any such use located on any such limited industrial zoning district lot shall also be required to adhere to all of the industrial performance standards relative to glare and heat, vibration, light, smoke emissions, odor emissions and particle emissions as outlined in Section 16-10-60 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-344; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-21-50. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Uses in the Limited Industrial I-L District shall comply in all respects with the off-street parking requirements as set forth in Section 16-10-30 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-345; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-21-60. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    Uses in the Limited Industrial I-L District shall comply in all respects with the off-street loading requirements as set forth in Section 16-10-40 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 16-346; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-21-70. - Landscaping requirements. 
    Appropriate landscaping shall be required in accordance with this Code and any regulations adopted by the Town. All landscaping plans shall be submitted as part of the site plan herein required and shall be subject to approval by the Town. 
(Prior code 16-347; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXII - Recreation and Open Space O District 

Sec. 16-22-10. - Intent. 
    The Recreation and Open Space O District is intended to preserve land for recreational uses and public and private open space. Residential development of such areas would be subject to rezoning. However, residential subdivisions could encompass open space areas if the open space within such developments was planned to overlay the previous Recreation and Open Space O District area. 
(Prior code 16-361; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-22-20. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal uses permitted by right. 
(1)  Public parks and recreation areas. 
(2)  Public schools. 
(3)  Public, private, commercial and private group outdoor recreational facilities. 
(4)  Other similar uses as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Permitted accessory uses. 
(1)  Service buildings and facilities normally incidental to the use of a public park and recreation area. 
(2)  Any other structure or use clearly incidental to and commonly associated with the operation of a principal use permitted by right. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in this District upon approval of a conditional use grant as provided in Article VII of this Chapter: 
(1)  Public administrative offices and services buildings. 
(2)  Public utility installations, including transmission lines and substations. 
(3)  Oil and gas facilities pursuant to the conditional use regulations contained in Article VII of this Chapter pertaining thereto. 
(4)  Subject to the applicable requirements of Section 16-7-70 of this Chapter, open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials, as defined in this Chapter. 
(5)  Open or surface mining operations for the development or extraction of solid materials. 
(Prior code 16-362; Ord. 2006-1232 18; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1321 D, F; Ord. 2010-1370 3; Ord. 2010-1372 3) 
Sec. 16-22-30. - Lot size. 
    Minimum lot area shall be one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet. 
(Prior code 16-363; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-22-40. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    See the provisions of Section 16-10-30. 
(Prior code 16-364; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXIII - Planned Unit Development Regulations 

Sec. 16-23-10. - Intent. 
(a)  The planned unit development (hereinafter called PUD) provisions contained herein are intended to provide for the planning and development of substantial tracts of land, suitable in location and character for the uses proposed, as unified and integrated entities in accordance with detailed development plans. 
(b)  Such planned unit developments are to be permitted as amendments to the Official Zoning District Map upon approval of a specific development proposal which complies with the requirements and standards set forth in this Chapter. 
(c)  The regulations contained herein, which are based on sound comprehensive planning principles, are adapted to unified planning and development and are intended to accomplish the purposes of public control to the same extent as do zoning and other regulations applicable to conventional lot-by-lot development, while simplifying, integrating and coordinating land development controls and providing necessary flexibility to encourage design innovation and creative community development. 
(d)  Specifically, the PUD provisions are intended to further the following objectives: 
(1)  To provide flexibility in land planning and development, resulting in amenable relationships between buildings and ancillary uses and permitting more intensive use of land where well-related open space and recreational facilities are integrated into the overall design. 
(2)  To encourage unity and diversity in land development, resulting in convenient and harmonious groupings of uses, structures and common facilities, varied type, design and layout of housing and other buildings and appropriate relationships of open spaces to intended uses and structures. 
(3)  To encourage unified and planned development of a site without customary subdivision into single lots and without specific application of the district regulations as provided for individual lots, subject to the regulations set forth herein. 
(4)  To provide for and encourage the preservation and enhancement of desirable natural landscape and other features unique to a development site. 
(5)  To provide reasonable standards and criteria by which the specific proposals for a PUD can be evaluated. 
(6)  To provide a procedure which can relate the design and layout of unified residential, commercial or industrial developments to the particular site and demand for such development in a manner consistent with the preservation of property values within established residential areas. 
(Prior code 16-381; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-23-20. - General location and planning requirements. 
(a)  Relation to major transportation system. Planned development districts shall be so located with respect to major streets and highways or other transportation facilities as to be directly accessible without creating traffic on minor streets in residential areas outside such districts. 
(b)  Relation to public utilities and community facilities. Planned development districts shall be so located in relation to public utilities and community facilities and services, either existing or to be available by the time development reaches the stage where they will be required, that such facilities can be provided at reasonable public cost. 
(c)  Relation to general pattern of urban development. Planned development districts shall be planned and located in general compliance with the Comprehensive Development Plan and shall relate the major elements of the urban pattern, including housing, commercial facilities and principal places of employment, by physical proximity of major streets so as to provide for the convenience and amenity of residents of the community and reduce general traffic congestion by a close relationship between origins and destinations. 
(Prior code 16-382; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-23-30. - Physical character of site. 
    The site shall be suitable for the development proposed without hazards to structures, occupants or any property from probability of flooding on the site or on adjacent lands, erosion or deposition of eroded material on adjacent lands, subsidence of the soil or other dangerous conditions. Soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall be appropriate to both kind and pattern of use intended. 
(Prior code 16-383; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-23-40. - Site planning; external relationships. 
(a)  Vehicular access. Entrances and exits for vehicles shall be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow with minimum hazards to passing traffic or to traffic entering or leaving the development. Merging or turnout lanes may be required where anticipated traffic flows from or to the planned development indicate the need for such lanes. In no case shall streets within a planned development district connect to streets outside the district in such a way as to encourage use of any minor streets for through traffic. 
(b)  Perimeter setback and screening. If topographical or other barriers do not provide adequate buffer between the planned development and adjacent uses, structures on the perimeter of the planned development shall be set back a distance equal to the minimum setback requirement of the adjoining district or shall be permanently screened by fences, walls or plantings as required to sufficiently protect the privacy and amenity of adjacent uses, to protect the planned development from potentially adverse external influences, such as a major street or highway and as necessary to make transition from adjoining districts. 
(c)  Mobile food vending. To the extent that mobile food vending is proposed for any site within a planned development under this Article, such activity shall be considered an accessory use, and shall be governed by the provisions of Section 16-10-110. 
(Prior code 16-384; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
(Ord. 2015-1503 , 7) 
Sec. 16-23-50. - Modifications of subdivision regulations. 
(a)  The improvements required under Article X of Chapter 17, including streets, storm drainage, sanitary sewerage and potable water systems, shall be provided in each type of planned unit development. 
(b)  The requirements and standards for the construction of streets and utilities set forth in the subdivision regulations shall be subject to modification where the plan and program for a PUD make adequate provision for vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation, recreation, utility and service needs of the tract when fully developed and occupied and which also provide such covenants, easements or other legal documents and provisions as will assume conformity to and successful implementation of the plan. 
(Prior code 16-385; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXIV - Residential Mixed Use Development Regulations 

Sec. 16-24-10. - Intent. 
    The intent of the residential mixed use zoning district (hereinafter referred to as the "RMU Zoning District") is to (1) provide for the development of mixed land uses in areas designated as such on the Land Use Plan Map of the Windsor Comprehensive Plan; (2) encourage the creation of a desirable mix of residential dwelling classifications which are compatible with, complimentary to and located on the same parcel as common recreational uses, open spaces and commercial and light industrial uses which are similar to those outlined below in Section 16-24-30; (3) provide for improved vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation and access; and (4) facilitate land use arrangements which preserve desirable natural landscape features. 
(Prior code 16-401; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-24-20. - Where permitted. 
    Subject to the general requirements set forth in this Code as well as the specific requirements set forth herein, an RMU zoning district may be established either in any area designated as such on the Land Use Plan Map of the Windsor Comprehensive Plan or in any area zoned or rezoned as such by the Town Board. 
(Prior code 16-402; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-24-30. - Use regulations. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the RMU zoning district: 
(1)  Any principal, accessory or conditional use permitted in any residential district, provided that such use, as proposed to be located, scaled and operated, meets the intent of the RMU zoning district as defined in Section 16-24-10 above; 
(2)  Recreational and open space uses; 
(3)  Office buildings and facilities required for the operation, administration and maintenance of the RMU development; 
(4)  Fully enclosed light industrial uses such as research and development facilities; light manufacturing and assembly facilities; electronics manufacturing facilities; printing and publishing firms; public and semipublic utility offices and installations, etc.; and 
(5)  Convenience centers, including retail stores and customer service establishments, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Convenience centers shall be designed to serve as integral parts of the development plans of RMU zoning districts, with the principal functions of convenience centers being to serve the residents of the development; 
b.  By reason of their location, construction, method of operation, signs, lighting, parking arrangements or other characteristics, convenience centers shall not cause adverse effects to the residential uses which are located either within or adjacent to the RMU zoning district, and, likewise, the convenience centers shall not create traffic congestion problems or traffic hazards for either vehicular traffic or pedestrians; and 
c.  Convenience stores and shops may be located within multiple-use buildings or a multiple-use building complex which contains residential dwelling units, administrative offices, recreational uses or common facilities which are designed to be used primarily by the residents of the development. 
(6)  Seasonal sales and farmers markets, subject to the provision of Article XXXII of this Chapter. 
(7)  Mobile food vending as an accessory use as set forth in Section 16-10-110. 
(Prior code 16-403; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2011-1404 5) 
(Ord. 2015-1503 , 8) 
Sec. 16-24-40. - Lot, area and height requirements. 
    The lot, area and height requirements in the RMU zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses. All residential uses shall meet all of the density, setback and offset requirements set forth in this Code for each respective type of dwelling unit. For example, all single-family dwelling units in an RMU zoning district shall have a minimum lot size of six thousand (6,000) square feet, a minimum setback requirement of twenty (20) feet and a minimum offset requirement of five (5) feet. Likewise, all other residential uses shall meet all of these similar types of requirements for the respective types of dwelling units. 
(2)  Commercial and light industrial uses. All commercial and light industrial uses in an RMU zoning district shall be required to be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet, and shall meet all of the offset requirements set forth in this Code for each respective type of commercial or light industrial land use. The density requirements for all commercial and light industrial uses shall meet all of the building coverage requirements outlined in Paragraph 16-24-60(a)(1) of this Chapter. 
(3)  Maximum lot area for commercial and light industrial uses. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area in an RMU zoning district may be used for any commercial and/or light industrial uses. 
(4)  Maximum height requirements. Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, the maximum height of any building in an RMU zoning district shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. Appurtenances such as clock towers or cupolas which are an integral part of any principal structure shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(5)  Minimum parcel size. The minimum parcel size required for an RMU development site shall be any size parcel which will accommodate all of the density, setback, offset, open space and building coverage requirements outlined herein for residential mixed use developments. 
(Prior code 16-404; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2011-1406 21) 
Sec. 16-24-50. - Site planning; internal relationships. 
(a)  Vehicular access. 
(1)  The design and layout of the street system within an RMU zoning district shall provide for an efficient, cost-effective and safe transportation system that will meet the Town's needs for convenient movement of people, goods and services. 
(2)  Single-family detached and attached dwelling units may have direct access from accessory off-street parking areas to a street. Vehicular access to off-street parking and loading areas accessory to multiple-family dwelling units shall be so designed, limited, combined and located so as to minimize traffic congestion on streets and promote safe and efficient traffic flow without excessive interruptions from driveways and entrances to parking areas. 
(b)  Pedestrian access. 
(1)  Pedestrian walkways shall be provided and shall form a logical, safe and convenient system for pedestrian access to all dwelling units and principal pedestrian destinations, such as churches and schools. Intersections of pedestrian walkways and street intersections shall be held to a minimum, and such walkways shall be otherwise located and designed so as to minimize contact with vehicular traffic. 
(2)  A building or lot shall not be required to have frontage on a public street, provided that every structure containing dwelling units which does not have frontage on a public street shall have access to a pedestrian walkway, court or other area designated as and guaranteed for general public use. 
(3)  Trails. See Paragraph 16-24-60(b)(4) below. 
(c)  Off-street parking and loading. 
(1)  The off-street parking requirements in the RMU zoning district shall be in compliance with the provisions outlined in Section 16-10-30 herein. 
(2)  The off-street loading area requirements in the RMU zoning district shall be in compliance with the provisions outlined in Section 16-10-40. 
(d)  Yards, courts and open spaces between buildings. Yards, courts and open spaces between buildings shall be designed and arranged in such a manner so as to ensure that all of the following requirements are met: adequate privacy and ventilation; access to and around buildings, off-street parking areas and loading areas; adequate space for landscaping; adequate spacing between buildings for security and visibility; and adequate space for recreational purposes and other functions being provided in the residential areas of the development site. 
(Prior code 16-405; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-24-60. - Open space and landscaping. 
(a)  Open space requirement. The minimum livable open space and landscaping requirements in the RMU zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  The total building coverage for all principal and accessory uses on any given RMU development site shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the site area and shall preferably cover no more than thirty-three percent (33%) of the site area. 
(2)  In order to allow for landscape buffers in all multifamily, commercial and light industrial uses, the minimum setback distances for all paving in an RMU zoning district shall be as follows: twenty-five (25) feet from arterial streets; twenty (20) feet from major collector streets; fifteen (15) feet from minor collector streets; ten (10) feet from local streets; and five (5) feet from all other property lines. 
(3)  Open landscape areas on any given RMU development site shall be at least twenty percent (20%) of the site area. In appropriate circumstances, however, the open landscape area may be reduced to a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the site area if the landscaping is of adequate density. 
(b)  Use and location. 
(1)  Open space required under this provision shall be located in a manner that will be convenient for use by the residents of the RMU development, with the location and purpose of such open space being consistent with both the character of the site and the location and use of other established open spaces in adjoining neighborhoods. 
(2)  Access to open space. Insofar as is reasonably practical, common livable open spaces for pedestrian use shall be located so as to be accessible from dwelling units with a minimum of street crossings. Pedestrian walkways and open spaces shall form an interconnected system, serving also as accessways to major pedestrian destinations, such as schools. The open space and walkway system shall be located in block interiors, and, except for all of the standards and requirements for parks which are outlined in the Windsor Parks and Recreation Master Plan and are referred to below in Paragraph (3), said open space and walkways shall be oriented away from exposure to automobile traffic. 
(3)  Parks. Upon review and recommendation by the Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board, any development within an RMU zoning district shall provide for parks and/or park land dedications in accordance with all of the standards and requirements outlined in the Windsor Parks and Recreation Master Plan. 
(4)  Trails. Pedestrian and bicycle trails shall be: (a) encouraged in all RMU zoning districts, and (b) required in any RMU zoning district in which trails are depicted in the Windsor Parks and Recreation Master Plan. 
(5)  Legal maintenance. Provision shall be made through covenants, easements, homeowners' associations or other means for the continuing maintenance of any common open spaces and private pedestrian ways not intended to be dedicated to the Town. 
(Prior code 16-406; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2012-1430 2) 
Sec. 16-24-70. - Submittal requirements. 
    In addition to all other subdivision and site planning requirements required by the Town, including, but not limited to, all corridor site planning requirements, the developer shall also be responsible for submitting all relevant plats, plans, documentation, calculations, etc., to address all of the development requirements of the RMU zoning district outlined in Sections 16-24-10 through 16-24-60 herein. 
(Prior code 16-407; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXV - Planned Mobile Home Park Development Regulations 

Sec. 16-25-10. - Intent. 
    The planned mobile home park development (hereinafter called "PD-MHP") provision is intended to encourage the unified planning and development of permanent mobile home parks providing all facilities and amenities appropriate to the need of residents. It is the further intent to provide for the orderly grouping of mobile homes, accessory uses and common facilities within the park and to provide such regulatory controls as will assure a harmonious relationship between the mobile home park and adjoining residential uses. 
(Prior code 16-421; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-25-20. - Where permitted. 
    Subject to the general requirements set forth in Article XXIII of this Chapter and additional requirements set forth herein, a PD-MHP may be established in any area indicated as a single-family residential area on the Proposed Land Use Plan. 
(Prior code 16-422; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-25-30. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  Any mobile home parked on any lot, parcel or tract in the Town but not included within an approved PD-MHP shall, after a period of forty-five (45) days, have the wheels removed and be placed on a suitable permanent foundation and be subject to all requirements of the district of its location. 
(b)  A mobile home may be parked within a PD-MHP, provided that within nine (9) months from the initial date of locating the mobile home, the wheels thereof shall be removed and the mobile home shall be placed on a suitable permanent foundation and shall be subject to all ordinances affecting real property improvements thereto. 
(Prior code 16-423; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-25-40. - Use regulations. 
    Principal uses permitted by right. All uses by right as hereinafter set forth may be subject to approval of appropriate plans pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town as are otherwise set forth in this Code. 
(1)  Mobile home dwelling units as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Chapter. 
(2)  Single-family dwellings for occupancy by the mobile home park owner, manager or caretaker. 
(3)  Places of assembly (small). 
(4)  Common uses and uses accessory to mobile home dwelling units, including recreation facilities for the use of residents of the park only, management offices, laundry rooms, tenant storage lockers, parking areas and garbage and trash disposal facilities. 
(Ord. 2011-1406 22) 
Sec. 16-25-50. - Minimum area. 
    The minimum required land area for a PD-MHP shall be five (5) contiguous acres. 
(Prior code 16-425; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-25-60. - Site planning; internal relationships. 
(a)  General requirements. The site, including mobile home stands, structures and all site improvements, shall be harmoniously and effectively organized in relation to topography, the shape of the tract and the shape, size and position of structures, with consideration for usability of space, appearance and livability. An informal park type of arrangement, with grouping or clustering of mobile home dwelling units and which conforms to the terrain and natural landscape features, is preferable to a rigid, stylized pattern. 
(b)  Streets and accessways. 
(1)  Paved streets at least twenty-two (22) feet in width shall extend from the existing street system as necessary to provide convenient access to each mobile home stand and to common facilities and uses. Private streets shall be permitted in a PD-MHP. 
(2)  Convenient access shall be provided to each mobile home stand by an accessway at least fifteen (15) feet in width. Such accessway shall be reserved for maneuvering mobile homes into position and shall be kept free of trees and other immovable obstructions, but need not be paved. Temporary planks or steel mats may be used during the placement of a mobile home. 
(c)  Pedestrian access. 
(1)  Pedestrian walkways at least two (2) feet in width and having an all-weather surface shall be provided for access to each mobile home from a paved street or from a paved driveway or parking area connected to a public street. 
(2)  Common walkways at least three (3) feet in width and having an all-weather surface shall be provided for access to common facilities and uses from each mobile home group or cluster. Walkways through the interiors of blocks are preferable to walkways adjacent to streets. 
(d)  Parking. 
(1)  Parking areas shall be located off-street and shall have an all weather surface. One (1) parking space may be located on each lot or on the space immediately adjacent to the mobile home stand, and the remainder shall be located in parking bays adjacent to the street or adjacent to a vehicular accessway connected to a street. 
(2)  Parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of at least one (1) car space for each mobile home, plus one (1) additional car space for each four (4) mobile home lots or spaces to provide for guest parking and delivery and service vehicles. 
(e)  Mobile home spaces and stands. 
(1)  Each mobile home shall be contained within a space or lot having a minimum area of three thousand (3,000) square feet for single-wide mobile homes and a minimum area of four thousand (4,000) square feet for double-wide or expandable mobile homes. 
(2)  The maximum density of mobile homes within the PD-MHP shall be eight (8) single-wide mobile homes per acre and six (6) double-wide mobile homes per acre. 
(3)  Within each space or lot allocated to a mobile home, there shall be provided a mobile home stand for the purposes of satisfactory placement of the mobile home and retention of the mobile home in the allocated space in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings. 
(4)  Mobile home stands shall have minimum dimensions equal to those of the mobile home to be placed on them. 
(5)  Mobile home stands shall be constructed of appropriate material on properly graded and compacted areas so as to be durable for the support of maximum anticipated loads under all weather conditions. 
(6)  The space between the lower edge of the mobile home unit and the mobile home stand shall be completely enclosed with suitable and uniform material. 
(f)  Distances between stands, structures and uses. 
(1)  The minimum distance from the line or corner of any mobile home stand to a street pavement, common parking bay or common walk shall be eight (8) feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance from the line or corner of any mobile home stand to a boundary line of the PD-MHP shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance from the line or corner of any mobile home stand to any permanent building or structure for common use shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Permanent buildings and structures for common facilities and dwelling units other than mobile ones shall be set back and offset from the PD-MHP boundaries a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet. 
(g)  Common facilities and uses. 
(1)  Not less than eight percent (8%) of the total land area of the PD-MHP shall be devoted to space for common facilities and uses, such as a laundry, swimming pool or recreation and play areas. 
(2)  Laundry, recreation rooms, management offices and other common facilities may be consolidated in a single building if the single location will adequately serve all mobile home units. 
(h)  Storage. 
(1)  Tenant storage facilities shall be provided for materials which cannot be conveniently stored in a mobile home. A minimum of thirty-two (32) square feet shall be provided for each mobile home unit. 
(2)  Storage facilities may be located adjacent to the mobile homes or in common compounds within a reasonable distance from the mobile homes. Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the park and shall be constructed of suitable weather-resistant materials appropriate under the use and maintenance contemplated. 
(i)  Landscaping. 
(1)  Lawn and ground cover, which may include aggregates, shall be provided on all common ground areas except those undisturbed areas, such as watercourses, left in their natural state. 
(2)  Screen planting and/or fencing at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided where necessary for screening purposes, such as around the PD-MHP boundary lines, refuse collection points, common recreation areas and playgrounds and at such other points as necessary for screening of objectionable views. 
(Prior Code 16-426; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXVI - Vested Property Rights 

Sec. 16-26-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide the procedures necessary to implement Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 16-441; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-26-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to each of them below except where the context of this Article clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Site specific development plan means, for those developments for which the landowner wishes the creation of vested rights: 
a.  The approval by the Town of the project at a hearing conducted at the request of the landowner, which hearing follows the successful approval of the development at all other required stages of the development review process; or 
b.  The conditional approval by the Town of the project at a hearing conducted at the request of the landowner, which hearing follows approval of the development at all other required stages of the development review process, except for the submission of: a) a final architectural plan; b) public utility filings; and/or c) final construction drawings and related documents specifying materials and methods for construction of improvements. Approval of such a site specific development plan shall be expressly conditioned upon the approval of all further submissions ordinarily required in the development review process. Such conditional approval shall result in a vested property right; however, the landowner's or developer's failure to abide by such terms and conditions shall result in a forfeiture of the vested property rights. 
    Vested property right means the right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan. 
(Prior code 16-442; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-26-30. - Notice of hearing. 
    No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such hearing. Such notice may, at the Town's option, be combined with the notice required by state law for zoning regulations or with any other required notice. At such hearing, interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Prior code 16-443; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-26-40. - Approval - effective date - amendments. 
    A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the Town Board approval action relating thereto, as set forth at Section 16-26-20. In the event amendments to a site specific development are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments for purposes of duration of a vested property right shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the Town Board specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such findings in its approval of the amendment. If a site specific development plan is conditionally approved, the effective date of the site specific development plan shall be the date of the conditional approval action by the Town Board, unless the vested property rights are thereafter forfeited by the landowner's or developer's failure to abide by the terms and conditions of the approval of the site specific development plan. 
(Prior code 16-444; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-26-50. - Notice of approval. 
(a)  Each map, plat or site plan or other document constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the following language: 
    "Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S." 
(b)  Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the specific parcel or parcel of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published once, but not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site specific development plan, in a newspaper of general circulation with the Town. 
(Prior code 16-445; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-26-60. - Payment of costs. 
    In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this Code, the applicant for approval of a site specific development plan shall pay all costs occasioned to the Town as a result of the site specific development plan review, including publication of notices, public hearing and review costs. 
(Prior code 16-446; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-26-70. - Other provisions unaffected. 
    Approval of a site specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this Code pertaining to the development and use of property. 
(Prior code 16-447; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-26-80. - Limitations. 
    Nothing in this Chapter is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S. In the event of the repeal of said article or a judicial determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, this Chapter shall be deemed to be repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(Prior code 16-448; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXVII - Flood Damage Prevention 

Sec. 16-27-10. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Town, as a home rule municipality, has the inherent authority to adopt land use regulations affecting the public health, safety and welfare. Additionally, the State Legislature, pursuant to Article 20 of Title 29, C.R.S., has delegated the responsibility to local government units the authority to adopt land use regulations, including those intended to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the Town are subject to periodic inundation which, in some cases, results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-30. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities, such as water, sewer and gas mains, electric and communications stations, and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood-blight areas; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential buyers are notified when that property is located within a flood hazard area. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-40. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this Article includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, are protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-50. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Article its most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms one-hundred-year flood and one-percent-chance flood are synonymous with the term 100-year flood . The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred (100) years. 
    100-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one-hundred-year flood. 
    500-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance annual flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred (500) years. 
    500-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five-hundred-year flood. 
    Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means a fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominately formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the Town Manager's interpretation of any provisions of this Article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means an area designated Zone AO or AH on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base Flood Elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on a FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30 and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Channel means the physical confine of a stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    Channelization means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent Rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
    Community means any political subdivision in the State that has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including but not limited to cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
    Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project which does not revise an effective floodplain map that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Section 16-27-230 of this Article, that, if flooded, may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See Section 16-27-230 of this Article. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    DFIRM database means a database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) means a FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as regulatory floodplain maps for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Register means the official daily publication for Rules, proposed Rules and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
c.  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water deposited along the path of the current). 
    Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones. 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, as well as the flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine Base Flood Elevations for some areas. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    Floodplain Administrator means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain development permit means a permit required before construction or development begins within any Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this Article. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means the zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half (1/2) foot (six [6] inches). Letters of Map Revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Freeboard means the vertical distance, in feet, above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood, such as debris, blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
    Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Levee means a man-made embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR  65.10. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes, which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use, such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. Manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment and spill-handling procedures. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    No-rise certification means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado professional engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). 
    Physical Map Revision (PMR) means FEMA's action whereby one (1) or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations and/or planimetric features. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Special Flood Hazard Area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure prior to when the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. The term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notifications by facilities to the State that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this Article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-60. - Applicability of Article. 
    This Article shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas and areas removed from the floodplain by issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the Town. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-70. - Basis for establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
    The Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report "The Flood Insurance Study for Weld County, Colorado and Incorporated Areas," dated January 20, 2016, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Article and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Article. These Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this Article and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the Town of Windsor. The Flood Insurance Study, FIRMs DFIRMs, and/or FBFMs are on file at the Town Hall, 301 Walnut Street, Windsor, Colorado 80550. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1512 , 11-23-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1512 , adopted Nov. 23, 2015, repealed the former  16-27-70, and enacted a new  16-27-70 as set out herein. The former  16-27-70 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2013-1464. 
Sec. 16-27-80. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter by located, altered or have its use changed within the Special Flood Hazard Area without full compliance with the terms of this Article and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-90. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, when this Article and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-100. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this Article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body to effect their purpose; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-110. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this Article in considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article shall not create liability on the part of the Town, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-120. - Flood development permit. 
(a)  A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 16-27-70 of this Article to ensure conformance with provisions of this Article. 
(b)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Town Manager and may include, but shall not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of proposed landscape alterations; existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the Special Flood Hazard Area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification by a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria in Paragraph 16-27-170(2) of this Article; and 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(c)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this Article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-130. - Designation of Floodplain Administrator. 
    The Town Manager is hereby appointed as Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement this Article by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-140. - Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Article, including the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by Section 16-27-120 above. 
(2)  Review, approve or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of this Article. 
(3)  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.  1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this Article, including proper elevation of the structure. 
(6)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(7)  When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 16-27-70 of this Article, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Article. 
(8)  For waterways with Base Flood Elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect on the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at any point within the community. 
(9)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE and AH on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half (1/2) foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval. 
(10)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(11)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-150. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Appeal Board. The Board of Adjustment, as established by the Town, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Article. The procedural requirements for appeals under this Article shall be substantially identical to the appellate procedure set forth in Chapter 16, Article VI of this Code. 
(b)  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Town Manager in the enforcement or administration of this Article. 
(c)  Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decisions to the County District Court, as provided by state law. 
(d)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(e)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the relevant factors in Section 16-27-120 of this Article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this Article, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this Article. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(i)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the Base Flood Elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(j)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in Subsections 16-27-150(a)-(h) above are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-160. - General standards. 
    In all Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
a.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
d.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
e.  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Specific requirements may be: 
a.  That over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side. 
b.  That frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side. 
c.  That all components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds. 
d.  That any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
f.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
g.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
h.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-170. - Specific standards. 
    In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 16-27-70, Paragraph 16-27-140(7) or Section 16-27-210 of this Article, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one (1) foot or more above the Base Flood Elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. 
a.  With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Section 16-27-230 of this Article, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one (1) foot or more above the Base Flood Elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that, at one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
b.  A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this Subsection. Such certification shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator in accordance with Section 16-27-120 of this Article. 
(3)  Enclosures. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
b.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Manufactured homes and mobile homes shall be anchored in accordance with Subparagraph 16-27-160(1)b of this Article. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on a Town FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) are elevated to one (1) foot or more above the Base Flood Elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
c.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the Town's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the above Subparagraph, shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) are one (1) foot or more above the Base Flood Elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade, and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the Town's FIRM shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements and elevation and anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-180. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). 
    Areas designated as shallow flooding areas are located within the Special Flood Hazard Area established in Section 16-27-70 of this Article. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three [3] feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in Section 16-27-230 of this Article, all new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three [3] feet if no depth number is specified) or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads or effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in Section 16-27-120 of this Article, are satisfied. 
Within Zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-190. - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent then the FEMA minimum standards (see definition of floodway in Section 16-27-50 of this Article). Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Section 16-27-70 of this Article are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed Colorado professional engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If Paragraph (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 16-27-160 through 16-27-230 of this Article. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in Base Flood Elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-200. - Alteration of watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project, as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(2)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
(3)  Any channelization or other stream activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(4)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer or certified professional hydrologist. 
(5)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and Town floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(6)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions in the floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with Section 16-27-190 above. 
(7)  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-210. - Properties removed from floodplain by fill. 
    A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
(1)  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads or effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-220. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Section 16-27-120 and the provisions of Sections 16-27-160 through 16-27-230 of this Article. 
(c)  Base Flood Elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 16-27-70 or Section 16-27-140 of this Article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
Sec. 16-27-230. - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that, if flooded, may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
(1)  Classification of critical facilities. Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) Essential services; (b) Hazardous materials; (c) At-risk populations; and (d) Vital to restoring normal services. 
a.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities and transportation lifelines. These facilities consist of: 
1.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage and emergency operation centers); 
2.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures, but excluding clinics, doctors' offices and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
3.  Designated emergency shelters; 
4.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables and conduits); 
5.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines and service lines); and 
6.  Air transportation lifelines (airports [municipal and larger], helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure [aviation control towers, air traffic control centers and emergency equipment aircraft hangars]). 
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), nonpotable water treatment and distribution systems and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this Article, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Town on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. These facilities may include: 
1.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
2.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
3.  Refineries; 
4.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
5.  Aboveground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
Facilities shall be classified as critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the workplace AND the chemical is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R.  302 (2010), also known as Extremely Hazardous Substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R.  1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R.  302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R.  1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation of this Article, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. 
Specific exemptions to this category include: 
1.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and household containing hazardous materials intended for household use and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
2.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
3.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this Section. 
c.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care and schools. These facilities consist of: 
1.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
2.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living); and 
3.  Public and private schools (preschools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children. 
d.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services, including government operations. These facilities consist of: 
1.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); and 
2.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices and classrooms only). 
These facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the Town Board that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this Article and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the Town Board on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this Article, protection shall include one (1) of the following: 
a.  Location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area; or 
b.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two (2) feet above the Base Flood Elevation. 
(3)  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the Town Board, have continuous noninundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(Ord. 2013-1464) 
ARTICLE XXVIII - Historic Preservation 

Sec. 16-28-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this Article to provide for the protection and preservation of the Town's historic and cultural heritage through the designation of historic landmarks and districts. Such protection and preservation will enhance property values through the stabilization of historic neighborhoods and commercial areas and will create economic and financial benefits to the Town by making it attractive to tourists, visitors, homebuyers, businesses and developers. This Article is designed to create a method to draw a reasonable balance between private property rights and the public interest in preserving the Town's historic character by ensuring that the demolition of, moving of or alterations to properties of historic value shall be carefully considered for the impact to the property's contribution to the Town's heritage. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-20. - Commission established. 
    There is hereby created an Historic Preservation Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "Commission," which shall have the principal responsibility for matters of historic preservation as more fully set forth hereafter. 
(1)  Membership. The Commission shall consist of five (5) members providing a balanced, community-wide representation. The Commission shall be composed of both professional and lay members, all of whom have demonstrated interest, knowledge or training in fields closely related to historic preservation. Three (3) members shall be professionals or shall have extensive expertise in a preservation-related discipline, including but not limited to history, architecture, planning or archaeology. If the required number of professional members cannot be found to serve on the Commission, this requirement may be waived until the next vacancy occurs, at which time the Town shall again diligently seek professional representation. In the case of a lack of professional appointees, the Commission may, with Town Board approval, be allowed to retain professional consultants to advise the Commission as necessary to fulfill its duties. The Windsor-Severance Historical Society and the Windsor Chamber of Commerce are encouraged to submit nominees for Town Board consideration. 
(2)  Appointments and terms of office. 
a.  Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Town Board and shall serve four-year staggered terms from the date of appointment. For the purpose of establishing staggered terms, initial appointments shall be two (2) years for one (1) member, three (3) years for two (2) members and four (4) years for two (2) members. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for four-year terms. 
b.  Members may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. Members may be reappointed by the Town Board to serve successive terms without limitation. Appointment to fill vacancies on the Commission shall be made to fill out the remainder of the vacated term only. Members of the Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Board and may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the Town Board. 
(3)  Residency. Pursuant to the provisions of the Home Rule Charter, all members of the Commission shall be residents of the Town, and if any member ceases to reside in the Town, his or her membership on the Commission shall immediately terminate. 
(4)  Exclusive service. No voting member of the Commission shall be eligible to serve on any other board or commission of the Town during that member's tenure on the Commission. 
(5)  Removal from Commission. In accordance with the provisions of the Home Rule Charter, Commission members may be removed by the Town Board for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance upon written notice and after public hearing. 
(6)  Vacancies. The Town Board shall make such appointments as necessary to fill the unexpired terms of vacancies that may occur on the Commission. 
(7)  Quorum and voting. A quorum for the Commission shall consist of a majority of the regular membership. A quorum is necessary for the Commission to hold a public hearing or take official actions, except that a public hearing may be continued by a majority vote of the members present when a quorum is not present. A tie vote shall be deemed a denial of the motion or recommended motion. 
(8)  Officers. At the Commission's first meeting of the calendar year, the Commission shall, by majority vote, elect one (1) of its members to serve as Chair to preside over the meetings of the Commission and one (1) member to serve as Vice-Chair. The members so designated shall serve in these capacities for one (1) year and may serve successive terms. 
(9)  Meetings. The Commission shall hold meetings at regularly scheduled intervals but shall meet a minimum four (4) times a year. Minutes shall be kept of all proceedings. 
(10)  Powers and duties. The Commission shall: 
a.  Adopt criteria for review of historic properties and for review of proposals to alter, demolish or move designated resources. 
b.  Review properties nominated for designation as an historical landmark and recommend that the Town Board designate by ordinance those properties qualifying for such designation. 
c.  Review and make decisions on any application for alterations to a designated historic landmark. 
d.  Review and make decisions on any application for moving or demolishing an historic landmark. 
e.  Maintain a list of significant historic properties in the Town. 
f.  Advise and assist owners of historical properties on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and rescue, including nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. 
g.  In conjunction with the Windsor-Severance Historical Society, develop and assist in public education programs, including but not limited to walking tours, brochures, a marker program for historic properties, lectures and conferences. 
h.  Conduct surveys of historic areas for the purpose of defining those of historic significance, and prioritizing the importance of identified historic areas and structures. 
i.  Advise the Planning Commission and Town Board on matters related to preserving the historic character of the Town. 
j.  In conjunction with other entities and private individuals, actively pursue financial assistance for preservation-related programs through grants and other means. 
(11)  Bylaws and rules. The Commission shall adopt bylaws and rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 2; Ord. 2005-1211 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-30. - Designation of landmarks and historic districts. 
(a)  Pursuant to the procedures hereinafter set forth, the Town Board may by ordinance make the following designations of landmarks and historic districts: 
(1)  Designate as a landmark an individual structure or other feature or an integrated group of structures and features on a single lot or site having a special historical or architectural value, and designate a landmark site for each landmark; 
(2)  Designate as an historic district an area containing a number of structures having a special historical or architectural value. 
(b)  Each such designating ordinance shall include a description of the characteristics of the landmark or historic district that justifies its designation, a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and a legal description of the location and boundaries of the landmark site or historic district. Any such designation shall be in furtherance of and in conformance with the purposes and standards of this Article. The property included in any such designation shall be subject to the controls and standards set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 3; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-40. - Procedures for designating structures and districts for preservation. 
    A nomination for designation may be made by any member of the Commission or by any citizen by filing an application with the Town. Upon such nomination, the Planning Department and at least one (1) member of the Commission shall contact the owner of record of the nominated property and outline the reasons and effects of the designation as a landmark and, if possible, shall secure the consent of the owner to such designation before the nomination is accepted as complete for review. 
(1)  Commission review with owner's consent. No more than sixty (60) days after the filing of an application for designation, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposal. The Commission shall review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation. Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall approve, modify and improve or disapprove the nomination. The Commission shall forward its recommendation by written report to the Town Board for consideration and final action. 
(2)  Commission review without owner's consent. If the owner of the property nominated for designation does not consent to the review, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal no more than sixty (60) days after the filing of the application. Notice of time, date and place of such hearing and a brief summary or explanation of the subject matter of the hearing shall be given by at least one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date, the Town shall: 
a.  Post the property so as to indicate that a landmark or historic district designation has been applied for; and 
b.  Mail written notice of the hearing to record owners, as reflected by the records of the County Assessor, of all property included in the proposed designation. Failure to send notice by mail to any such property owner where the address of such owner is unknown and not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation. 
The Commission shall review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation. Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall either approve, modify and approve or disapprove the proposal. The Commission shall forward its recommendation by written report to the Town Board for consideration and final action. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 4; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-50. - Proceedings by the Town Board. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after the Commission has taken action, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed designation. Notice of time, date and place of such hearing and a brief summary of explanation of the subject matter of the hearing shall be posted on the property in a manner visible from all adjacent public rights-of-way at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Where the property owner does not consent to the proposed designation, written notice of the hearing shall also be provided to the record owner at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The Town shall be responsible for accomplishing the public notice. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the public hearing, the Town Board shall approve, modify and approve or disapprove the proposed designation. 
(1)  If the owner of the property does not consent to the review, approval shall require the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the Town Board in office at the time. In such cases, the Town Board shall use the following criteria in addition to the designation criteria listed in this Article: 
(2)  The property has overwhelming historic importance to the entire community. The term overwhelming significance shall, for purposes of this Article, encompass: 
a.  Possessing such unusual or uncommon significance that the structure's potential demolition or major alteration would diminish the character and sense of place in the Town community. 
b.  Demonstrating superior or outstanding historical characteristics. The term superior shall mean excellence of its kind, and the term outstanding shall mean marked by eminence and distinction. 
(3)  The Town Board may exempt a property from meeting the above criteria if the Town Board finds that the property owner has shown that the historic designation creates an undue hardship. The following criteria shall be used in assessing the potential for hardship: 
a.  Economic hardship: 
1.  For investment or income-producing properties, the owner's inability to obtain a reasonable rate of return in its present condition or, if rehabilitated, under the alterations criteria. 
2.  For non-income-producing properties consisting of owner-occupied single-family dwelling and/or institutional properties not solely operating for profit, the owner's inability to convert the property to institutional use in its present condition or, if rehabilitated, under the alterations criteria. 
b.  Noneconomic hardship: 
1.  Designation creates a situation substantially inadequate to meet the applicant's needs because of specific health and/or safety issues. 
2.  The Commission and the Town Board may adopt additional guidelines and criteria for the submittal and review of information pertaining to economic and other kinds of hardship, which shall be made available to the public. 
3.  When a landmark has been designated by the Town Board as provided above, the Planning Department shall promptly notify the owner of the property included therein and shall cause a copy of the designating ordinance to be recorded, together with a summary description of the penalties and sanctions for violation of this Article. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 5; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-60. - Criteria for designation. 
    The Commission and the Town Board shall consider the following criteria in reviewing nominations of properties for designation: 
(1)  Landmarks. Landmarks must be at least fifty (50) years old and meet one (1) or more of the criteria for architectural, social or geographic/environmental significance hereinafter described. A landmark could be exempt from the age standard if it is found to be exceptionally important in other significant criteria. 
a.  Historic sites shall meet one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Architectural. 
a)  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period. 
b)  Example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, statewide, regionally or locally. 
c)  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value. 
d)  Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design. 
e)  Style is particularly associated with the Windsor/Northern Colorado area. 
f)  Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history. 
g)  Pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one (1) of the above criteria. 
h)  Significant historic remodel. 
2.  Social. 
a)  Site of historic event that had an effect upon society. 
b)  Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or social heritage of the community. 
c)  An association with a notable person or the work of a notable person. 
3.  Geographic/environmental. 
a)  Enhances the sense of identity of the community. 
b)  An established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community. 
b.  Prehistoric and historic archaeological sites shall meet one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Architectural. 
a)  Exhibits distinctive characteristics of a type, period or manner of construction. 
b)  A unique example of structure. 
2.  Social. 
a)  Potential to make an important contribution to the knowledge of the area's history or prehistory. 
b)  An association with an important event in the area's development. 
c)  An association with a notable person or work of a notable person. 
d)  A typical example/ association with a particular ethnic group. 
e)  A unique example of an event in Windsor/Northern Colorado's history. 
3.  Geographic/environmental. 
a)  Geographically or regionally important. 
b)  Buried human remains will be handled in as culturally sensitive and appropriate manner as possible. 
c.  All properties will be evaluated for their physical integrity using the following criteria (a property need not meet all of the following criteria): 
1.  Shows character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the community, region, State or nation. 
2.  Retains original design features, materials and/or character. 
3.  Original location or same historic context after having been moved. 
4.  Has been accurately reconstructed or restored based on documentation. 
(2)  Districts. 
a.  For the purposes of this Section, a district is a geographically definable area including a concentration, linkage or continuity of subsurface sites, buildings, structures and/or objects. A district is related by a pattern of either physical elements or social activities. Significance is determined by applying criteria to the patterns and unifying elements. Nominations will not be considered unless the application contains written approval of sixty percent (60%) of the property owners within the district boundaries. Properties that do not contribute to the significance of the historic district may be included within the boundaries, as long as the noncontributing elements do not noticeably detract from the district's sense of time, place and historical development. Noncontributing elements will be evaluated for their magnitude of impact by considering their size, scale, design, location and/or information potential. 
b.  District boundaries will be defined by visual changes, historical documentation of different associations or patterns of development, or evidence of changes in site type or site density as established through testing or survey. 
c.  In addition to meeting at least one (1) of the criteria outlined in Subparagraphs d.1. through d.4. below, the district must be at least fifty (50) years old. The district could be exempt from the age standard if the resources are found to be exceptionally important in other significant criteria. 
d.  Historic districts shall meet one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Architectural. 
a)  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period. 
b)  Example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, statewide, regionally or locally. 
c)  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value. 
d)  Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design. 
e)  Style particularly associated with the Windsor/Northern Colorado area. 
f)  Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history. 
g)  Pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one (1) of the above criteria. 
h)  Significant historic remodel. 
2.  Social. 
a)  Site of historic event that had an effect upon society. 
b)  Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or social heritage of the community. 
c)  An association with a notable person or the work of a notable person. 
3.  Geographic/environmental. 
a)  Enhances sense of identity of the community. 
b)  An established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community. 
4.  Archaeology/subsurface. 
a)  Potential to make an important contribution to the area's history or prehistory. 
b)  An association with an important event in the area's development. 
c)  An association with a notable person or work of a notable person. 
d)  Distinctive characteristics of a type, period or manner of construction. 
e)  Geographical importance. 
f)  A typical example or association with a particular ethnic group. 
g)  A typical example or association with a local cultural or economic activity. 
h)  A unique example of an event or structure. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 6; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-70. - Revocation of designation. 
    If a building or special feature on a designated landmark site was lawfully removed or demolished, the owner may apply to the Commission for a revocation of the designation. The Commission shall review the application and make a recommendation to the Town Board, and the Town Board shall thereafter make a final determination. The Town Board shall revoke a landmark designation upon determination that without the demolished building or feature, the site as a whole no longer meets the purposes and standards for designation. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 7; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-80. - Amendment of designation. 
    Designation of a landmark or historic district may be amended to add features or property to the site or district under the procedures set forth in this Article for initial designations. Whenever a designation has been amended, the Town shall promptly notify the owners of the property included therein and shall record a copy of the amending ordinance with the Weld or Larimer County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 8; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-90. - Landmark alteration certificate required. 
(a)  No person shall carry out or permit to be carried out on a designated landmark site or in a designated historic district any new construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or other designated feature without first obtaining a landmark alteration certificate for the proposed work under this Section, as well as any other permits required by this Code or other ordinances of the Town. 
(b)  The Town shall maintain a current record of all designated landmark sites and historic districts and pending designations. If the Building Department receives an application for a permit to carry out any new construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or other designated feature on a landmark site or in an historic district or in an area for which designation proceedings are pending, the Building Department shall promptly forward such application to the Town Manager and the Town Board. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 9; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-100. - Construction on proposed landmark sites or in proposed districts. 
    No person shall receive a permit to construct, alter, remove or demolish any structure or other feature on a proposed landmark site or in a proposed historic district after the date an application has been filed to initiate the designation of such landmark site or district. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 10; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-110. - Landmark alteration application and review. 
(a)  An owner of property designated as a landmark or located in an historic district may apply for a landmark alteration certificate, such application to include all information which the Planning Department determines is necessary to consider the application, including without limitation, plans and specifications showing the proposed exterior appearance, with texture, materials and architectural design and detail, and the names and addresses of the abutting property owners. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for an alteration certificate, the Planning Department shall submit that application, together with a recommendation thereon, to the Commission for final approval. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 11; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-120. - Unsafe or dangerous conditions exempted. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent any measures of construction, alteration, removal or demolition necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, other feature or parts thereof where such condition is declared unsafe or dangerous by the Town and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary by the Town Manager to correct the condition. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 12; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-130. - Criteria for review of alteration certificate. 
(a)  The Commission shall issue an alteration certificate for any proposed work on a designated historical site or district only if the Commission determines that the proposed work would not detrimentally alter, destroy or adversely affect any architectural or landscape feature which contributes to the original historical designation. The Commission must find that a proposed development is visually compatible with designated historic structures located on the property in terms of design, finish, material, scale, mass and height. When the subject site is an historic district, the Commission must also find that the proposed development is visually compatible with the development on adjacent properties. For purposes of this Section, the term compatible shall mean consistent with, harmonious with and/or enhances the mixture of complementary architectural styles, either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. 
(b)  The Commission will use the following criteria to determine compatibility: 
(1)  The effect upon the general historical and architectural character of the structure and property. 
(2)  The architectural style, arrangement, texture and material used on the existing and proposed structures and their relation and compatibility with other structures. 
(3)  The size of the structure, its setbacks, its site, location and the appropriateness thereof, when compared to existing structures and the site. 
(4)  The compatibility of accessory structures and fences with the main structure on the site, and with other structures. 
(5)  The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying or otherwise impacting the exterior architectural features of the structure upon which such work is done. 
(6)  The condition of existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to public health and safety. 
(7)  The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of the property. 
(8)  Compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation as listed below: 
a.  A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment. 
b.  The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided. 
c.  Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken. 
d.  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
e.  Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved. 
f.  Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. When the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial evidence. 
g.  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
h.  Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
1.  New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. To protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment, the new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features. 
2.  New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 13; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-140. - Relocation criteria. 
    The Commission shall use the following criteria in considering alteration certificate applications for relocating a landmark, a structure on an historic site, a building or structure within an historic district, a structure onto a landmark site or a structure to property in an historic district: 
(1)  For consideration of the original site, the Commission will review for compliance with all of the following criteria: 
a.  Documentation showing that the structure cannot be rehabilitated or reused on its original site to provide for any reasonable beneficial use of the property; 
b.  The contribution the structure makes to its present setting; 
c.  Whether plans are specifically defined for the site to be vacated, and have been approved by the Town staff; 
d.  If the structure can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity and the applicant can show the relocation activity is the best preservation method for the character and integrity of the structure; 
e.  Whether the structure has been demonstrated to be capable of withstanding the physical impacts of the relocation and re-siting; and 
f.  Whether a structural report submitted by a licensed structural engineer adequately demonstrates the soundness of the structure proposed for relocation. 
(2)  For consideration of the new location, the Commission will review for compliance with all of the following criteria: 
a.  Whether the building or structure is compatible with its proposed site and adjacent properties, and if the receiving site is compatible in nature with the structure or structures proposed to be moved; 
b.  The structure's architectural integrity and its consistency with the character of the neighborhood; 
c.  Whether the relocation of the historic structure would diminish the integrity or character of the neighborhood of the receiving site; and 
d.  If a relocation plan has been submitted and approved by the Town staff, including posting a bond, to ensure the safe relocation, preservation and repair (if required) of the structure, site preparation and infrastructure connections as described in this Code. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 14; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-150. - Exemptions from alteration certificate requirements. 
    An applicant may request an exemption from the alteration certificate requirements set forth herein. The applicant must provide adequate documentation to establish qualification for one (1) of the following exemptions: 
(1)  Economic hardship exemption. Exemptions are granted only to the specific owner and use and are not transferable. 
a.  For investment or income-producing properties: the owner's inability to obtain a reasonable rate of return in the property's present condition or if rehabilitated. 
b.  For non-income-producing properties consisting of owner-occupied single-family dwellings and/or non-income-producing institutional properties not solely operating for profit: the owner's inability to convert the property to institutional use in its present condition or if rehabilitated. 
c.  The consideration for economic hardship shall not include willful or negligent acts by the owner, purchase of the property for substantially more than the market value, failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs, failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants or failure to provide normal tenant improvements. 
(2)  Undue hardship. An applicant requesting an exemption based on undue hardship must show that the application of the criteria creates a situation substantially inadequate to meet the applicant's needs because of specific health and/or safety issues. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 15; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-160. - Appeal or call-up disapproved proposals. 
(a)  A decision of the Commission approving or disapproving an application for alteration or extending the review period on the application is final unless appealed to or called up by the Town Board as provided below: 
(1)  Appeal. An applicant may appeal any decision of the Commission to the Town Board by filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning Department within seven (7) days of the Commission's decision. 
(2)  Review. The Town Board may call up for review any decision of the Commission to disapprove, modify or suspend action on an alteration application by serving written notice on the Commission within twenty-one (21) days of the Commission's decision. 
(3)  Town Board meeting and decision. Within thirty (30) days of the date of any decision of the Town Board to disapprove or modify an alteration certificate application, the Town Board shall hold a public meeting on the matter. Where a decision to move or demolish a landmarked structure is involved, public notice shall be required in accordance with this Article. The Town Board shall consider the written findings and conclusions of the Commission and the proposal's conformance to adopted alteration certificate criteria and shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the proposed application. 
(4)  Undue hardship appeals. The Town Board may consider claims of economic or undue hardship in cases where the Commission denied an applicant an alteration certificate. The applicant must provide adequate documentation and/or testimony at the Town Board meeting to justify such claims. The following includes the type of information, plus any other information the applicant feels is necessary, that must be submitted in order for the Town Board to consider a hardship appeal: 
a.  Estimate of the cost of the alteration proposed under the denied alteration certificate, and an estimate of any additional costs that would be incurred with the alterations recommended by the Commission. 
b.  Estimate of the value of the property in its current state, with the denied alterations, and with the alterations proposed by the Commission. 
c.  Information regarding the soundness of the structure or structures, and the feasibility for rehabilitation that would preserve the character and qualities of the designation. 
d.  In the case of the income-producing properties, the annual gross income from the property, the operating and maintenance expenses associated with the property, and the effect of the proposed and Commission-recommended alterations on these figures. 
e.  Any information concerning the mortgage of other financial obligations on the property, which are affected by the denial of the proposed alterations. 
f.  The appraised value of the property. 
g.  Any past listing of the property for sale or lease, the price asked and any offers received on that property. 
h.  Information relating to any nonfinancial hardship resulting from the denial of an alteration certificate. 
(b)  The Town Board may refer the information for review by the Commission prior to rendering its final decision on any hardship-related appeal. If it is determined that the denial of the certificate of alteration would pose an undue hardship on the applicant, then a certificate of alteration noting the hardship relief shall be issued, and the property owner may make the alterations outlined in the alteration certificate application. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 16; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-28-170. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  No person shall violate or permit to be violated any of the requirements of this Article or the terms of a landmark certificate. 
(b)  Violations of this Article are punishable as is otherwise provided in this Code and, in addition, are subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Alterations to a designated landmark or district without an approved landmark alteration certificate will result in a one-year moratorium on all building permits for the subject property; and 
(2)  Moving or demolishing a designated structure without an approved landmark alteration certificate will result in a five-year moratorium on all moving, demolition or building permits for the structure and for the property at the structure's original location. 
(Ord. 2004-1194 17; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXIX - Adult Businesses 

Sec. 16-29-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to each of them below except where the context of this Article clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Adult bookstore means a commercial establishment which devotes a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade, or interior floor space, to the sale, rental or viewing of books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matters, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas . Regardless of the stock in trade or interior floor space devoted to the activities described herein, an adult bookstore shall also include a commercial establishment wherein a significant or substantial portion of the revenues earned or a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures are used for the promotion of the activities described herein. 
    Adult business includes, but shall not be limited to, adult motion picture theaters, nude entertainment, adult book stores and other similar businesses. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
    Appearing in a state of nudity. A person appears in a state of nudity when such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
    Nude entertainment includes any type of entertainment where a person appears in a "state of nudity." 
    Specified anatomical areas include any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities include any of the following: 
a.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
b.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
(Prior code 16-521; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-29-20. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  The operation of adult businesses shall be limited to those areas of the Town zoned Heavy Industrial I-H. 
(b)  No adult business, service or entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of: 
(1)  Any school certified or licensed by the State; 
(2)  Any licensed child care facility or any public or private facility, the primary purpose of which is instructional or recreational activities for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
(3)  Any property upon which a place of worship is located; 
(4)  Any residentially zoned property, whether within or without the Town's corporate limits; 
(5)  Any public recreational facility, public trail or public park; 
(6)  Any cemetery; 
(7)  Any existing adult business; or 
(8)  The centerline of Colorado Highway 392 along its entire length within the Town's corporate limits. 
(c)  Method of distance measurement. For purposes of this Section, distance shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures and shall be measured from the closest property line of the adult business to the nearest property line within which the uses identified in this Section may lie. 
(Ord. 2010-1395 3) 
Sec. 16-29-30. - Times of operation. 
(a)  With the specific exception of adult book stores, all other adult businesses as defined by this Article shall be open for business only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday of each week. 
(b)  There shall be no restrictions on the hours of adult book stores. 
(Prior code 16-523; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-29-40. - Age restrictions. 
(a)  With the exception of adult book stores, no one under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be admitted to any adult business, nor shall any employee, agent, servant or independent contractor working on the premises be under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(b)  No one under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to any adult book store, nor shall any employee, agent, servant or independent contractor working on the premises be under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Prior code 16-524; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-29-50. - Buffering. 
    Adult businesses shall be adequately buffered through the use of facade treatment, landscaping and fencing to minimize negative secondary impact on other commercial uses, residential uses, public parks, churches or public or private schools certified or licensed by the State which are present in the vicinity. Buffering requirements shall be determined for the perimeter of adult businesses on a case-by-case basis by reviewing the intensity of the establishment and comparing it to the type and location of surrounding land uses. 
(Prior code 16-525; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-29-60. - Lighting and signage. 
    The lighting and signage for adult businesses shall be arranged, shielded and restricted so as to prevent negative secondary impacts on adjacent streets, other commercial uses, residential uses, public parks, churches or public or private schools certified or licensed by the State which are present in the vicinity. Lighting and signage requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by reviewing the intensity of the establishment and comparing it to the type and location of surrounding land uses. The lighting and signage requirements set forth herein shall be in addition to those requirements otherwise set forth in this Code. 
(Prior code 16-526; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 16-29-70. - Form of expression. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed so as to apply to the presentation, showing or performance of any play, drama, ballet or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum, school or similar establishment, as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of a state of nudity for the purposes of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business establishment. 
(Prior code 16-527; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XXX - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 

Sec. 16-30-10. - Statement of purpose, intent and applicability. 
    The within Town of Windsor Telecommunications Land Use Code (hereinafter "Code") is established with the purpose and intent of accommodating the communications needs of the Town's residents and businesses, while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. The Town finds these regulations are necessary in order to: 
(1)  Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services to the residents and businesses within the Town. 
(2)  Minimize the adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting standards. 
(3)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards, radio frequency emissions standards and setback requirements. 
(4)  Encourage and maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings and other structures to accommodate new telecommunication antennae in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community. 
This Code shall not govern any tower or wireless communication facilities owned or operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or used exclusively for received-only antennae, provided that all other zoning district requirements are met. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 1) 
Sec. 16-30-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Director means the Director of Planning for the Town or authorized designee. 
    Owner means an individual or entity holding an ownership interest in property that is subject to this Code, as well as any other applicant for approval under this Code who is acting with authority of a record owner. Once any approvals are granted pursuant to this Code, any references to owner shall also mean operators, managers or any other person or entity authorized by an owner with the responsibility for the approved facilities. Any other such person or entity shall be jointly and severally liable with an owner for any violations of this Code associated with the approved facilities. 
    Telecommunications site means the site or lot utilized for an unmanned telecommunications facility that uses radio signals to transmit conversation, visual imagery or data to a user. 
    Wireless communication facilities means facilities that transmit and/or receive electromagnetic wireless communications signals. It includes antennae, nodes, microwave dishes, horns and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, communications towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, equipment cabinets, equipment closets, parking areas and other accessory development. The following types of facilities are included within this definition: 
a.  Alternative communication facility means a communication facility with an alternative design that camouflages or conceals the presence of antennae or towers such as, but not limited to, artificial trees, clock and bell towers and steeples. 
b.  Antenna shall mean, but shall not be limited to), any exterior transmitting or receiving devices mounted on a pole, tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals; 
c.  Freestanding communication facility means a communication facility that is mounted and supported on the roof or any rooftop appurtenance of a legally existing building or structure. 
d.  Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennae, including self-supporting towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers and alternative telecommunication facilities. 
e.  Wall-mounted communication facility means a communication facility that is mounted and supported entirely on the wall of a legally existing building, including the walls of architectural features such as parapets, chimneys and similar appurtenances. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 2) 
Sec. 16-30-30. - General requirements, location and design criteria. 
    In addition to the applicable zoning requirements for the telecommunications site (including, where required, any variance approved by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Section 16-6-60 of this Chapter), all wireless communication facilities and telecommunications sites shall be designed and located in compliance with the criteria set forth in this Section. The Director or, where Town Board action is required under this Chapter or any other provisions of this Code or Home Rule Charter, the Town Board may withhold approval of any facility that does not meet any of these criteria: 
(1)  Applications must contain an applicant's name, address, telephone number and an emergency telephone number at which a representative of the applicant may be reached twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. Should any information found within an application change, the applicant must provide updated information in writing to the Town within a reasonable period following the change. The application shall include a clear map, photographic rendering or other reliable depiction of the location of all facilities for which approval is sought by the applicant. Such map, photographic rendering or other depiction shall be to scale and shall identify with specificity the location, size, appearance and height of all wireless communication facilities proposed by the applicant. 
(2)  Wireless communication facilities shall be co-located with other wireless communication facilities or public utilities whenever possible and to the extent consistent with the scale and appearance of surrounding structures. 
(3)  The applicant shall: 
a.  Demonstrate how the proposed communication site fits into the overall communication network for the community, confirming the necessity for the site. 
b.  To the extent that it seeks approval to address gaps in coverage, demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that there are no viable alternatives to remedy gaps in the applicant's existing network. 
c.  To the extent that the applicant provides services under a license granted by a governmental authority, that a failure to approve the application will result in the applicant's inability to provide the minimum coverage it is required to provide pursuant to its license and any applicable law. 
(4)  The location and development of wireless communication facilities should, to the maximum extent possible, preserve the existing character of the site's topography and vegetation. 
(5)  Wireless communication facilities should be designed and located to avoid dominant silhouettes and to preserve view corridors of surrounding areas to the maximum extent possible. 
(6)  The visual impact of wireless communication facilities shall be mitigated through the use of alternative communication facilities and compatible architectural elements such as colors, textures, surfaces, scale and character. The facilities shall be screened with vegetation, structures or topographical features. The facility should be integrated to the maximum extent possible through its location and design, into the natural setting and the structural environment of the area. Accessory equipment in areas of high visibility shall, where possible, be sited below the ridgeline or designed (e.g., placed underground, depressed or located behind earth berms or structures) to minimize its profile. 
(7)  Where possible, wireless communication facilities should be concealed in accessory structures consistent with the architectural scale and character of the area. 
(8)  Roof-mounted and wall-mounted facilities shall be architecturally compatible with and colored to match the building or structure to which they are attached. Wall-mounted facilities shall be mounted as flush to the building wall as possible. A wall-mounted facility may encroach a maximum of thirty (30) inches into the required setback for the building to which it is attached, but shall not extend across any property line. 
(9)  Freestanding wireless communication facilities shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable governmental authority. If lighting is required, the Town may review available lighting alternatives and approve the design that will cause the least disturbance to surrounding views. Lighting must be shielded or directed to the greatest extent possible so as to minimize the amount of light falling onto nearby properties, particularly in and near residential areas. 
(10)  Towers shall be designed to allow for co-location to the maximum extent possible. 
(11)  No portion of any antenna array may extend beyond any property line. 
(12)  Wireless communication facilities should be screened to mitigate visual impacts to the maximum extent practicable. 
(13)  The use of any portion of a wireless communication facility for promotional or advertising purposes, including but not limited to company name, phone numbers, banners, streamers and balloons is prohibited. The Town may require the installation of informational signage, including safety and owner contact information. 
(14)  Fencing should not be used extensively and shall be supplemented with vegetation and other barriers to screen a wireless communication facility. Security fencing shall be designed in such a fashion as to blend into the character of the existing environment. 
(15)  The wireless communication facility shall be designed, maintained and operated as required by applicable Federal Communication Commission licenses and regulations. 
(16)  Every application for approval of any wireless communication facility shall be accompanied by the owner's good-faith projection of anticipated technological advances for all antennae contemplated within the application, together with the owner's good-faith plan addressing anticipated technological advances to assure that the wireless communication facility does not experience functional obsolescence over time. In the event the owner cannot provide the projection or commitment required in this Paragraph, the agreement shall require the owner to submit to periodic review of wireless communication facility obsolescence by the Town as a condition of continued approval. 
(17)  Lattice towers shall not be approved under any circumstances within the Town. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 3) 
Sec. 16-30-40. - Compliance with setback requirements. 
    All wireless facilities shall comply with the setback requirements within the zone district in which the telecommunications site is located. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 4) 
Sec. 16-30-50. - Towers. 
    Towers shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height, as measured from the natural grade. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 5) 
Sec. 16-30-60. - Radio frequency emissions (RFEs). 
    All owners and operators of wireless communication facilities shall comply with federal regulations for radio frequency emissions (RFEs). At the time of application for a wireless communication facility, and thereafter at the request of the Town upon complaint (but not more than annually), the owner or operator shall submit a report that provides cumulative field measurements of RFEs of all antennae installed at the subject site and that compares the results with established federal standards. If, upon review, or at any time any wireless communication facility with the Town is operational, the Town finds that the facility does not meet federal regulations, the Town may require corrective action within a reasonable period of time and, if not corrected, may require removal of the wireless communication facilities at the owner's expense. Any reasonable costs incurred by the Town, including reasonable consulting costs to verify compliance with these requirements for removal of wireless communication facilities, shall be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 6) 
Sec. 16-30-70. - Structural integrity of towers, freestanding communications facilities. 
    To ensure the structural integrity of towers, freestanding communication facilities and wall-mounted communication facilities upon which other wireless communication facilities may be mounted, the owner of such structures shall ensure that they are of sufficient structural strength to accommodate reasonable co-location and are maintained in compliance with the following standards: any standards contained in applicable Town building codes; the applicable standards for towers published by the Electronic Industries Alliance, as amended from time to time (presently TIA/EIA-222-G as of January 1, 2006); and all other applicable codes of the Town. In addition to any other applicable standards and requirements, the following shall apply to all structures upon which wireless communication facilities are located: 
(1)  Sufficient anti-climbing measures must be incorporated into each facility to reduce potential for trespass and injury. 
(2)  No guy wires employed may be anchored within the area in front of any principal buildings or structures on a parcel. 
(3)  All wireless communication facilities shall comply with the power line clearance standards set forth by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission. 
(4)  All wireless communication facilities must be structurally designed and physically sited so that they do not pose a potential hazard to nearby residences or surrounding properties or improvements. Any tower or freestanding communication facility shall be designed and maintained to withstand, without failure, maximum forces expected from wind, tornadoes, hurricanes and other natural occurrences, when the facility is fully loaded with antennae, transmitters, other wireless communications facilities and camouflaging. Initial demonstration of compliance with this requirement shall be provided via submission of a report included in the application to the Director of Planning, prepared by a structural engineer licensed in the State, describing the structure, specifying the number and type of antennae it is designed to accommodate, providing the basis for the calculations done and documenting the actual calculations performed. Proof of ongoing compliance shall be provided upon request. If, upon inspection, the Town concludes that a wireless communication facility fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner of a wireless communication facility, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance with such standards. Upon good cause shown by the owner, the Director of Planning may extend such compliance period, not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of said notice. If the owner fails to bring such facility into compliance within said time limit, the Town may remove such facility at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 7) 
Sec. 16-30-80. - Application fees. 
    The fee and any additional application-related financial requirements for wireless communication facilities shall be fixed and published by resolution of the Town Board, and any amendments to such fees and financial requirements shall likewise require a resolution of the Town Board. 
(Ord. 2012-1435 1) 
Sec. 16-30-90. - Wireless communication facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Subject to the Town's applicable right-of-way permitting process administered by the Director of Engineering, wireless communication facilities located solely within public rights-of-way shall be permitted based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The facilities must be placed on existing poles, upon replacement poles of the same dimensions or upon replacement poles of a dimension that would otherwise be permitted under existing regulations for any utility operating within the Town. 
(2)  Any necessary wiring or cabling shall be located within the pole or camouflaged to blend with the color and texture of the pole. 
(3)  The area of the facilities on any pole shall be designed to minimize the visual impact of such facilities. The facilities shall add no more than five (5) feet of additional height to any pole and shall not project outward in any direction a distance of more than eighteen (18) inches. 
(4)  Any ground equipment shall be buried or screened by landscaping approved by the Town. The owner of such facilities shall irrigate and maintain such landscaping. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the administrative approval contemplated in this Section, if an applicant is proposing to add to the total number of poles located in the area impacted by its application, the request shall require a separate application and approval, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the Town and the applicant/owner. 
(6)  The applicant shall provide confirmation that it has the written consent of any owner of poles or other structures upon or to which the applicant intends to fasten wireless communication facilities. 
(b)  Any permit customarily required for the location of facilities within public rights-of-way may be waived by the Director of Engineering, following review of the applicant's proposed facilities. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 9) 
Sec. 16-30-100. - Co-location. 
(a)  The shared use of existing towers or other freestanding communication facilities upon which wireless communications facilities can be mounted shall be preferred to the construction of new facilities. As a condition of approval of any tower or other freestanding communications facilities, the applicant shall be required to allow co-location on such facilities in the future if: (1) the facility is capable of supporting co-location, (2) the entity wishing to co-locate is willing to pay fair market value for the space; and (3) the Town requests such co-location. 
(b)  The application for any wireless communication facility involving a new tower or other freestanding communication facility shall include evidence that reasonable efforts have been made to co-locate within or upon an existing wireless communication facility within a reasonable distance of the proposed site, regardless of municipal boundaries. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed wireless communication facility cannot be accommodated on existing facilities due to one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing and approved wireless telecommunications facilities, considering existing and planned use for those facilities. 
(2)  The planned equipment, if co-located, would cause radio frequency interference with other existing or planned equipment or exceed radio frequency emission standards which cannot be reasonably prevented. 
(3)  Existing or approved wireless communications facilities do not have space on which proposed equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and reasonably. 
(4)  Other technical reasons make it impracticable to place the equipment proposed by the applicant on existing facilities or structures. 
(5)  The landowner or owner of the existing wireless communication facility refuses to allow such co-location or requests an unreasonably high fee for such co-location compared to current industry rates. 
(6)  No existing wireless communication facilities upon which the applicant's facilities can be mounted are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(7)  Existing wireless communication facilities are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(8)  Existing wireless communication facilities upon which the applicant's facilities can be mounted do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antennae and related equipment. 
(9)  Any other reason, in the reasonable discretion of the Director of Planning. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 10) 
Sec. 16-30-110. - Town action on applications. 
(a)  The Director may, in his or her discretion, refer any application for wireless communication facilities for review by the Planning Commission and Town Board consistent with the requirements of this Code for conditional use grants or tower applications. If not so referred or not otherwise required by this Code, the Director shall review and determine any application for siting of wireless communication facilities within the Town in accordance with the standards set forth in this Code. If approved, the Director shall issue a written statement of approval containing any conditions for such approval. If denied, the Director shall likewise issue a written statement of denial to the applicant. 
(b)  Conditional use grants. Wireless communication facilities may be allowed as conditional uses on private property or public property owned by an entity other than the Town within all zone districts, if approved as a conditional use in compliance with the Town's standards and procedures for approval of conditional use grants as set forth in Article VII of this Chapter. Wireless communication facilities may be allowed as conditional uses on property owned by the Town in any zone district if approved as a conditional use in compliance with the Town's standards and procedures for approval of conditional use grants as set forth in Article VII. 
(c)  Tower approvals. All applications for siting of any tower shall first be reviewed by the Director and then referred to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. After the Planning Commission has completed its review of a tower application, the matter shall be referred to the Town Board for determination of the application with due regard to the Planning Commission's recommendation. The Town Board shall conduct a public hearing before considering any application for the construction of a tower. Notice of the Town Board public hearing shall be conspicuously posted upon the telecommunications site, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town and shall be mailed by first-class mail to all property owners within a radius of three hundred (300) feet from the proposed tower site. The applicant shall provide the Director with written verification that all mailings required by this Section have been issued no less than thirty (30) days prior to the Town Board hearing. The Town Board may continue any public hearing to assure a full and fair presentation of evidence. The Town Board's decision on whether to approve or deny an application for construction of a tower shall be issued within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the Town Board public hearing. The Town Board's decision on whether to approve or deny an application for construction of a tower shall be in writing, based upon evidence presented to the Town Board at the public hearing and shall take into account a recommendation of the Planning Commission. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prohibit the Planning Commission from conducting a public hearing upon any tower application referred to it, provided that the Planning Commission hearing complies in all respects with the notice requirements of this Section. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 11) 
Sec. 16-30-120. - Telecommunications provider agreement. 
    Any approval for the installation, erection or construction of wireless communication facilities within the Town shall be conditioned upon the applicant entering into a telecommunications provider agreement with the Town under which, at a minimum, the following provisions shall be addressed: 
(1)  The removal of all antennae, driveways, structures, buildings, equipment sheds, lighting, utilities, fencing, gates and accessory equipment or structures, as well as any tower or freestanding communication facility used as a wireless communication facility if such facility is deemed abandoned, becomes technologically obsolete or ceases to perform its originally intended function for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. Upon removal, the owner shall restore the telecommunication site, including but not limited to the landscaping of exposed areas. 
(2)  Removal of wireless communication facilities where, upon inspection, the Town concludes that a wireless communication facility fails to comply with any applicable conditions of approval or constitutes a danger to person or property. Under such circumstances, upon written notice, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance. If the owner fails to bring such facility into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the Town may remove the facility at the owner's expense. 
(3)  Removal of any wireless communication facility that is not operated for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days and which has been declared abandoned by the Town. The Town, in its sole discretion, may require any abandoned wireless communication facility to be removed within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the Town notifying the owner of such abandonment. Upon removal, the site shall be restored and revegetated to blend with the surrounding environment. If such removal is not completed within said ninety (90) days, the Town may consider the facility a nuisance under this Code, and the Town may remove and dispose of the same at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a structure upon which wireless communication facilities are mounted, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the structure. 
(4)  Every applicant shall post security for the discharge of duties undertaken by the applicant and owner of each wireless communication facility. Such security shall be in any form approved by and in an amount deemed sufficient by the Director to cover the anticipated cost of the owner obligations established under this Code and/or any agreements between the Town and the owner/ applicant. 
(5)  Every telecommunications provider agreement shall require that the applicant's wireless telecommunication facilities be upgraded as technology advances and as may be accomplished at reasonable cost upon such timetable as is feasible. 
(6)  Every telecommunications provider agreement shall require that, as co-location occurs on the telecommunication site, each owner within such telecommunication site shall utilize alternative communications facilities to assure that the visual impacts of multiple wireless communication facilities are minimized. 
(7)  If the owner contemplates phasing of wireless communication facilities within a single application approval, such phasing shall be set forth in the telecommunications provider agreement. Phasing of wireless communication facilities pursuant to an existing telecommunications provider agreement shall not require a new application. To the extent phasing is not clearly set forth in an existing telecommunications provider agreement, a new application and approval pursuant to this Code shall be required for such phasing. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 13) 
Sec. 16-30-130. - Existing wireless communication facilities. 
    Any wireless communication facilities approved before the effective date of the ordinance codified herein shall comply only with the applicable sections herein with respect to modifications of such facilities. 
(Ord. 2007-1307 14) 
ARTICLE XXXI - Notification Requirements for Land Use Decisions 

Sec. 16-31-10. - Notification requirements for public hearings and neighborhood meetings. 
(a)  Except as required under the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, each of the following notification requirements shall apply to all public body consideration of land use matters presented under Chapters 15, 16 and 17 of this Code requiring a public hearing or a neighborhood meeting: 
(1)  Publication requirements, generally. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Section, for all public hearings and all neighborhood meetings required under this Code, the Town shall cause a notice to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the subject property lies not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date set for the meeting or hearing, which notice shall contain: 
a.  A description of the land use proposal in question; 
b.  The location of the land which is the subject of the hearing or meeting; 
c.  The date, time and location of the hearing or meeting; and 
d.  A recital that public comment will be taken at the public hearing or neighborhood meeting. 
(2)  Posting requirements, generally. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this Section, the Town shall cause a notice stating that a land use proposal is under review and containing contact information for the Planning Department to be posted in the vicinity of such proposed land use proposal no less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
(3)  Mailing requirements. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Section, the following mailing requirements shall be met: 
a.  The Planning Department shall provide the proponent with a form of written notice which shall contain the information referred to in Paragraph (1) above. The Planning Department shall provide the proponent with a listing of all property owners within the distances specified in Subparagraph b., c. or d. below for the particular land use proposal, according to then-current Assessor's records. No less than ten (10) calendar days prior to a neighborhood meeting or public hearing (if a public hearing is required by law), the proponent shall mail such notice by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to all such property owners. 
b.  For neighborhood meetings and annexations, the listing of all property owners shall include all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of any boundary of the property which is the subject matter of the land use proposal. 
c.  For conditional use grants, the listing of all property owners shall include all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of any boundary of the property which is the subject matter of the conditional use grant proposal. 
d.  For building height modifications and zoning amendments, the listing of all property owners shall be three hundred (300) feet from the property lines of the property upon which any modification of height restrictions or zoning amendment is proposed. 
e.  No less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing or neighborhood meeting, the proponent shall, by affidavit, certify that the proponent has complied with the mailing requirements of this Paragraph (3). 
(4)  The Director of Planning is hereby authorized to promulgate and adopt such additional regulations regarding all notification requirements for public hearings and neighborhood meetings as may be necessary to implement the purposes and intent of this Section. 
(b)  Notification requirements, surface development notification. Nothing in this Section shall affect the notification requirements set forth in Section 24-65.5-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
(c)  Notification requirements for conditional use grant applications pertaining to oil and gas and mineral extraction only. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subparagraph (a)(3)(b) above, the distance for purposes of notification for any neighborhood meeting during which a proposal for oil and gas or mineral extraction will be presented as required by Sections 15-3-20 and 15-3-30 of this Code shall be increased to five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subparagraph (a)(3)(c) above, the distance for purposes of notification for any public hearing during which the Town Board or Planning Commission will consider an application for a conditional use grant associated with oil and gas or mineral extraction shall be five hundred (500) feet. 
(3)  The Director of Planning is hereby authorized to promulgate and adopt such additional regulations regarding notification requirements for conditional use grant applications pertaining to oil and gas and mineral extraction as may be necessary to implement the purposes and intent of this Section. 
(Ord. 2011-1407 3) 
ARTICLE XXXII - Seasonal Sales and Farmers Markets 

Sec. 16-32-10. - Intent. 
    The intent of this Section is to provide a mechanism by which the Town may allow seasonal sale operations and farmers markets. It shall be unlawful for any seasonal sales or farmers market to offer goods or services to the public unless and until all of the following requirements for a seasonal sales permit are met to the satisfaction of the Town. 
(Ord. 2011-1404 6) 
Sec. 16-32-20. - Seasonal sales permit; when required. 
    A seasonal sales permit shall be required for the following activities: 
(1)  Christmas tree sales. 
(2)  Pumpkin sales. 
(3)  Farmers market sales. 
(Ord. 2011-1404 6) 
Sec. 16-32-30. - Application requirements. 
    An application for a seasonal sales permit must be submitted to the Director of Planning for review and approval prior to any seasonal sales or farmers market activities. A seasonal sales permit will be valid during the season for which the permit was issued, subject to all of the information on the application remaining materially unchanged. If at any time any of the information upon which the seasonal sales permit materially changes, a revised application shall be submitted to the Director of Planning for review and approval pursuant to this Article. The application for a seasonal sales permit shall contain and be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A written narrative describing the nature of the proposed activities, proposed duration of such activities and the proposed daily hours of operation. 
(2)  A legible sketch plan depicting the proposed location of the activities, including but not limited to merchandise display, parking, circulation, pedestrian and vehicular ingress/egress, surface materials and sanitary facilities, if any. 
(3)  Payment of all applicable application fees. 
(4)  Written and signed authorization from any property owner upon whose property the proposed activities are to take place, confirming that the applicant has the right to use such property for the entire duration listed on the application. 
(5)  Proof of a valid and current Town sales tax license and a Town business license. 
(6)  Proof of applicable health department approvals if the proposed activity requires the same. 
(7)  A diagram depicting the height, location and materials for any proposed fenced enclosures. 
(Ord. 2011-1404 6) 
Sec. 16-32-40. - Limitations. 
(a)  The operational requirements and limitations set forth in this Section shall apply to all seasonal sales and farmers markets. A violation of the requirements or limitations set forth in this Section may result in revocation of any or all seasonal sales permits issued to the permit holder. 
(b)  Subject to all requirements of this Article, seasonal sales operations may take place only in the following zoning districts: the commercial component of any RMU Residential Mixed Use District; Neighborhood Commercial NC District; Central Business CB District; General Commercial GC District; Heavy Industrial IH District; and Limited Industrial IL District. 
(c)  Signage for seasonal sales and farmers markets shall be limited to the size requirements stated in Subparagraph 16-9-130(5)a.3 and shall be attached to and flush-mounted to the temporary sales structure, tent, trailer or similar use. 
(d)  Fencing of seasonal sales and farmers market sites shall conform to the fence location, height and materials approved for such sites. 
(e)  Seasonal sales and farmers markets intended for operation within any Town-owned recreational facility (including but not limited to Town parks and open spaces) shall be exempt from the requirements of this Article. All such seasonal sales and farmers markets shall comply with the applicable permit requirements administered by the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Ord. 2011-1404 6) 
Sec. 16-32-50. - Duration, revocation and renewal. 
(a)  A seasonal sales permit issued pursuant to this Article shall be valid for one (1) season, subject to renewal as provided in Subsection (b) below. 
(b)  A seasonal sales permit is eligible for renewal for each subsequent season, subject to the following criteria being met: 
(1)  No more than sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of a subsequent season, the permit holder applies in writing for renewal; 
(2)  The permit holder shall provide the Director of Planning with proof that the temporary vendor sales tax license fee has been paid in accordance with Paragraph 4-3-360(5) of this Code; 
(3)  The permit holder certifies or otherwise verifies to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning that all circumstances under which the seasonal sales permit remain materially unchanged at the time renewal is sought; and 
(4)  The Director of Planning approves the renewal in writing. 
(c)  A seasonal sales permit may be revoked by the Director of Planning if, in the sole discretion of the Director of Planning, any conditions upon which the seasonal sales permit was issued have materially lapsed, or any such conditions were materially misrepresented by the applicant. 
(Ord. 2011-1404 6) 
ARTICLE XXXIII - Accessory Dwelling Units 

Sec. 16-33-10. - Statement of intent. 
    The intent of this Article is to provide for accessory dwelling uses in areas within which single-family detached residential uses are permitted, while protecting the public health, safety and welfare through reasonable limitations on size, occupancy, density and parking associated with such uses. 
(Ord. 2014-1481 1) 
Sec. 16-33-20. - General provisions. 
    Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted as an accessory use in conjunction with all single-family detached dwellings in all zoning districts which permit single-family dwelling units as a permitted use, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Compliance with development standards and building codes. Every accessory dwelling unit shall meet the same development standards applicable to the principal dwelling unit. In addition, every accessory dwelling unit shall meet all applicable municipal codes, building codes, residential codes, fire codes and property maintenance codes. The application of these codes may render some property ineligible for accessory dwelling unit approval. 
(2)  Compliance with restrictive covenants. If the parcel upon which an accessory dwelling unit is proposed falls within the jurisdiction of a homeowners' association or similar covenant-based property owners' association, the requirements of this Article shall be considered minimum requirements. Any such association shall have the right to lawfully adopt more stringent standards for accessory dwelling units, including the outright prohibition of accessory dwelling units, for any parcel within the regulatory authority of such association. 
(3)  Parking. One (1) off-street parking space shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit, which parking space shall be in addition to any parking otherwise required for the principal dwelling unit. The parking space required under this Section may be established in tandem with other required parking spaces. The parking space required under this Section shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. 
(4)  Accessory dwelling unit size and configuration. Except as modified in Paragraph (5) below, the living space of the accessory dwelling unit shall be no larger than the living space of the principal dwelling unit on the subject lot or parcel, and shall not in any event exceed nine hundred fifty (950) square feet. No accessory dwelling unit shall be less than five hundred (500) square feet, and all accessory dwelling units shall be designed and configured as either studio, one-bedroom or two-bedroom units. Square footage calculations, as contained herein, exclude any related garage, porch or similar area. 
(5)  Unit size exception. The limitations of Paragraph (4) above shall not apply to accessory dwelling units located within the footprint of an existing home as long as the living space of the accessory dwelling unit is not larger than fifty percent (50%) of the entire principal dwelling unit, including the basement. For example, if a home has one thousand (1,000) square feet of living space within the basement, an accessory dwelling unit could be established in this space if the principal dwelling also contains at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of living space. 
(6)  Unit occupancy. No more than three (3) persons shall occupy an accessory dwelling unit. 
(7)  Number of accessory dwelling units per lot or parcel. Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed for each lot or parcel. 
(8)  Owner occupancy. The property owner, as reflected in the books and records of the County Clerk and Recorder, must occupy either the principal dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit. In the case of a corporation, limited liability company, trust or other owner entity, owner occupancy by a natural person shall be established by resolution or other formal declaration by the entity. 
(9)  Existing development on lot. 
a.  Certificate of occupancy required. A single-family dwelling shall exist as the principal use on the lot or parcel, or shall be constructed in conjunction with the accessory dwelling unit. A certificate of occupancy for an accessory dwelling unit will only be granted after a certificate of occupancy has been granted to the principal dwelling unit on the lot or parcel. 
b.  Legal nonconformity. Nothing herein shall be construed to render lawful any dwelling unit in use which, at the time of its establishment, was not lawful. Nothing herein shall require adherence to the requirements of this Article as applied to any dwelling unit which, at the time of its establishment, was lawful, unless such dwelling unit is proposed for expansion, modification or use different than that taking place at the time of the adoption of this Article. 
c.  Utility service requirements. With the exception of telephone, television, electrical and Internet service, accessory dwelling units must be served through the utility services of the principal dwelling unit and shall not have separate services. 
d.  Limitations on garage-space accessory dwelling units. Garage space dedicated for use in conjunction with an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
e.  Prohibited accessory dwelling units. Mobile homes, travel trailers and recreational vehicles shall be prohibited for use as an accessory dwelling unit. 
f.  Minimum lot size. No accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on a lot or parcel consisting of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(Ord. 2014-1481 1) 
Sec. 16-33-30. - Types of accessory dwelling units. 
    The following designations shall identify three (3) distinct types of accessory dwelling units: 
(1)  Type I: An accessory dwelling unit which is detached from the principal dwelling unit and considered a separate dwelling unit under the Residential Code. 
(2)  Type II: An accessory dwelling unit located inside a single-family dwelling whose occupants and the occupants of the principal dwelling unit do not live together as a single household unit. Type II accessory dwelling units typically have a separate access from the principal dwelling unit. In this case, both the accessory dwelling unit and the principal dwelling unit to which it is accessory are considered separate dwelling units under the Residential Code. 
(3)  Type III: An accessory dwelling unit located inside a single-family dwelling whose occupants and the occupants of the principal dwelling unit live together as a single household unit and which is not locked off from the principal dwelling unit. In this case, the accessory dwelling unit and principal dwelling unit shall be considered part of one (1) dwelling unit under the Residential Code. 
(Ord. 2014-1481 1) 
Sec. 16-33-40. - Design-related limitations, provisions. 
    Each accessory dwelling unit proposed for any location shall be approved in the form of a site plan, which shall, in addition to any other required contents, contain the following: 
(1)  Design. To preserve the appearance of the single-family dwelling, accessory dwelling units shall be designed in the following manner: 
a.  The design of the accessory dwelling unit shall be compatible with the design of the principal dwelling unit by use of similar style, exterior wall materials, window types, door and window trims, roofing materials and roof pitch and colors. 
b.  If the entrance to the accessory dwelling unit is visible from an adjacent street, it shall be designed in a manner as to be clearly subordinate to the entrance of the principal dwelling. 
c.  Windows which face an adjoining residential property shall be designed to protect the privacy of neighbors. 
(2)  Outdoor areas. The site plan shall provide accessible outdoor space and landscaping for both the accessory dwelling unit and the principal dwelling unit. The parking area required under Paragraph 16-33-20(3) of this Article shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. 
(Ord. 2014-1481 1) 
Sec. 16-33-50. - Home occupations. 
    Home occupations may take place within any accessory dwelling unit approved or lawful pursuant to this Article. However, home occupations taking place in any accessory dwelling unit shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Article X of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2014-1481 1) 
Sec. 16-33-60. - Recorded declaration of restrictions required. 
    As a condition of accessory dwelling unit approval and condition of any building permit issued for or within an accessory dwelling unit, the property owner shall record a declaration of restrictions with the clerk and recorder of the county in which the property is located. Such declaration of restrictions shall be in the form approved and maintained by the Zoning Official, and shall state that: 
(1)  The declarant (at least one [1], if more than one[1]) shall reside on the property and such property shall be the primary and permanent dwelling place of the declarant, excluding temporary absences and temporary stays elsewhere, and said property shall be and remain the declarant's place of legal residence. 
(2)  Ownership of the accessory dwelling unit shall not be transferred separately from the principal dwelling unit, nor shall the lot or parcel upon which the accessory dwelling unit is situated be subdivided. 
(3)  The accessory dwelling unit shall be restricted to the approved size, and shall not be expanded. Any modification of the approved accessory dwelling unit site plan shall first be approved by the Town. 
(4)  The certificate of occupancy for the accessory dwelling unit shall be in effect only so long as either the principal residence or the accessory dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of record as a principal dwelling unit as required by Paragraph 16-33-20(8) of this Article. 
(5)  If the accessory dwelling unit is approved as Type III, the accessory dwelling unit shall not be locked off from the principal dwelling unit unless, prior to such action, the property owner has applied for and received approval for a change of designation to a Type II accessory dwelling unit. 
(6)  The above restrictions are binding upon any successor in ownership of the property. 
(7)  Noncompliance with the declaration of restrictions may subject both the owner of the property and any accessory dwelling unit occupants to criminal prosecution and civil remedies, including but not limited to injunctive relief. The owner of the property shall be liable for all Town expenses associated with civil remedies sought by the Town in association with the declaration of restrictions. The failure of the Town to pursue civil or criminal remedies shall not be deemed a waiver of any violations or noncompliance. 
(8)  The declaration of restrictions shall lapse upon removal of the accessory dwelling unit. To effect this intent, and upon verification of such removal, the Town shall execute documentation confirming release of the deed restriction. The property owner shall record the Town-executed documentation releasing the declaration of restrictions. The property owner shall pay all required recording fees, and shall provide satisfactory written evidence that such recording was successfully completed. 
(9)  The declaration of restrictions shall be perpetual and constitute covenants running with the land. The declaration of restrictions shall be binding upon the property owner, and the heirs, successors and assigns of the property owner and all persons claiming under them. 
(10)  Neither the declaration of restrictions, nor any of the specifics set forth or incorporated therein, shall be amended, terminated or modified in any way without the written consent of the Town, filed with the clerk and recorder of the county in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 2014-1481 1) 
Sec. 16-33-70. - Procedure for accessory dwelling unit approval. 
    The approval of each accessory dwelling unit shall be governed by the following procedures: 
(1)  The property owner shall file an application for approval with the Planning Department upon such forms as may be approved by the Zoning Official. Upon completion of Planning Department review, the Zoning Official shall either approve the application as presented, deny the application as presented or approve the application with conditions. The Zoning Official shall base the determination and any conditions upon the express requirements and limitations of this Article. 
(2)  Any applicant aggrieved by the Zoning Official's determination pursuant to this Section shall have a right to appeal to the Board of Adjustment as provided in Sections 16-6-40 and 16-6-50 of this Chapter. 
(3)  The determination of the Board of Adjustment pursuant to this Section shall be deemed final agency action for purposes of judicial review. 
(Ord. 2014-1481 1) 
CHAPTER 17 - Subdivisions 
Appendix 
ARTICLE I - Purpose 

Sec. 17-1-10. - Intent. 
    The regulations contained in this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements enacted to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Town. To these ends, such regulations are intended to assure efficient circulation, adequate improvements, sufficient open space and basic order in subdivision design by providing for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets pursuant to the Comprehensive Development Plan; for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic circulation, utilities, emergency access, recreation and light and air; for the avoidance of population congestion; and for the establishment of standards for the design and construction of improvements herein required. 
(Prior code 17-1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE II - Definitions 

Sec. 17-2-10. - Words and terms defined. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
    Block means a parcel of land bounded on all sides by a street or streets. 
    Comprehensive development plan means a plan for guiding and controlling the physical development of land use and circulation facilities in the Town and any amendment or extension of such plan. 
    Dedication means a grant by the owner of a right to use land to the public in general, involving a transfer of property rights and an acceptance of the dedicated property by the appropriate public agency. 
    Easement means an interest in land dedicated for a specified purpose such as, but not limited to, providing access for maintenance of utilities and/or the conveyance of drainage. 
    Lot means a parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or building development having its full frontage on a public street. 
    Plat means a map, drawing or chart upon which the subdivider presents proposals for the physical development of a subdivision, and which he or she submits for approval and intends to record in final form. 
    Principal building means a building in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. In the case of large retail developments with multiple tenants, the principal building is typically referred to as either an "anchor" store in a mall setting (which may include more than one (1) such anchor store in a retail development) or the primary retailer in a freestanding "supercenter" (which may include smaller retail stores within the footprint of the supercenter). 
    Reservation means a legal obligation to keep property free from development for a stated period of time not involving any transfer of property rights. 
    Right-of-way means the width between property lines of a street. 
    Street means a way for vehicular traffic, further classified and defined as follows: 
a.  Arterial streets: Those which permit the relatively rapid and unimpeded movement of large volumes of traffic from one (1) part of the community to another. 
b.  Collector streets: Those which collect traffic from minor streets and carry it to arterial streets or to local traffic generators, such as neighborhood shopping centers and schools. Collector streets include the principal entrance streets to a residential development, those linking such adjacent developments and those streets providing circulation within such developments. 
c.  Minor streets: Those used primarily for direct access to properties abutting the right-of-way. Minor streets carry traffic having an origin or destination within the development and do not carry through traffic. 
    Subdivider means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to provide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined, including the agent of the subdivider . 
    Subdivision. 
a.  Major subdivision: 
1.  The division or reconfiguration of a parcel of land into six (6) or more parcels, sites or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. 
2.  The division of a parcel of land which is zoned MF-1, MF-2, CB, NC, GC, I-H or I-L into two (2) or more parcels, sites or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. 
b.  Minor subdivision : 
1.  The division of a parcel of land which is zoned SF-1, SF-2, E-1, E-2, RMU or other zoning district where single-family dwelling units are a permitted use by right, into two (2) to five (5) parcels, sites or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership. 
2.  The establishment of lot lines for an area being site planned in zones other than SF-1, SF-2, E-1, E-2 or RMU when no rights-of-way or easements need to be dedicated. 
3.  To change lot lines in an existing subdivision where no new lots are being created, no utilities are being extended, no new easements or rights-of-way are necessary and all requirements of the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances are maintained. 
(Prior code 17-11; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2011-1420 4) 
ARTICLE III - Applicability of Regulations 

Sec. 17-3-10. - Minimum requirements; applicability. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be regarded as minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, prosperity and welfare. 
(Prior code 17-21; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-3-20. - Territorial scope. 
    The territory within which these regulations are applicable shall include all land located within the legal boundaries of the Town and all land located within three (3) miles of the corporate limits of the Town and not located in any other municipality for purposes of control with reference to the plan for major streets only. 
(Prior code 17-22; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-3-30. - Neighborhood meetings. 
    Neighborhood meetings shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 15, Article III of this Code. 
(Ord. 2007-1298) 
Sec. 17-3-40. - Minimum requirements; applicability, exceptions. 
(a)  General applicability. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article shall be regarded as minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, prosperity and welfare. 
(b)  Nonregulated land transfers by metes and bounds. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code or state law to the contrary, any parcel of land, whether larger or smaller than thirty-five (35) acres, may be conveyed by metes and bounds description or by other usual and customary method of land description, without being subject to subdivision requirements, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No such conveyance shall imply or confer any right to develop or create a new lot upon which development can occur unless such development has, prior to the conveyance, been approved in accordance with this Code or prior law. 
(2)  Such conveyance shall not be made if it creates nonconformities of any nature whatsoever or circumvents the intent or requirements of this Code. 
(3)  Every deed or other instrument conveying or otherwise transferring property pursuant to this Subsection within the Town shall contain the following statement in bold type prominently displayed on the face of said deed or instrument: 
"The transfer of real property accomplished pursuant to this instrument does not confer or imply that the conveyed property or the remainder of property may be used for development within the Town of Windsor, Colorado. Any future development of the property described herein shall be subject to all development requirements of the Town of Windsor, including, without limitation, all zoning and subdivision requirements and associated procedures." 
(4)  The grantee/transferee under every deed or other instrument conveying or otherwise transferring property pursuant to this Subsection (b) within the Town shall provide a true and correct copy of such deed or other instrument of conveyance or transfer to the Director of Planning within thirty (30) days of recording, which copy shall bear the date of recording and reception by the Clerk and Recorder. 
(c)  Transfers of road right-of-way to the Town. Any parcel of land may be transferred to the Town as right-of-way by means of metes and bounds description or by other usual and customary method of land description, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The Director of Engineering shall first review and approve the land description; and 
(2)  All other Town requirements for the dedication of right-of-way have been met. 
(d)  Effective date. Subsections (b) and (c) of this Section shall be effective as to all affected instruments presented for recording by the Clerk and Recorder for Larimer or Weld County on or after 12:01 a.m. on March 15, 2010. 
(Ord. 2010-1370 7) 
ARTICLE IV - Major Subdivision 

Sec. 17-4-10. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the major subdivision procedure are: 
(1)  To divide or reconfigure a parcel or parcels of land into six (6) or more parcels, sites or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. 
(2)  To divide a parcel of land which is zoned MF-1, MF-2, CB, NC, GC, I-H or I-L into two (2) or more parcels, sites or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. 
(3)  To change an existing subdivision when the change involves rights-of-way or major easements. 
(Prior code 17-31; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-4-20. - Subdivision procedure. 
(a)  The subdivider is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the subdivision request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(b)  No major subdivision plat shall become effective until after a public hearing thereon, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(c)  Upon the filing of an application, petition or other document, the designated hearing authority shall set a date for a public hearing, to afford the public a full opportunity to be heard on such application, petition or document. 
(d)  Preliminary plat. 
(1)  Procedure. The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Department in electronic format, as specified by the Town, the preliminary plat, along with a review fee set by resolution of the Town Board and all required supportive information as set forth in this Section. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. Such submission shall allow the Planning Department to schedule consideration of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission. 
a.  Upon the filing of the preliminary plat, the applicant or applicant's representative shall distribute copies of the preliminary plat to the following agencies and offices for review and comments (additional agencies or offices may be added to this list of referrals at the sole discretion of the Planning Department): 
1.  Gas and electric utilities. 
2.  Telecommunications utility. 
3.  Windsor-Severance Fire Rescue. 
4.  Cable television provider. 
5.  Windsor Post Office. 
6.  Respective school district in which the subject property is located. 
7.  Water and sewer utilities. 
The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by written notice to the agencies and offices, and the written notice shall state that any comments or objections must be received by the Planning Department within ten (10) days of the receipt of such notice. Unless otherwise indicated on the "Developer's Referral Checklist" or later required by the Planning Department, the referral agency or office will not be contacted for comments or objections concerning the final plat. The Planning Department shall distribute application materials to referral agencies in a timely manner. 
b.  The subdivider shall meet with the Planning Department to review the recommendations of the referral agencies. 
c.  The preliminary plat and recommendations shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as provided by planning policy. 
d.  The Planning Commission shall either approve or disapprove the preliminary plat. If the preliminary plat is approved, it shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval. If a complete final plat application is received within the aforementioned one-year period, the preliminary plat approval shall remain valid during the review of the final plat unless said final plat application becomes inactive, at which time the preliminary plat shall be considered to have expired. For the purposes of this Section, an application shall be deemed inactive if the applicant does not submit required application materials as specified by the Town within one (1) year from the date requested by the Town. The applicant may submit a formal written request for reinstatement of an expired preliminary plat for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year for Planning Commission consideration within one (1) year of such expiration. 
(2)  Plats and data. All preliminary plats shall be made at a scale of either one (1) inch represents fifty (50) feet, with the exception of subdivisions which propose a minimum lot size of one (1) acre or greater, which shall be made at a scale of one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, shall be on a reproducible medium of one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The date of preparation, the scale, a symbol designating the zoning and a symbol designating true north. 
b.  The proposed name of the subdivision. 
c.  The legal description (lot, block, subdivision, section, township, range). 
d.  The names, boundaries and zoning of adjacent subdivisions, streets and property owners. 
e.  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the subdivider and firms or persons responsible for preparing the plat. 
f.  The location and dimensions of all existing utilities, streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way and watercourses within and adjacent to the subdivision and the names of all such streets. 
g.  The location and dimensions of all proposed utilities, streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way and watercourses within and adjacent to the subdivision and the names of all such streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way and watercourses. 
h.  The lot numbers, approximate dimensions and the total lots devoted to each zone district on the plat. 
i.  The total acreage of the parcel, with a designation of the specific acreage dedicated to each zone district included in the parcel, the acreage of streets, public areas and other uses. 
j.  Designation of any area subject to flooding and adequate easements for flood control. 
k.  Traffic control plan. 
l.  Vicinity map. 
m.  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all preliminary plats, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: 1) the date of each revision; 2) the initials of the person who made the revision; and 3) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted in electronic format, as specified by the Town, with the preliminary plat. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. 
a.  A Town application form provided by the Planning Department. If signed by the authorized representative, written evidence of such authorization signed by the property owner shall be submitted as well. 
b.  A Town general application overview form provided by the Planning Department. 
c.  A deed or legal instrument identifying the applicant's interest in the property. 
d.  Preliminary utility drawings. Such utility drawings shall include, but not be limited to, existing and proposed facilities and utility lines, sizes and appurtenances, storm drainage facilities, etc. Appurtenances shall include valves, fire hydrants, manholes, etc. 
e.  Traffic study prepared by a licensed engineer. 
f.  Traffic control plan prepared by a licensed engineer. 
g.  Proposed deed restrictions. 
h.  A soil types and limitations report, if not submitted when the area was annexed. 
i.  Description and location of any hazardous areas (i.e., floodplain, geological, topographic, etc.) on the subject property and proposed remedial features. 
j.  Preliminary drainage plan and report. 
k.  Topographical map with two-foot contour intervals. 
l.  Preferred method of water rights dedication: total acreage, lot-by-lot or by phase. 
m.  A landscaping plan for any public right-of-way adjacent to any arterial street. 
n.  A written narrative description of special considerations requested by the developer, including but not limited to: 
1.  Phasing plan (twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch phasing plan plat). 
2.  Landscaping proposal for all areas other than and in addition to the landscaping plan required for arterial streets in Subparagraph (3)n. above (also to be delineated on the preliminary plat). 
3.  Infrastructure oversizing requirements. 
4.  Park land dedication (also to be delineated on the preliminary plat). 
5.  Design variations of required public improvements. 
6.  Any variations to subdivision regulations proposed in accordance with the Planned Unit Development (PUD) overlay. 
(e)  Final plat. The final plat shall be submitted in electronic format, as specified by the Town. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. 
(1)  Procedure. The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Department the final plat and complete construction utility drawings, along with a fee set by resolution of the Town Board and all required supportive information as set forth in this Section. Such submission shall allow the Planning Department to schedule consideration of the final plat by the Planning Commission. 
a.  Upon receipt of the final plat, the applicant or the applicant's representative shall distribute copies thereof, along with accompanying notices to the agencies and offices set forth in Subsection (d) above in a manner consistent with the requirements thereof. 
b.  The subdivider shall meet with the Planning Department to review the recommendations of the referral agencies and offices. 
c.  The final plat and recommendations shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as provided by planning policy. 
d.  The Planning Commission shall recommend approval, recommend conditional approval or recommend disapproval of the final plat, but in all cases shall submit a written recommendation to the Board. 
e.  The Planning Department shall prepare a memorandum of agreement for public improvements which shall be signed by the applicant. 
f.  The final plat, recommendation of the Planning Commission and memorandum of agreement shall be reviewed by the Town Board as provided by planning policy, which shall either approve or disapprove the final plat or refer the same back to the Planning Commission for further study. 
g.  Following final Town Board approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
h.  The Town Clerk shall cause the approved final plat to be recorded in the office of the applicable county clerk and recorder. 
(2)  Plats and data. All final plats shall be made at a scale of either one (1) inch represents fifty (50) feet, with the exception of subdivisions which propose a minimum lot size of one (1) acre or greater, which shall be made at a scale of one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, shall be in electronic format of one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches and shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, except that the final plat may constitute only a portion of the territory covered by the preliminary plat. 
a.  The final plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date of preparation, the scale, a symbol designating the zoning and a symbol designating true north. 
2.  The name of the subdivision. 
3.  The legal description (lot, block, subdivision, section, township, range). 
4.  The names, boundaries and zoning of adjacent subdivisions, streets and property owners. 
5.  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the subdivider and the firms or persons responsible for preparing the plat. 
6.  A complete description of primary control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. 
7.  All bearings, distances, chords, radii, central angles and tangent lengths for all lots, blocks, perimeters, easements and rights-of-way. 
8.  The location and physical description of all monuments. 
9.  Identification of each lot or site by a number and designation of the area of each lot in square feet. 
10.  Vicinity map. 
11.  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all final plats, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: a) the date of each revision; b) the initials of the person who made the revision; and c) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the final plat. 
b.  Appropriate certification blocks as required by the Town shall appear on the final plat. 
(3)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted in electronic format, as specified by the Town, with the final plat. Paper copies shall be submitted where indicated. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. 
a.  Complete improvement plans prepared by a registered professional engineer at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch represents fifty (50) feet, to include the following: 
1.  Complete street plans and profiles. 
2.  Complete storm drainage plans and profiles. 
3.  Complete sanitary sewer plans and profiles, and water main plans with grades and sizes indicated. 
4.  Complete overlot and final grading plans. 
b.  One (1) electronic version as specified by the Town and one (1) paper copy of final drainage plan and report. 
c.  One (1) electronic version as specified by the Town and one (1) paper copy of design soil test results and the corresponding location map. 
d.  Final subdivision plat reduced to no larger than eleven (11) by seventeen (17) inches. 
e.  Final boundary closure calculations for the exterior boundary of the subdivision and for each individual lot prepared by a licensed civil engineer or land surveyor. 
(4)  Street lighting plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Town prior to construction of electrical utilities. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 6; Ord. 2017-1553 3) 
ARTICLE V - Minor Subdivision 

Sec. 17-5-10. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the minor subdivision procedures are: 
(1)  To divide a parcel of land which is zoned SF-1, SF-2, E-1, E-2, RMU or other zoning district where single-family dwelling units are a permitted use by right into two (2) to five (5) parcels, sites or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership. 
(2)  To establish lot lines for an area being concurrently site planned in zones other than SF-1, SF-2, E-1 or E-2 when the dedication of new rights-of-way is not contemplated or required and no more than five (5) lots are being created. 
(3)  To establish lot lines for an area being concurrently site planned for commercial and light industrial uses within RMU zones when the dedication of new rights-of-way is not contemplated or required and no more than five (5) lots are being created. 
(4)  To change lot lines in an existing subdivision where no new lots are being created, no utilities are being extended, no new easements or rights-of-way are necessary and all requirements of this Chapter and Chapter 16 of this Code are maintained. 
(Prior code 17-51; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1329) 
Sec. 17-5-20. - Subdivision procedure. 
(a)  Initial submittal. 
(1)  Procedure. The subdivider shall consult with the Planning Department in regard to the requirements of this Article and any special consideration pertaining to the site. 
a.  The subdivider shall submit a review fee set by resolution of the Town Board, and submit in electronic format, as specified by the Town, the minor subdivision plat and all required supportive information as set forth in this Section to the Planning Department. 
b.  Upon the filing of the minor subdivision plat, the Planning Department shall distribute application materials to the following agencies and offices for their review and comments. (Additional agencies or offices may be added to this list of referrals at the sole discretion of the Planning Department): 
1.  Gas and electric utilities. 
2.  Telecommunications utility. 
3.  Windsor-Severance Fire Rescue. 
4.  Cable television provider. 
5.  Windsor Post Office. 
6.  Respective school district in which the subject property is located. 
7.  Water and sewer utilities. 
The minor subdivision plat shall be accompanied by written notice to the agencies and the offices, and the written notice shall state that any comments or objections must be received by the Planning Department within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice. Unless otherwise indicated on the "Developer's Referral Checklist" or later required by the Planning Department, the referral agency or office will not be contacted for comments or objections concerning the minor subdivision plat. 
(2)  Plats and data. All minor subdivision plats shall be made at a scale of either one (1) inch represents fifty (50) feet or one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, shall be on a reproducible medium of one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The date of preparation, the scale, a symbol designating the zoning and a symbol designating true north. 
b.  The proposed name of the subdivision. 
c.  The legal description (lot, block, subdivision, section, township, range). 
d.  The names, boundaries and zoning of adjacent subdivisions, streets and property owners. 
e.  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the subdivider and firms or persons responsible for preparing the plat. 
f.  The location and dimensions of all existing utilities, watercourses, rights-of-way, easements and streets within and adjacent to the subdivision and names of all such streets and watercourses. 
g.  The location and dimensions of all proposed utilities, watercourses, rights-of-way, easements and streets within and adjacent to the subdivision and names of all such streets and watercourses. 
h.  The lot numbers, approximate dimensions and the total lots devoted to each zone district on the plat. 
i.  The total acreage of the parcel with a designation of the specific acreage dedicated to each zone district included in the parcel, the acreage of streets, public areas and the other uses. 
j.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed features on the site, including buildings, easements, rights-of-way and watercourses. 
k.  Designation of any area subject to flooding and adequate easements for flood control. 
l.  Traffic control plan. 
m.  Vicinity map. 
n.  All bearings, distances, chords, radii, central angles and tangent lengths for all lots, blocks, perimeters, easements and rights-of-way. 
o.  A complete description of primary control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. 
p.  The location and physical description of all monuments. 
q.  Identification of each lot or site by number and a designation of the area of each lot in square feet. 
r.  Appropriate certification blocks as required by the Town. 
s.  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all minor subdivision plats, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: 1) the date of each revision; 2) the initials of the person who made the revision; and 3) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the minor subdivision plat. 
(3)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted in electronic format, as specified by the Town, with the minor subdivision plat. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if necessary for review purposes. 
a.  A Town application form, provided by the Planning Department. If signed by the authorized representative, written evidence of such authorization signed by the property owner shall be submitted as well. 
b.  A Town general application overview form provided by the Planning Department. 
c.  A deed or legal instrument identifying the applicant's interest in the property. 
d.  Complete set of utility drawings. Such utility drawings shall include, but shall not be limited to, existing and proposed facilities and utility lines, sizes and appurtenances, storm drainage facilities, etc. Appurtenances shall include valves, fire hydrants, manholes, etc. 
e.  Topographical map with two-foot contour intervals. 
f.  Complete improvement plans prepared by a registered professional engineer at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch represents fifty (50) feet, to include the following: 
1.  Complete street plans and profiles. 
2.  Complete storm drainage plans and profiles. 
3.  Complete sanitary sewer plans and profiles, and water main plans with grades and sizes indicated. 
4.  Complete overlot and final grading plans. 
g.  Drainage plan and report. 
h.  Design soil test results and a corresponding location map. 
i.  Preferred method of water rights dedication: total acreage, lot-by-lot or phase. 
j.  Landscaping plan for any public right-of-way adjacent to any arterial street. 
k.  Written narrative description of special considerations requested by the developer, including but not limited to: 
1.  Phasing plan (twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch phasing plan plat). 
2.  Landscaping proposal for all areas other than and in addition to the landscaping plan required for arterial streets pursuant to this Subparagraph 3k. (also to be delineated on the minor subdivision plat). 
3.  Infrastructure oversizing requirements. 
4.  Park land dedication (also to be delineated on the minor subdivision plat). 
5.  Design variations of required public improvements. 
6.  Any variations to subdivision regulations proposed in accordance with the Planned Unit Development (PUD) overlay. 
(b)  Submittal of corrections and plat recording. 
(1)  The subdivider shall meet with the Planning Department to review the recommendations of the referral agencies. 
(2)  The subdivider shall make any changes and corrections that may be required. Such changes and corrections shall be reviewed by the Planning Department. 
(3)  The Planning Department shall prepare a memorandum of agreement for public improvements which shall be signed by the subdivider. 
(4)  The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Department the corrected minor subdivision plat. 
(5)  Following final staff approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
(6)  The Town Clerk shall cause the approved final plat to be recorded in the office of the applicable county clerk and recorder. 
(7)  Street lighting plan, which shall be reviewed and approved by the Town prior to construction of electrical utilities. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 7; Ord. 2017-1553 3) 
ARTICLE VI - Lot Line Adjustments 

Sec. 17-6-10. - Applicability. 
(a)  The lot line adjustment procedure as established herein shall apply only to existing, legally subdivided residential lots located in a zoning district wherein single-family dwelling units are designated as a use by right. The lot line adjustment procedure established hereby shall not be applicable where an adjustment would affect more than two (2) adjoining lots or would create a new lot or where such adjustment would cause either of two (2) adjoining lots or portions thereof to be located in different zoning districts. 
(b)  In addition to the procedural requirements hereinafter set forth, all lot line adjustments pursuant to this Section shall comply with all requirements of this Code including, but not limited to, building and fire codes and minimum lot size setback and offset requirements. 
(c)  No lot line adjustments pursuant to this Section shall have the effect of creating or relocating any easements or rights-of-way and shall not affect the extension of utilities. 
(Prior code 17-61; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-6-20. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the lot line adjustment procedure established herein shall be as follows: 
(1)  To allow the removal of a common property line between two (2) lots in order to create a single lot. 
(2)  To provide for minor adjustments to be made to lot lines, including: 
a.  Adjusting a property line to coincide with the correction of a legal description. 
b.  Adjusting a property line to coincide with the correction of a property survey. 
c.  Adjusting a common property line for the purpose of transferring or conveying real property between adjoining landowners. 
(Prior code 17-62; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-6-30. - Procedure. 
(a)  Initial determination. 
(1)  An application shall be submitted to the Director of Planning requesting an initial determination of whether or not the property in question is subject to lot line adjustment pursuant to this Section. This application shall be completed in a form designated by the Director of Planning and shall contain sufficient information to allow the Director of Planning to make an initial determination as aforesaid. The Town Board shall establish a fee for an initial determination, which may from time to time be modified by resolution of the Town Board. 
(2)  A favorable determination of this application shall not vest any rights under this Section in the applicant, and any benefits afforded to the applicant under this Section shall be subject to and conditioned upon the applicant's submission of full and complete additional data as hereinafter required and compliance with all additional procedural requirements hereinafter set forth. 
(3)  In the event an initial application is rejected, the applicant shall have a right of appeal to the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Procedure upon acceptance. In the event a favorable determination is made by the Director of Planning pursuant to this Section, the applicant shall thereafter submit to the Planning Department, in electronic format as specified by the Town, the following documentation: 
(1)  Lot line adjustment plat. All plats shall be drawn to a minimum scale of one (1) inch representing fifty (50) feet, shall be on a reproducible medium of one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The date of preparation, the scale, a notation stating the zoning of the property and a symbol designating true north. 
b.  The proposed name of the plat, which shall include the name of the subdivision in which the subject lots are located. 
c.  The legal description (lot, block, subdivision, section, township, range). 
d.  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the subdivider and firms or persons responsible for preparing the plat. 
e.  The location and dimensions of all existing utilities, watercourses, rights-of-way, easements and streets within and adjacent to the subject lots, and the name of all such streets and watercourses. 
f.  Vicinity map. 
g.  All bearings, distances, chords, radii, central angles and tangent lengths for all lots, blocks, perimeters, easements and rights-of-way. 
h.  A complete description of primary control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. 
i.  The location and physical description of all monuments. 
j.  Identification of each of the lots by a number and a designation of the area of each of the lots in square feet. 
k.  Appropriate certification blocks as required by the Town. 
l.  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all lot line adjustment plats, and all such revisions blocks shall include entry blocks for: (1) the date of each revision; (2) the initials of the person who made the revision; and (3) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the lot line adjustment plat. 
(2)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Town. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. 
a.  A completed application on a form provided by the Planning Department, together with any attachments that may be required by the Planning Department. Said application shall be signed by the landowner. 
b.  A plot plan drawn to a minimum scale of one (1) inch representing thirty (30) feet, which shall be on a legal-size sheet with outer dimensions of fourteen (14) inches by eight and one-half (81/2) inches and shall show the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed features on the site, including but not limited to buildings and other structures, easements, rights-of-way and watercourses. 
(c)  Final approval. 
(1)  Following final approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the Mylars as aforesaid, the Town Clerk shall cause the appropriate documents evidencing the approved lot line adjustment plat to be recorded in the office of the Weld County Clerk and Recorder or the Larimer County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 8; Ord. 2017-1553 3) 
ARTICLE VII - Site Plans 

Sec. 17-7-10. - Intent. 
    Each zoning district is primarily intended for a predominant type of land use with specific physical requirements which regulate structure size and placement on the site. A site plan or administrative site plan is used to review the impact of proposed land uses on the adjacent properties, neighborhood, street systems and existing and planned infrastructure, and to determine the need for additional dedication and design criteria. 
(Prior code 17-71; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-7-20. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the site plan procedure is to: 
(1)  Develop land as a unit development. 
(2)  Develop land zoned for multifamily, commercial or industrial uses. 
(3)  Develop land which, in the opinion of the Town Planner, could have an adverse environmental impact upon the surrounding area or would have a major community land use impact. 
(4)  To amend an approved site plan when the change involves additional land use, including but not limited to: 
a.  Additional buildings. 
b.  Outside storage and/or display. 
c.  Landscaping. 
d.  Parking. 
e.  Traffic flows. 
f.  A change from the originally approved use or intensity of such use, as determined by the Director of Planning. 
(Prior code 17-72; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-7-30. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
(a)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(b)  The applicant shall consult with the Planning Department for general information regarding requirements for site plans and any special considerations pertaining to the site. 
(Prior code 17-73; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-7-40. - Preliminary site plan. 
(a)  Procedure. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department the review fee, set by resolution of the Town Board, of the preliminary site plan and all required supportive information as set forth in this Section. Such submission shall allow the Planning Department to schedule consideration of the proposal by the Planning Commission. 
(1)  Upon the filing of the preliminary site plan, the Planning Department shall distribute the preliminary site plan to the following agencies and offices for their review and comments (additional agencies or offices may be added to this list of referrals at the sole discretion of the Planning Department): 
a.  Gas and electric utilities. 
b.  Telecommunications utility. 
c.  Windsor-Severance Fire Rescue. 
d.  Cable television provider. 
e.  Windsor Post Office. 
f.  Respective school district in which the subject property is located. 
The preliminary site plan shall be accompanied by notice to the agencies and offices, and the notice shall state that any comments or objections must be received by the Planning Department within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice. Unless otherwise indicated on the "Developer's Referral Checklist" or later required by the Planning Department, the referral agency or office will not be contacted for comments or objections concerning the final site plan. 
(2)  The applicant shall meet with the Planning Department to review the recommendations of the referral agencies or offices. 
(3)  The Planning Department shall submit the preliminary site plan and recommendations of the referral agencies to the Planning Commission. The preliminary site plan and recommendations shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as provided by planning policy. 
(4)  The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the preliminary site plan. If the preliminary site plan is approved, it shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval. If a complete final site plan application is received within the aforementioned one-year period, the preliminary site plan approval shall remain valid during the review of the final site plan unless said final site plan application becomes inactive, at which time the preliminary site plan shall be considered to have expired. For the purposes of this Section, an application shall be deemed inactive if the applicant does not submit required application materials as specified by the Town within one (1) year from the date requested by the Town. The applicant may submit a formal written request for reinstatement of an expired preliminary site plan for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year for Planning Commission consideration within one (1) year of such expiration. 
(b)  Plans and data. All preliminary site plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents forty (40) feet, shall be in electronic format as specified by the Town of one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale, a symbol designating the zoning and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The proposed name of the project. 
(3)  The legal description (lot, block, subdivision, section, township, range). 
(4)  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the applicant and the firms or persons responsible for preparing the site plan. 
(5)  Adjacent street improvements, including rights-of-way, curb cuts, paved areas, landscape areas, two-foot contours, structures and their use. 
(6)  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed on-site easements, rights-of-way, curb cuts, paved areas, landscape areas, two-foot contours, structures and their use and facilities for water, sewer and storm drainage. 
(7)  The distances from proposed and existing structures to the property line. 
(8)  Building height. 
(9)  Vicinity map. 
(10)  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all preliminary site plans, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: a) the date of each revision; b) the initials of the person who made the revision; and c) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the preliminary site plan. 
(c)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted with the preliminary site plan in electronic format as specified by the Town: 
(1)  A Town application form provided by the Planning Department. If signed by the authorized representative, written evidence of such authorization signed by the property owner shall be submitted as well. 
(2)  A Town general application overview form provided by the Planning Department. 
(3)  A deed or legal instrument identifying the applicant's interest in the property. 
(4)  A detailed narrative description of the proposed use, including number of employees, type of activity, phases of development, etc. (if applicable). 
(5)  If the use is residential, the type of units and the number of each unit to be built shall be specified. 
(6)  A narrative description of all structures to be built on the site, including size, quantity, use and the number of units per structure. 
(7)  Square footage and percentage of land devoted to: 
a.  Buildings, including amount of floor space for each floor. 
b.  Parking. 
c.  Private drives. 
d.  Public streets. 
e.  Sidewalks and pathways. 
f.  Open space. 
(8)  A block scale model within and adjacent to the site will be required for planned unit developments and for site plans having more than one (1) building of a height of thirty-five (35) feet or more, to show space relationship. 
(9)  Preliminary drainage plan and report. 
(10)  Architectural elevations and specifications of all four (4) building elevations and all structures, signs and lighting to be included with the site plans. 
(11)  Architectural elevations of the site as it is to be developed. 
(12)  Landscaping plans to be included with site plans. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 9) 
Sec. 17-7-50. - Final site plan. 
(a)  Procedure. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department the final site plan and all required supportive information as set forth in this Section a minimum of twenty-one (21) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission. 
(1)  Upon the filing of the final site plan, the Planning Department shall distribute the final site plan to the following agencies and offices for their review and comments (additional agencies or offices may be added to this list of referrals at the sole discretion of the Planning Department): 
a.  Gas and electric utilities. 
b.  Telecommunications utilities. 
c.  Windsor-Severance Fire Rescue. 
d.  Cable television provider. 
e.  Windsor Post Office. 
f.  Respective school district in which the subject property is located. 
g.  Water and sewer utilities. 
The final site plan shall be accompanied by notice to the agencies and offices, and the notice shall state that any comments or objections must be received by the Planning Department within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice. Unless otherwise indicated on the "Developer's Referral Checklist" or later required by the Planning Department, the referral agency or office will not be contacted for comments or objections concerning the final site plan. 
(2)  The applicant shall meet with the Planning Department to review the recommendations of the referral agencies or offices. 
(3)  The final site plan and recommendations shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as provided by planning policy. 
(4)  The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the preliminary site plan. If the preliminary site plan is approved, it shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval. If a complete final site plan application is received within the aforementioned one-year period, the preliminary site plan approval shall remain valid during the review of the final site plan unless said final site plan application becomes inactive, at which time the site plan shall be considered to have expired. For the purposes of this Section, an application shall be deemed inactive if the applicant does not submit required application materials as specified by the Town within one (1) year from the date requested by the Town. The applicant may submit a formal written request for reinstatement of an expired site plan for Planning Commission consideration and recommendation to the Town Board within one (1) year of such expiration. 
(5)  The Planning Department shall prepare a memorandum of agreement for public improvements, which shall be signed by the applicant. 
(6)  The final site plan and recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be reviewed by the Town Board as provided by planning policy. The Town Board shall approve the final site plan by resolution, disapprove it or refer the same back to the Planning Commission for further study. 
(7)  Following Town Board approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
(8)  If construction has not commenced within one (1) year after approval, the approved site plan shall become void. 
(b)  Plans and data. All final plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents forty (40) feet, shall be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Town of one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, and shall conform to the preliminary site plan, as approved. 
(1)  The final site plan shall contain the following information, in addition to the information on the preliminary site plan: 
a.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed traffic controls, trash disposal areas and enclosures, electric transformers, a complete submittal of all landscaping materials shown at mature sizes and the maintenance system for landscaping as per Windsor Landscaping Guidelines provided by the Planning Department. 
b.  Vicinity map. 
c.  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all final site plans, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: 1) the date of each revision; 2) the initials of the person who made the revision; and 3) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the final site plan. 
(2)  Certification blocks. Appropriate certification blocks as required by the Town shall appear on the final site plan. 
(c)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted with the final site plan: 
(1)  Permits from the Colorado Department of Transportation for curb cuts on state highways. Such permits must be cosigned by the Town Engineer. 
(2)  A survey of the lot lines of they are not the same as originally platted. 
(3)  Final utility plans. Such utility plans shall include, but not be limited to, existing and proposed facilities and utility lines, sizes and appurtenances, storm drainage facilities, etc. Appurtenances shall include valves, fire hydrants, manholes, etc. 
(4)  Grading plan with site elevations and finished floor elevations. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 10; Ord. 2017-1553 3) 
ARTICLE VIII - Administrative Site Plan 

Sec. 17-8-10. - Intent. 
    The intent of an administrative site plan is to ensure that the existing neighborhood character is preserved and/or enhanced and to minimize possible detrimental uses. 
(Prior code 17-91; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-8-20. - Purpose. 
    The administrative site plan is required when any of the following situations exist: 
(1)  Nonresidential uses: 
a.  Develop any nonresidential use for which site plan review by the Town Board is not required. 
b.  Redevelop existing nonresidential uses when the redevelopment results in one (1) of the following, but not limited to: 
1.  Additional floor space. 
2.  Change in parking area. 
3.  Change in pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
4.  Change in size or location of landscaping areas. 
c.  Change in an approved administrative site plan when the change involves the conditions listed below or such other conditions which significantly change, modify or alter an approved administrative site plan: 
1.  Building location or size. 
2.  Parking area. 
3.  Pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
4.  Size or location of landscaping areas. 
(2)  Residential uses. 
a.  The conversion of a single-family use to a less restrictive use. 
b.  The demolition or removal of a single-family use for purposes of constructing a less restrictive use. 
c.  The addition of dwelling units to an existing multiple-family structure. 
(Prior Code 17-92; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-8-30. - Administrative site plan review. 
(a)  Procedure. The applicant shall consult with the Planning Department for general information regarding requirements for site plans and any special considerations pertaining to the site. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department the review fee set by resolution of the Town Board and submit the site plan in electronic format as specified by the Town. 
(2)  Upon the filing of an administrative site plan, the Planning Department shall review the nature and location of the proposal and determine whether or not the site plan information and applicable drawings are included in Planning Commission and Town Board packets as informational communications items, based upon the following criteria: 
a.  Proximity to neighboring residential properties; 
b.  Whether the project will be located in a prominent location; 
c.  Extent of significant modifications to building elevations and/or additions of significant new structures; and/or 
d.  Extent of significant modifications planned or needed for parking, lighting, internal or external traffic, vehicular circulation and/or space for loading and unloading. 
(3)  Upon the filing of the administrative site plan, the Planning Department shall distribute the administrative site plan to the following agencies and offices for their review and comments (additional agencies and offices may be added to this list of referrals at the sole discretion of the Planning Department): 
a.  Gas and electric utilities. 
b.  Telecommunications utility. 
c.  Windsor-Severance Fire Rescue. 
d.  Cable television provider. 
e.  Windsor Post Office. 
f.  Respective school district in which the subject property is located. 
g.  Water and sewer utilities. 
The administrative site plan shall be accompanied by notice to the agencies and offices, and the notice shall state that any comments or objections must be received by the Planning Department within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice. Unless otherwise indicated on the "Developer's Referral Checklist" or later required by the Planning Department, the referral agency or office will not be contacted for comments or objections concerning the site plan. 
(4)  The applicant shall meet with the Planning Department to review the comments of the referral agencies. 
(5)  The applicant shall make all changes required by the referral agencies. 
(6)  Following final staff approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
(b)  Plans and data. 
(1)  All site plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents forty (40) feet, shall be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Town on one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The date of preparation, the scale, a symbol designating the zoning and a symbol designating true north. 
b.  The name of the project. 
c.  The legal description (lot, block, subdivision, section, township, range). 
d.  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the owner and the firms or persons responsible for preparing the site plan. 
e.  Land uses adjacent to the site. 
f.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed on-site easements, rights-of-way, curb cuts, paved areas, sidewalks, landscape materials (including common name, scientific name, planting size and mature size), two-foot contours, structures and their uses, parking areas, trash disposal areas and enclosures, signs and lighting, and water and sewer service connections. 
g.  Number of residential units. 
h.  Vicinity map. 
i.  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all site plans, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: 1) the date of each revision; 2) the initials of the person who made the revision; and 3) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the site plan. 
(2)  Appropriate certification blocks as required by the Town shall appear on the site plan. 
(3)  The following supportive information shall be submitted with the site plan: 
a.  A Town application form provided by the Planning Department. If signed by the authorized representative, written evidence of such authorization, signed by the property owner, shall be submitted as well. 
b.  A Town general application overview form provided by the Planning Department. 
c.  A deed or legal instrument identifying the applicant's interest in the property. 
d.  A detailed narrative description of the proposed use, including number of employees, type of activity, phases of development, etc. (if applicable). 
e.  A preliminary drainage plan and report. 
f.  If the use is residential, the type of units and the number of each unit to be built shall be specified. 
g.  Architectural elevations and specifications of all four (4) building elevations of all proposed structures, signs and lighting to be included with the site plans. 
(4)  If construction has not commenced within one (1) year after approval, the approved site plan shall become void. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 11; Ord. 2017-1553 3; Ord. 2018-1565 2) 
ARTICLE IX - Qualified Commercial and Industrial Site Plans 

Sec. 17-9-10. - Intent and purpose. 
    Commercial and industrial site plans proposed to be developed on lots that have either previously been subdivided or are presently being subdivided as part of a minor subdivision shall qualify for administrative site plan review in accordance with the requirements of this Section. The provisions of this Section, as well as the administrative site plan review procedures set forth in Section 17-8-30, shall not apply to multifamily residential projects or site plans, which shall remain subject to the subdivision and site plan review procedures otherwise set forth in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 17-95; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-9-20. - Site plan review procedure. 
    The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department the review fee set forth by resolution of the Town Board, the site plan in electronic format as specified by the Town and all required supportive information as set forth in this Section. 
(1)  Upon the filing of the site plan, the Planning Department shall distribute copies of the site plan to the following agencies and offices for their review and comments (additional agencies or offices may be added to this list of referrals at the sole discretion of the Planning Department): 
a.  Gas and electric utilities. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities. 
c.  Windsor-Severance Fire Rescue. 
d.  Cable television provider. 
e.  Windsor Post Office. 
f.  Respective school district in which the subject property is located. 
g.  Water and sewer facilities. 
(2)  The site plan shall be accompanied by notice to the agencies and offices, and the notice shall state that any comments or objections must be received by the Planning Department within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice. Unless otherwise indicated on the "Developer's Referral Checklist" or later required by the Planning Department, the referral agency or office will not be contacted for comments or objections concerning the site plan. 
(3)  The applicant shall meet with the Planning Department to review the recommendations of the referral agencies or offices. 
(4)  The applicant shall make all changes required by the referral agencies. 
(5)  The Planning Department shall include commercial and industrial site plan information and applicable drawings in Planning Commission and Town Board meeting packets as informational communications items. 
(6)  In the event a dispute arises between the applicant and the Planning Department with regard to the administrative site plan review, a Notice of Dispute shall be sent to the applicant by the Planning Department via e-mail, U.S. Mail or both. The applicant may apply to the Town for further review of the site plan by the Planning Commission and Town Board within ten (10) days of the date of the Notice of Dispute. Upon receipt of the timely application for further review, the site plan, together with the disputes giving rise to the application, shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and, thereafter, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the final site plan to the Town Board. Upon its receipt of the proposed site plan, the Town Board shall review the site plan and shall make a final determination regarding the approval thereof. 
(7)  Following final staff approval, the applicant shall comply with the document submittal requirements and standards then in effect as maintained by the Director of Planning. 
(Ord. 2018-1565 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-1565 ,  1, adopted Aug. 13, 2018, repealed the former  17-9-20 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  17-9-20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2013-1457, 12; and Ord. 2017-1553 , 3. 
Sec. 17-9-30. - Plans and data. 
    All site plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents forty (40) feet, shall be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Town on one (1) or more sheets with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale, a symbol designating the zoning and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The proposed name of the project. 
(3)  The legal description (lot, block, subdivision, section, township, range). 
(4)  The names, addresses, phone numbers and fax numbers of the applicant and the firms or persons responsible for preparing the site plan. 
(5)  Adjacent street improvements, including rights-of-way, curb cuts, paved areas, landscape areas, two-foot contours, structures and their use. 
(6)  The location and dimensions of all existing on-site easements, rights-of-way, curb cuts, paved areas, landscape areas, two-foot contours, structures and their use and facilities for water, sewer and storm drainage. 
(7)  The distances from proposed and existing structures to the property line. 
(8)  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed traffic controls, trash disposal areas and enclosures, electric transformers, a complete submittal of all landscaping materials shown at mature sizes and the maintenance system for landscaping as per Windsor Landscaping Guidelines provided by the Planning Department. 
(9)  Building height. 
(10)  Vicinity map. 
(11)  Revisions block. An information block entitled "Revisions" shall be included on all site plans, and all such blocks for revisions shall include entry blocks for: a) the date of each revision; and b) the initials of the person who made the revision; and c) a brief description of the revision. The applicant or applicant's representative shall be responsible for making entries in each of these respective blocks each time a revision has been made to the site plan. 
(12)  Certification blocks. Appropriate certification blocks as required by the Town shall appear on the site plan. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 13) 
Sec. 17-9-40. - Supportive information. 
    The following supportive information shall be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Town with the site plan. Paper copies shall be submitted where indicated. Additional paper copies of any required documents may be required if deemed necessary for review purposes. 
(1)  A Town application form provided by the Planning Department. If signed by the authorized representative, written evidence of such authorized signed by the property owner shall be submitted as well. 
(2)  A Town general application overview form provided by the Planning Department. 
(3)  A deed or legal instrument identifying the applicant's interest in the property. 
(4)  A detailed narrative description of the proposed use, including number of employees, type of activity, phases of development, etc. (if applicable). 
(5)  If the use is residential, the type of units and the number of each unit to be built shall be specified. 
(6)  A narrative description of all structures to be built on the site, including size, quantity, use and the number of units per structure. 
(7)  Square footage and percentage of land devoted to: 
a.  Buildings, including amount of floor space for each floor. 
b.  Parking. 
c.  Private drives. 
d.  Public streets. 
e.  Sidewalks and pathways. 
f.  Open space. 
(8)  A block scale model within and adjacent to the site will be required for planned unit developments and for site plans having more than one (1) building of a height of thirty-five (35) feet or more, to show space relationship. 
(9)  A drainage plan and report stamped by a licensed engineer. 
(10)  Architectural elevations and specifications of all four (4) building elevations of all structures, signs and lighting to be included with the site plans. 
(11)  Architectural elevations of the site as it is to be developed. 
(12)  Landscaping plans to be included with site plans. 
(13)  Permits from the Colorado Department of Transportation for curb cuts on state highways, if applicable. Such permits must be cosigned by the Town Engineer. 
(14)  A survey of the lot lines, if they are not the same as originally platted. 
(15)  A complete set of final utility plans. Such utility plans shall include, but not be limited to, existing and proposed facilities and utility lines, sizes and appurtenances, storm drainage facilities, etc. Appurtenances shall include valves, fire hydrants, manholes, etc. 
(16)  A grading plan with site elevations and finished floor elevations. 
(17)  A Traffic Impact Study, if deemed necessary. 
(18)  If located in a floodplain, all documentation required to comply with floodplain regulations. 
(Ord. 2013-1457 13) 
Sec. 17-9-50. - Time limit for commencement. 
    If construction has not commenced within one (1) year after approval, the approved site plan shall become void. 
(Prior code 17-96; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-9-60. - Compliance with procedures. 
    With the exception of the commercial and industrial site plans as described herein and excluding plans which may otherwise qualify for administrative site plan review pursuant to Section 17-8-30 of this Chapter, such plans remain subject to the subdivision and site plan review procedures otherwise set forth in this Chapter. 
(Prior code 17-96; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE X - Design Standards 

Sec. 17-10-10. - General design considerations. 
(a)  A proposed subdivision shall be in general compliance with the Comprehensive Development Plan for the Town, particularly with respect to adequate reservation of major street rights-of-way, major utility easements and open spaces for schools and recreation areas. 
(b)  A proposed subdivision shall not, by reason of its location or design, cast an undue burden on public utility systems and community facilities on or adjacent to the tract. Where extension and enlargement of public utility systems and community facilities are necessary, the subdivider shall make provision to offset higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public cost necessitated by the subdivision. Due consideration shall be given to the difference between prior public revenue and anticipated public revenue to be derived from the fully developed subdivision in determining added net public cost. 
(c)  No land shall be subdivided in areas where soil, subsoil or flooding conditions are potential dangers to health or safety. 
(d)  Subdivision design shall give consideration to the preservation of groves of trees, streams, unusually attractive topography and other desirable natural landscape features. Provision shall be made for the perpetual maintenance of such features through private covenants or other means acceptable to the Planning Commission. 
(e)  A proposed subdivision shall be designed in such manner as to be coordinated with adjoining subdivisions with respect to the alignment of street rights-of-way and utility and drainage easements and open spaces. 
(Prior code 17-111; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-10-20. - Street Design and Construction Standards. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets, design of closed-end streets, design of intersections, horizontal and vertical alignment of streets, visibility requirements and street names within the Town shall be governed by the Street Design and Construction Standards maintained by the Director of Engineering. The Director of Engineering shall make the Street Design and Construction Standards available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  The Director of Engineering shall have the authority to make minor modifications to the Street Design and Construction Standards. However, major modifications or amendments of the Street Design and Construction Standards shall take place only upon formal resolution adopted by the Town Board as recommended by the Director of Engineering. 
(c)  Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate names of existing streets, provided that new streets which are extensions of or which are in alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of such streets. 
(Ord. 2009-1355 2) 
Sec. 17-10-30. - Utilities easements. 
(a)  Subdivisions shall be platted with utility easements of a minimum width of sixteen (16) feet, eight (8) feet of which shall be one each side of common rear lot lines where said lines abut. On perimeter rear lots, easement width shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. Side lot easements where necessary shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. Said easements shall be graded to within six (6) inches of final grade before utility facilities are installed. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway or stream, there shall be provided a perpetual drainage easement conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and of such width as necessary and adequate to carry off the predictable volume of stormwater drainage from a one-hundred-year frequency storm. 
(c)  In general, utility systems shall be arranged and located in such manner as to avoid cross-connections, minimize trenching and adequately separate incompatible systems. 
(Prior code 17-113; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-10-40. - Blocks, design standards. 
(a)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the following: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Requirements of the Zoning Ordinance as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access and control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Maximum block length between intersecting streets shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. 
(Prior code 17-114; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-10-50. - Lots, design standards. 
(a)  Lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall facilitate the placement of buildings with sufficient access, outdoor space, privacy and view. 
(b)  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and loading areas required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(c)  Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to accommodate the required building setback line on both street frontages. 
(d)  Each lot shall be provided with satisfactory access to an existing public street. 
(e)  Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots shall not be permitted except where essential to provide separation of residential properties from arterial streets or commercial uses or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(f)  There shall be no right of access from individual lots to an arterial street. 
(g)  Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets. 
(h)  Sites to be dedicated for public use shall be allocated with consideration for suitable location and adequate size as indicated on the Comprehensive Development Plan. 
(Prior code 17-115; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-10-60. - General transportation requirement. 
(a)  This Section shall apply to all complete application for development received after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. 
(b)  As part of any application for development, and as a specific condition of approval thereof, an applicant shall demonstrate that the following adequate public facilities for transportation are available, or will be available, to serve the proposed development. 
(1)  All developments shall demonstrate compliance with the following transportation level of service (LOS) standards. 
a.  All development must have direct, paved access to a paved street as part of the street network or to a street for which funds have already been appropriated or provided by the proponent of the development. 
b.  Existing levels of service at peak hour are maintained on all arterial and collector roads and at all intersections within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the primary access to the site, or the level of service shall not fall below LOS "D" as defined by the Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209 (Washington D.C.: National Research Council 1998), as amended, as set forth below: 
LOS Volume to Capacity Ratio A =0.59 B =0.69 C =0.79 D =0.89 E =0.99 F =1.00  
(2)  All developments shall provide an overall access management plan that demonstrates free-flowing access to the site and avoids unsafe congestion conditions on adjacent public roads and streets. 
(3)  All developments shall comply with the specific provisions of the Town's Road Impact Fee Ordinance. 
(4)  The Town Board may waive the requirements set forth herein upon an adequate showing that the proposed development will have nominal effect on roads and intersections. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to repeal or otherwise modify existing infrastructure requirements and public facilities criteria regarding transportation in effect upon the adoption of the ordinance codified herein. 
(Ord. 2004-1163) 
ARTICLE XI - Required Improvements 

Sec. 17-11-10. - General regulations for subdivisions. 
(a)  The subdivider or developer shall enter into an agreement with the Town to guarantee construction of all required improvements, including streets, curbs and gutters, driveways, sidewalks, storm drainage system, sanitary sewerage and potable water system. 
(b)  Under such agreement, the subdivider or developer shall post a performance bond, letter of credit or similar security instrument drawn in favor of the Town in an amount equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated cost of the construction of improvements. 
(c)  Sixty percent (60%) of the performance bond, letter of credit or similar security document posted by the subdivider or developer shall be released upon complete construction acceptance of all public improvements by the Town. The balance of the performance bond, letter of credit or similar security instrument shall not be released until final construction of improvements has been completed and the Town has given its final acceptance of maintenance and repair of the improvements. 
(d)  Dedication of land within a subdivision shall be required where easements for storm drainage, sanitary sewerage or other public utilities are necessary to permit agencies and utility companies to maintain utilities and render services to the subdivision. 
(e)  The improvements required by the following sections shall be provided in each subdivision or development as appropriate to the particular type of development proposed and to the extent determined by the Planning Commission. Required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the detailed design standards and specifications of the Town Engineer and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans and profiles and the construction requirements and specifications of the Town Engineer. 
(Prior code 17-131; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2006-1269 1) 
Sec. 17-11-20. - Street improvements in subdivisions. 
(a)  Grading. Street rights-of-way shall be graded as necessary to provide adequate surface drainage and convenient access to lots or sites. 
(b)  Pavement base. The pavement base shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Street Design and Construction Standards maintained, amended and modified pursuant to Section 17-10-20 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Pavement. Pavement shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Street Design and Construction Standards maintained, amended and modified pursuant to Section 17-10-20 of this Chapter. 
(d)  Driveways and accessways. Where appropriate to the type of development proposed, driveways or accessways shall be provided for vehicular access to each structure or parking or loading area. Driveways and accessways provided shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Street Design and Construction Standards maintained, amended and modified pursuant to Section 17-10-20 of this Chapter. 
(e)  Sidewalks and walkways. Sidewalks and walkways shall be provided where necessary or appropriate for the safety and convenience of pedestrians. Width of sidewalks shall be as specified in the Street Design and Construction Standards maintained, amended and modified pursuant to Section 17-10-20 of this Chapter. Sidewalks and walkways shall be durably constructed with all-weather surfacing and shall be adequately lighted and maintained for the use contemplated. 
(f)  Street name signs. Easily legible street name signs shall be installed at street intersections or as necessary for convenient identification of streets. 
(Ord. 2009-1355 3) 
Sec. 17-11-30. - Utilities improvements in subdivisions. 
(a)  Storm drainage system. 
(1)  The storm drainage system shall consist of surface drainage structures and, where appropriate to the type of development proposed, catch basins and other underground drainage structures. The storm drainage system shall be of sufficient size and design to carry off all predictable surface water runoff within the subdivision or development and stormwater drainage which enters the development from adjacent areas. 
(2)  Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, catch basins shall be provided at all low points, at street intersections and at intermediate locations as necessary to prevent overloading of the street gutters. Catch basins provided shall be connected to collection mains of adequate site with outfalls approved by the Planning Commission. 
(3)  Storm drainage shall not be permitted to empty into any sanitary sewerage system. 
(b)  Sanitary sewerage system. The sanitary sewerage system shall be connected to an existing public sanitary sewer system and shall consist of a closed system of sanitary sewer mains and lateral branch connections to each structure or lot upon which a structure is built. The sanitary sewerage system shall be of sufficient size and design to collect all sewage from all proposed or probable structures within the subdivision or development. 
(c)  Potable water system. The potable water system provided shall connect to an existing public water system and shall consist of water mains directly connected to using structures by means of lateral branches. The water system shall be of sufficient size and design to supply potable water to each structure or lot upon which a structure is to be built. 
(d)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed at street intersections and at other points as necessary to assume that no building is located more than five hundred (500) feet from the nearest fire hydrant. 
(e)  Underground electric power and telephone distribution system. Telephone lines and electric lines and other like utility services shall be placed underground unless not feasible. The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this Subsection, and he or she shall make the necessary arrangements, including any construction or installation of such facilities, and shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations for the construction of the same. Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities may be placed aboveground; electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and communication long-distance trunk and feeder lines and necessary appurtenances thereto may be placed aboveground. Such facilities shall be placed within easements or public rights-of-way provided for particular facilities. Every effort shall be made to place pedestals as close to corner lot lines as possible. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to existing facilities or subdivisions platted prior to the adoption of this Chapter. 
(f)  Street lighting. 
(1)  Ornamental street lighting and associated underground street supply circuits shall be installed. The minimum requirement shall be nine thousand five hundred (9,500) lumen lamps at a maximum spacing of five hundred (500) feet and at each street intersection. A street lighting plan specifying the number, kind and location of street lights must be submitted with the final plat. 
(2)  The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to existing facilities or subdivisions platted heretofore upon which building permits have been issued. 
(g)  Location of water and sewer lines. All water and sewer service lines shall be extended by the developer from the main onto each lot and through the front utility easement to the rear boundary thereof. Curb stops for all water lines shall be located directly behind the sidewalk of each lot. 
(Prior code 17-133; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-11-40. - Reference monuments in subdivisions. 
    Permanent reference monuments shall be located and placed within the subdivision or development as required by state law. Iron pin monuments at least twenty-four (24) inches long and flush with the surface shall be placed at all points on boundary lines where there is a change in direction, at all block and lot corners and at other points as required by the Town Engineer. 
(Prior code 17-134; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-11-50. - Maintenance of required improvements. 
    Adequate provision for the satisfactory maintenance of streets and utilities improvements, including easements, shall be made by dedication of such improvements to the Town. Prior to acceptance by the Town, the improvements to be dedicated shall be inspected and approved by the Town Engineer. 
(Prior code 17-135; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-11-60. - Reservations of land. 
(a)  Reservation by covenant, in lieu of dedication, may be permitted in some cases, such as planned unit developments, where land is to be used for recreational or amenity purposes by the property owners. 
(b)  Reservation of land within a subdivision may be required for the duration of the preliminary plat approval in order to afford the appropriate public agency the opportunity to coordinate its acquisition of public land with the development of the subdivision. An agreement shall be entered into between the subdivider and the public agency regarding the timing and method of acquisition. 
(Prior code 17-136; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-11-70. - Nonpotable secondary water systems. 
(a)  Mandatory construction of nonpotable secondary water systems for irrigation. All new residential development within those areas of the Urban Growth Boundary of the Town designated by the Town Board as suitable for the construction of nonpotable secondary water systems, shall be required, as part of any subdivision process, to construct a nonpotable secondary water system for irrigation of all residential lots and common areas within the subdivision. Likewise, proponents of all new residential development shall provide for adequate nonpotable water in amounts sufficient in both quantities and quality to operate said system so that the system will provide an assured and sufficient amount of water to adequately irrigate all residential lots and common areas. 
(b)  Private management of nonpotable secondary water systems. 
(1)  As a condition of subdivision approval of any residential development wherein a nonpotable secondary water system shall be required, such system shall be operated, repaired and maintained by a metropolitan district, homeowners' association or other public or private entity. The nature and structure of such entity shall be subject to approval by the Town, and the management entity and the Town shall enter into a written agreement prior to final subdivision approval to provide for the entity's management and operation of the nonpotable secondary water system and specifically providing for such credits as may be appropriate from the Town for the construction of such system, including reduced raw water dedication requirements reflective of the existence of a nonpotable secondary water system, as well as reduced water plant investment fees likewise reflective of the existence of the nonpotable secondary water system. 
(2)  Any agreement between the management entity and the Town shall also provide that the nonpotable water resources designated by the management entity for the operation of the nonpotable secondary water system shall be available both physically and legally in perpetuity, thereby assuring to the Town that in the event the management entity fails and the Town is subsequently required to operate the nonpotable secondary water system, adequate water resources will be available to the Town for the operation of the nonpotable secondary water system. Therefore, the agreement must also provide for the transfer of such water resources, as well as the water acquisition and distribution system, to the Town at its option, should the management entity be unable to operate, repair, maintain and replace the system so that it functions to provide a reliable and sufficient supply of nonpotable water for the purposes set forth in the agreement. The adequacy and reliability of the nonpotable water resources shall be determined by the Town in its sole discretion. Any funds held by or for the management entity for the operation, repair, maintenance and replacement of such system shall also be transferred to the Town, with the use of such funds limited to the operation, repair, maintenance and replacement of such system. 
(c)  Establishment of geographical areas where nonpotable secondary water systems shall be required. 
(1)  Upon the adoption of the ordinance codified herein, the Town Board shall, by resolution, designate those areas within the Town's Urban Growth Boundary wherein the construction of a nonpotable secondary water system shall be required as a condition of development. Such designation by the Town shall include areas within the Urban Growth Boundary of the Town that have historically been irrigated by agricultural wells or ditch and canal systems, as well as other areas wherein, for reasons of topography and access to raw water, the construction of nonpotable secondary water systems is determined by the Town to be feasible. 
(2)  The Town may, by a resolution subsequently adopted and after appropriate findings, remove from or add to the original areas wherein nonpotable secondary water systems are required within the Town's Urban Growth Boundary. 
(d)  Annexation. The construction of a nonpotable secondary water system at the time of development shall be a condition of annexation when annexation is proposed for residential development in an area designated for the construction of nonpotable secondary water systems. 
(e)  Feasibility review and determination. In the event it can be established to the satisfaction of the Town Board that the construction of a nonpotable secondary water system as part of new residential development in an area designated for the construction of nonpotable secondary water systems is not economically feasible and would work an undue hardship, the Town Board may relieve the developer from the operation of the ordinance codified herein. Any such determination by the Town Board shall be conditioned upon compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The developer shall submit an application seeking relief from the operation of the ordinance codified herein on a form prescribed by the Town and containing such information and supporting documentation as may be required by the Town. 
(2)  The developer shall submit an analysis of the economic feasibility of the proposed nonpotable system using a standardized cost benefit analysis approved by the Town. 
(3)  The developer may submit such additional information and documentation as may be deemed relevant in support of its proposition that the construction of a nonpotable system is not economically feasible and would work an undue hardship, including but not limited to, information concerning the availability and cost of raw water and issues of engineering relating to the delivery of raw water to the system in question. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the aforesaid application, cost benefit analysis and additional information and documentation, the Director of Engineering may, in his or her sole discretion, employ such engineers, financial analysts and such other experts as may be necessary to review and evaluate the data provided and to submit an independent analysis of the developer's application for relief from the operation of the ordinance codified herein. The reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the Town shall be paid by the developer and shall be advanced by the developer as a condition of this process. 
(5)  Upon the completion of the independent analysis as aforesaid, the Director of Engineering, upon notice to the developer, shall schedule a hearing before the Town Board. At the time of the hearing, the developer and the Town shall each be afforded a full opportunity to present all relevant evidence in the form of testimony and exhibits. Within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Town Board shall prepare and submit a written decision affirming the requirements of the ordinance codified herein or providing the developer relief therefrom. The decision of the Town Board shall be final upon submission of its written decision. 
(f)  Regulations. The Director of Engineering is hereby authorized to develop regulations for the construction and operation of nonpotable secondary water systems. Such regulations shall include, but shall not be limited to, specifications for transmission lines, connections, pumps and storage requirements for nonpotable water. 
(Prior code 17-137; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XII - Variances and Modifications 

Sec. 17-12-10. - Procedure. 
    Application for variances or modifications of these regulations shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. Such application shall include a statement setting forth the nature and extent of the requested variance or modification, together with evidence supporting the need for such variance. At the time of the filing of the application the applicant shall pay to the Town a fee to be set by resolution of the Town Board. 
(Prior code 17-151; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-12-20. - Guiding considerations. 
(a)  Hardship. Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that individual and public interests are secured, provided that such variance is based on a finding that unusual topography or other exceptional conditions not caused by the subdivider made such variance necessary and that the granting thereof will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. 
(b)  Planned unit development. The requirements and standards of these regulations may be modified by the Planning Commission in the case of the plan and program for a planned unit development which, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(Prior code 17-152; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-12-30. - Conditions. 
    The Planning Commission may require such conditions, upon the granting of variances and modifications, as will, in its judgment, secure substantial compliance with the objectives of the requirements and standards so varied or modified. 
(Prior code 17-153; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XIII - Design Criteria and Procedures 
Division 1 - Commercial Corridor Design Criteria 

Sec. 17-13-10. - Commercial Corridors identified, defined. 
    The following Commercial Corridors are hereby declared to be a special and unique part of the Town, requiring additional design criteria for all building, growth and development proposed therein: 
(1)  The East Main Street Subarea, defined as that portion of Colorado Highway 392 Corridor from Second Street to the eastern boundary of the Town and including proximate vicinities contiguous thereto, as that boundary may change from time to time, specifically designated on the map attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by this reference; 
(2)  The Downtown Subarea, defined as that portion of Colorado Highway 392 from Second Street west to Tenth Street and including proximate vicinities contiguous thereto, as that boundary may change from time to time, specifically designated on the map attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by this reference; 
(3)  The West Main Street Subarea, defined as that portion of Colorado Highway 392 from Tenth Street west to the western boundary of the Town and including proximate vicinities contiguous thereto, as that boundary may change from time to time, specifically designated on the map attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by this reference; 
(4)  The Colorado Highway 257 North Subarea, defined as that portion of Colorado Highway 257 from Ash Street on the west side of Colorado Highway 257 and from Birch Street on the east side of Colorado Highway 257 north to the northern corporate limits of the Town and including proximate vicinities contiguous thereto, as that boundary may change from time to time, specifically designated on the map attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by this reference; and 
(5)  The Interstate 25 Subarea adopted on July 23, 2001, under Resolution 2001-50, defined as that portion of the I-25 Regional Corridor encompassing an area roughly one (1) mile on either side of the Interstate 25 right-of-way from the southern boundary of the Town to the northern boundary of the Town and including proximate vicinities contiguous thereto, as those boundaries may change from time to time, specifically designated on the map attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-20. - Establishment and modification of Commercial Corridors. 
    By ordinance, the Town Board may increase, decrease or otherwise modify Commercial Corridor areas and may by ordinance extend the effect of this Division to other corridors. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-30. - Design criteria. 
    The Town Board shall by resolution adopt design criteria applicable to each Commercial Corridor which shall include, but shall not be limited to, setback provisions, parking requirements, walkways, bikeways, landscaping, lighting, architectural guidelines, signage guidelines, building size and design guidelines, and such other and further design criteria as may be determined by the Town Board to further the purposes of this Division. All building, growth and development within designated Commercial Corridors shall be in compliance with such design criteria. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-40. - Site plan process. 
    Submission of a site plan demonstrating compliance with the applicable design criteria, as established hereby, shall be submitted and processed pursuant to the site plan review procedure set forth in Article VII of this Chapter prior to the approval of any building, growth or development within any Commercial Corridor. Any site plan review fees established by Town Board resolution pursuant to this Article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. 2011-1402 3) 
Sec. 17-13-50. - Review by Town. 
    The Town Manager is hereby authorized to retain the services of a consulting architect to examine the site plan and report to the Planning Department, Planning Commission and Town Board with respect to the site plan's compliance with the design criteria. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-60. - Design criteria controls other rules and regulations. 
    The requirements of this Division and the design criteria subsequently adopted by resolution of the Town Board shall be in addition to all other building, growth and development rules and regulations set forth in this Code. Where those rules and regulations specifically conflict with the design criteria adopted hereunder, the design criteria adopted hereunder shall control. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Division 2 - Large Retail Establishments 

Sec. 17-13-210. - Supplementary regulations. 
    No large retail establishment occupying more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross leasable area (GLA), as defined in Section 16-2-20 of this Code, shall be approved for construction or occupancy unless such establishment has been determined by the Town Board to be in compliance with this Division, including subsequent amendments thereto. In addition to the foregoing, no large retail establishment occupying more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of GLA shall be approved for construction or occupancy unless such establishment has obtained approval of a qualified commercial site plan approval by the Town Board in accordance with the requirements and standards set forth in this Code. 
    The Design Criteria and Procedures set forth in this Division 2 of Article XIII of Chapter 17, shall not apply to Large Entertainment Establishments located within a Commercial Corridor Plan area, or governed by design standards contained within any Intergovernmental Agreement or any area governed by specific site plan development standards. 
    For the purposes of this Section, Large Entertainment Establishments shall be defined as any facility, the primary purpose of which is devoted to recreational or entertainment uses, such as showing motion pictures or the presentation of dramatic, musical or live performances or containing amusement facilities such as bowling, billiards, and video arcades. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1; Ord. 2014-1487 1 ) 
Sec. 17-13-220. - Intent. 
    Consistent with the Town's Comprehensive Plan, these design standards and procedures for large retail establishments are intended to encourage all developments to maintain a certain level of architectural and landscape quality such that the character or "look" of the Town is not compromised. Furthermore, the standards are intended to encourage development that contributes to the Town as a unique place by reflecting its physical character and adding to it in appropriate ways. The following procedure and design standards shall apply to all retail establishments of more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of GLA in any zoning district of the Town. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-230. - Procedure. 
    All retail establishments of more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of GLA shall require Town Board approval of a qualified commercial site plan and shall not be eligible for administrative approval. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-240. - Design standards. 
    These standards are intended to augment the Town's adopted corridor plans and zoning requirements with more specific interpretations that apply to the design of large retail store developments. In cases where there are conflicts between the standards established under this Division and Commercial Corridor standards with respect to a retail establishment of more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of GLA, the standards set forth in this Division shall control. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-250. - Facades and exterior walls. 
    Facades should be articulated to reduce the massive scale and the uniform, impersonal appearances of large retail buildings and provide visual interest that will be consistent with the community's identity, character and scale. 
(1)  Facades greater than one hundred (100) feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least three percent (3%) of the length of the facade and extending at least twenty percent (20%) of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed one hundred (100) horizontal feet. 
(2)  Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings or other such features along no less than sixty percent (60%) of their horizontal length. 
(3)  Building facades must include a repeating pattern that shall include no less than three (3) of the elements listed below. At least one (1) of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet, either horizontally or vertically: 
a.  Color change. 
b.  Texture change. 
c.  Material change. 
d.  Expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than twelve (12) inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib. 
(4)  All building facades which are visible from adjoining properties and/or public streets shall comply with these facade and exterior wall requirements. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-260. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-13-270. - Roofs. 
    Variations in roof lines should be used to add interest to and reduce the massive scale of large buildings. Roofs shall have no less than two (2) of the following features: 
(1)  Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment, such as HVAC units, from public view. The average height of such parapets shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the height of the supporting wall, and such parapets shall not at any point exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the height of the supporting wall. Such parapets shall feature three-dimensional cornice treatment. 
(2)  Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three (3) feet past the supporting walls. 
(3)  Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every three (3) feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every one (1) foot of horizontal run. 
(4)  Three (3) or more roof slope planes. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-280. - Materials and colors. 
    Exterior building materials and colors comprise a significant part of the visual impact of a building; therefore, they should be aesthetically pleasing. 
(1)  Required materials. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high-quality materials. The Planning Commission may approve additional materials, particularly based upon consistency with materials used in surrounding developed properties. Each principal building, as well as smaller stores located within the principal building, on a site shall incorporate no less than two (2) of the following or other approved materials: 
a.  Brick. 
b.  Wood. 
c.  Sandstone and other native stone. 
d.  Tinted, textured, concrete masonry units. 
(2)  Prohibited materials. Predominant exterior building materials shall not include: 
a.  Smooth-faced concrete block. 
b.  Prefabricated steel or other metal panels. 
(3)  Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors is prohibited. 
(4)  Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors; however, neon tubing shall not be an acceptable feature for building trim or accent areas. No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the building facade may be dedicated to trim and accent materials (e.g., Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems [EIFS], stucco, etc.). 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1; Ord. 2014-1487 2 ) 
Sec. 17-13-290. - Entryways. 
    Entryway design elements and variations should give orientation and aesthetically pleasing character to the building. Each principal building, as well as smaller stores located within the principal building, on a site shall include clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than three (3) of the following elements: 
(1)  Canopies or porticos. 
(2)  Overhangs. 
(3)  Recesses/projections. 
(4)  Arcades. 
(5)  Raised corniced parapets over the door. 
(6)  Peaked roof forms. 
(7)  Arches. 
(8)  Outdoor patios. 
(9)  Display windows. 
(10)  Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design. 
(11)  Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-300. - Pedestrian flows and amenities. 
    Pedestrian accessibility opens auto-oriented developments to the neighborhood, reducing traffic impacts and enabling the development to project a friendlier, more inviting image. 
(1)  Large retail buildings shall feature multiple entrances to reduce walking distances, facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access from public sidewalks and provide convenience. All facades of a principal building that directly face an abutting public street shall feature at least one (1) customer entrance, not to exceed two (2) facades facing a street. Movie theaters are exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Sidewalks at least eight (8) feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abut a public street. 
(3)  Continuous pedestrian walkways internal to the site, no less than eight (8) feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the primary customer entrance of all principal buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, street crossings, building and store entry points, transit stops, etc., and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, groundcovers or other materials for no less than fifty percent (50%) of their length. Internal pedestrian walkways shall provide weather protection features, such as awnings or arcades, within thirty (30) feet of all customer entrances. 
(4)  Sidewalks, no less than eight (8) feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least six (6) feet from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade. 
(5)  All pedestrian walkways, entryways, patio and seating areas internal to the site shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials, such as pavers, bricks or colored, patterned concrete, to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort and to provide an attractive walkway. 
(6)  All pedestrian crosswalks which cross vehicular traffic internal to the site and at the perimeter of the site shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of terra cotta colored, stamped, patterned concrete. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-310. - Parking. 
    In addition to the location restrictions contained in Section 10-4-60 of this Code, the property shall not be advertised or marketed as available for camping, long-term parking or any use other than typical customer parking for shopping patrons. Parking lots shall not be used for short-term or long-term storage of motor homes, campers, trailers, mobile homes and recreational vehicles. In the event that the business provides service on motor vehicles, such vehicles that are parked on site prior to or after service shall be parked in a designated area as depicted on the approved site plan. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-320. - Parking lot orientation. 
    Parking areas shall be distributed around principal buildings in order to shorten the distance to other buildings and public sidewalks, to reduce the overall scale of the paved surface and to promote the location of buildings closer to streets to reduce the scale of the building, encourage pedestrian traffic and enhance architectural details. 
(1)  No more than eighty-five percent (85%) of the off-street parking area for the lot, tract or area of land devoted to the large retail establishment shall be located between the front facade and the abutting streets, or "front parking area." If the applicant proposes more than eighty-five percent (85%) of the parking to be located in the front parking area and, in the determination of the Planning Commission and Town Board, the applicant's proposal is equal to or better than the parking lot configuration which meets the eighty-five-percent standard, the Planning Commission may make a recommendation regarding the alternative proposal to the Town Board for final determination. 
(2)  The front parking area (FPA) shall be determined by drawing a line from the front corners of the building (facade with a main customer entrance) to the nearest property corners. If any such line, when connected to the plane of the front facade of the building, creates an angle that is greater than one hundred eighty (180) degrees, then the line shall be adjusted to create an angle of one hundred eighty (180) degrees. If any such line, when connected to the plane of the front facade of the building, creates an angle that is less than ninety (90) degrees, then the line shall be adjusted to create an angle of ninety (90) degrees. Parking spaces in the FPA shall be counted to include all parking spaces entirely within the boundaries of the FPA, including (i) any partial parking space if that portion within the FPA boundary line constitutes more than fifty percent (50%) of said parking space; and (ii) all parking spaces associated with any pad sites located within the FPA boundaries. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1; Ord. 2014-1487 3 ) 
Sec. 17-13-330. - Parking lot screening and mitigation. 
(a)  Screening: All off-street parking areas shall be screened from all streets and adjacent properties using a combination of landscaping and at least one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  Screen walls of at least three (3) feet in height, constructed of the same materials as the primary materials of the principal building. The wall cap shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal building as well. 
(2)  Earth berms constructed to appear in a natural shape and form at least three (3) feet in height at the highest point and not to exceed a slope of four (4) to one (1). 
(b)  Mitigation: All off-street parking areas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Landscape islands a minimum of seventeen (17) feet in length and eight (8) feet in width shall occur at ends of all parking rows. 
(2)  Landscape islands a minimum of seventeen (17) feet in length and five (5) feet in width shall be spaced at intervals no greater than twenty (20) parking stalls in a row. Landscape islands at the ends of parking rows shall count toward meeting this requirement. 
(3)  The total number of parking stalls may not exceed the Town's minimum parking stall requirement by more than twenty percent (20%). 
(4)  Cart returns. A minimum of one (1) two-hundred-square-foot cart return area shall be provided for every one hundred (100) parking stalls. In no event shall any parking stall be located further than two hundred (200) feet from a cart corral. Cart corrals shall be of durable, nonrusting, all-season construction and shall be designed and colored to be compatible with the building and parking lot light standards. There shall be no exterior cart return or cart storage areas located within twenty-five (25) feet of the building. All cart returns located in double-loaded parking rows shall be accessible from both parking rows. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-340. - Truck, trailer and outdoor container storage. 
    Except for the purpose of normal loading and unloading operations, no trailers, semi-trailers and trucks, truck-tractors or outdoor containers shall be stored on site. Such trucks, trailers and outdoor containers shall only be located in designated loading and unloading areas that are completely screened from adjacent streets or properties for the duration that they are on the site. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-350. - Noise mitigation. 
    Based upon site-specific conditions and location, various methods of noise mitigation may be determined to be necessary to protect surrounding neighborhoods. When applicable, such site-specific concerns may be addressed through the use of adequate landscaping, screen walls and other items to create a sound buffer to be described on the site plan and in the applicable development agreement. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-360. - Outdoor display areas. 
    Exterior display areas shall be permitted only where clearly depicted on the approved site plan. All exterior display areas shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences. Materials, colors and design of screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors of the building. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors on the building. All exterior display areas shall be separated from motor vehicle routes by a physical barrier visible to drivers and pedestrians, and by a minimum of ten (10) feet. Display areas on building aprons must maintain a minimum walkway width of ten (10) feet between the display items and any vehicle drives. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Sec. 17-13-370. - Ongoing maintenance. 
    All large retail establishments, whether occupied or not, shall be regularly maintained so they are not allowed to fall into a state of disrepair or neglect; and shall consistently present a neat and orderly appearance to the general public as well as adjacent and nearby tenants and property owners. Furthermore, all large retail establishments shall submit to the Director of Planning, for review and approval, a maintenance plan for normal repairs and upkeep of the property, including but not limited to maintenance of the building, parking lot and parking lot surface, landscaping, signage and elimination of "ghost signage," and ongoing use of the property, including but not limited to the parking lot. 
(Ord. 2010-1393 1) 
Division 3 - Interstate 25/State Highway 392 Corridor Activity Center 

Sec. 17-13-410. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Corridor Activity Center shall mean the Interstate 25/State Highway 392 Corridor Activity Center defined in the Intergovernmental Agreement Pertaining to the Development of the Interstate 25/State Highway 392 Interchange dated January 3, 2011, between the City of Fort Collins, Colorado, and Town of Windsor, Colorado, and as may, pursuant to said Intergovernmental Agreement, be amended in the future. 
    Front faade shall mean any side of building with the primary entrance. A front faade may also be a primary faade. 
    I-25 landscape buffer shall mean an area of no less than eighty (80) feet, measured from the Interstate 25 right-of-way's outer boundary. 
    Parking lot shall mean all areas used for the parking of vehicles for customers, employees, and visitors, and fleet or business vehicles. 
    Primary faade shall mean any side of building facing toward a public or street-like private drive. A front faade may also be a primary faade. 
    Street-like private drive shall mean any privately-owned and maintained roadway intended for public use. 
(Ord. 2016-1526  1) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2016-1526 ,  1, adopted Oct. 24, 2016, repealed the former  17-13-410 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  17-13-410 pertained to Corridor Activity Center defined and derived from Ord. 2011-1402,  2. 
Sec. 17-13-420. - Corridor Activity Center; permitted uses. 
    Land uses within the Corridor Activity Center shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Adult day care centers. 
(2)  Drive-thru restaurants. 
(3)  Entertainment facilities/theaters. 
(4)  Fast food restaurants. 
(5)  Fuel sales convenience stores. 
(6)  Grocery/supermarkets. 
(7)  Health clubs. 
(8)  Hospitals. 
(9)  Lodging. 
(10)  Long-term care facilities. 
(11)  Medical center/clinics. 
(12)  Mixed use residential. 
(13)  Multi-family mixed use. 
(14)  Offices/financial. 
(15)  Personal/business service shops. 
(16)  Retail establishments/big box. 
(17)  Retail stores. 
(18)  Schools - private/vocational colleges. 
(19)  Single-family Detached Residential dwellings, subject to the locational and numerical limits found in the Third Amendment to First Amended Intergovernmental Agreement Pertaining to the Development of the Interstate 25/State Highway 392 Interchange dated April 1, 2017, between the Town of Windsor and City of Fort Collins. 
(20)  Small scale recreation/events centers. 
(21)  Standard restaurants. 
(22)  Telecommunication equipment, excluding freestanding towers. 
(23)  Unlimited indoor recreation. 
(Ord. 2017-1539 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2017-1539 ,  1, adopted June 12, 2017, repealed the former  17-13-420 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  17-13-420 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2011-1402,  2. 
Sec. 17-13-430. - Corridor Activity Center; enhanced design standards, intent and applicability. 
(a)  The intent of these standards is to provide the tools for creating an improved quality of appearance and more integrated mix of land uses for the Windsor Corridor Activity Center (CAC). These standards apply to all development applications within the CAC other than single-family residential development and public parks or open space. These standards supplement all of the Town's adopted design standards and, to the extent that the Town's adopted standards conflict with these standards, these standards shall apply. 
(b)  The Enhanced Design Standards for the Corridor Activity Center established pursuant to this Division shall apply to all building, growth and development within the Corridor Activity Center, with the exception of single-family residential development and public parks or open space. These standards supplement all of the Town's adopted design standards and, to the extent that the Town's adopted standards conflict with these standards, these standards shall apply. 
(Ord. 2016-1526  2) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2016-1526 ,  2, adopted Oct. 24, 2016, repealed the former  17-13-430 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  17-13-430 pertained to Corridor Activity Center; design standards; applicability and derived from Ord. 2011-1402,  2. 
Sec. 17-13-440. - Design criteria. 
    The following criteria shall apply to all building, growth and development within the Corridor Activity Center: 
(1)  Minimum level of masonry. On any first floor building elevation that is visible from a public right-of-way, masonry materials limited to natural stone, synthetic stone, brick and concrete masonry units that are textured or split face, solely or in combination, shall be applied to cover from grade to the top of the entry feature of such elevation, or if there is no entry feature on any particular elevation, to a height that would be equivalent to the top of the first floor. For first floor building elevations not visible from a public right-of-way and on all upper stories, other exterior finish materials, including but not limited to synthetic stucco (E.I.F.S.), architectural metals, clay units, terra cotta, prefabricated brick panels or wood, can be applied in whole or in combination with the masonry materials described above. For the purposes of this provision, architectural metals shall mean metal panel systems that are either coated or anodized; metal sheets with expressed seams; metal framing systems; or cut, stamped or cast ornamental metal panels, but not ribbed or corrugated metal panel systems. Standard concrete masonry units or tilt-up concrete with applied texturing are prohibited on any building elevation. 
(2)  Roofs. A roof pitch is required for buildings containing less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet and having three (3) stories or less. In cases where mechanical equipment must be mounted on the roof, a sloping mansard roof shall be allowed. 
(3)  Building height. The maximum building height shall be ninety (90) feet. 
(4)  Sign standards. All freestanding signs shall be ground signs and shall be limited to a maximum height of fourteen (14) feet along and perpendicular to I-25 and twelve (12) feet along and perpendicular to all other streets. Such ground signs shall be subject to all other requirements found in Chapter 16, Article IX of this Code. 
(5)  Enhanced design criteria-Site design. To the maximum extent feasible, larger sites containing multiple buildings and uses shall be composed of a series of urban-scale blocks of development defined and formed by public streets or street-like private drives that provide links to nearby streets along the perimeter of the site. 
a.  In addition to a network of streets and drives, blocks shall be connected by a system of parallel tree-lined sidewalks that adjoin the streets and drives which, when combined with off-street connecting walkways, enables a fully integrated and continuous pedestrian network. 
b.  To the maximum extent feasible, remote or independent pad sites, disconnected from the pedestrian sidewalk network and shared parking facilities, shall be minimized. Buildings shall be directly connected to the pedestrian sidewalk network. All parking areas shall be interconnected to provide shared parking opportunities. 
(6)  Enhanced design criteria-Landscaping. Landscaping shall be incorporated around service areas, building entrances and throughout parking areas, vehicular and pedestrian circulation areas. All landscaping shall be in accordance with the Town of Windsor Tree and Landscape Standards, as amended, updated or replaced. The intent of these standards is to enhance the tree and landscape standards in the CAC to ensure a high-quality appearance within the CAC. 
a.  Site landscaping shall be twenty percent (20%) or greater, excluding the 1-25 Buffer, and any applicable Buffer Yards as set forth below. 
b.  Landscape designs shall strive to incorporate xeric principles. 
c.  Berms and walls may also be incorporated as an element for screening. 
d.  I-25 landscape buffer. Landscaping adjacent to Interstate 25 shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
1.  Landscaping within the I-25 landscape buffer shall be planted predominantly with drought-tolerant grasses, interspersed with bands of shrubs and trees. 
2.  A minimum of two (2) evergreen trees, two (2) shade trees, and four (4) shrubs per one-hundred (100) lineal feet of frontage shall be provided. 
3.  Fences, screen walls, and parking lots are not allowed within the 1-25 landscape buffer. Retaining walls should be minimized to the greatest extent possible, and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
4.  Parking Lots, loading and service areas shall be significantly buffered from I-25 primarily by the use of naturalistic berms and landscaping. Berm heights shall primarily be designed to provide significant buffering of Parking Lots, loading and service areas, yet allowing for some visibility of buildings and providing visual interest along 1-25. 
5.  Berms shall comply with the following: 
i.  Berms shall range in height from three (3) to seven (7) feet in height, dependent on the proposed finished grade of the adjacent parking lot, loading or service area in relation to the adjacent interstate grade. If I-25 is elevated in comparison to the grade at the edge of the proposed development, berms should be higher to achieve the same buffering effect. 
ii.  Berms shall create a naturalistic appearance raising, lowering, and/or overlapping, to provide adequate buffering. 
iii.  The slope of berms shall generally be no steeper than a ratio of 4:1 to allow for a naturalistic, park-like appearance, and allow for mowing. 
iv.  Berms shall be located along the easternmost portion of the I-25 Landscape Buffer, while still allowing for a meandering appearance of the berms. 
v.  Berms shall be predominately planted with drought-tolerant grasses, interspersed with shrubs and trees. 
vi.  When berms are intended to provide significant screening of parking, loading and service areas, calling for berms greater than five (5) feet in height, the berms and surrounding areas shall primarily be planted with drought-tolerant grasses interspersed with shrubs and a mix of shade, ornamental, evergreen trees. On average, such screening areas shall be planted with a minimum of four (4) trees and four (4) shrubs per one-hundred (100) lineal feet, requiring a minimum of 50% evergreen trees. Significant buffering of parking lots, loading and service areas shall be provided while allowing for some visibility of buildings. 
vii.  When berms are intended to provide lower amounts of screening of parking lots, loading and service areas, calling for berms five feet or less in height, the berms and surrounding areas shall be planted with a higher-density mix of shade, evergreen and ornamental trees, in addition to drought-tolerant grasses and shrubs. On average, such areas shall be planted with a minimum of eight (8) trees and eight (8) shrubs per one-hundred (100) lineal feet, requiring a minimum of fifty percent (50%) evergreen trees. Significant buffering of parking lots, loading and service areas shall be provided while allowing for some visibility of buildings. 
viii.  The site plan development review process submittals shall illustrate screening and view opportunities, including representative cross-sections and key views from adjacent streets. 
e.  Parking lot screening. 
1.  The perimeter of all parking lots shall be screened from public streets, Street-like private drives, public open space, and adjacent properties by at least one (1) of the following methods for the entire perimeter length: 
i.  A berm three (3) feet high with a maximum slope of 3:1 in combination with evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs. 
ii.  A hedge at least three (3) feet high, consisting of a double row of shrubs planted 3-feet to 5-feet on center, depending on the species, in a triangular pattern. 
iii.  A decorative fence or wall made of masonry or other high quality material between three (3) and four (4) feet high in combination with landscaping. 
2.  In addition to the above screening, the following landscaping is required: 
i.  Trees shall be provided at a ratio of two (2) evergreen, one (1) ornamental tree, one (1) shade tree, and four (4) shrubs per one-hundred (100) lineal feet along a public street or Street-like Private Drive. 
ii.  Trees may be spaced irregularly in informal groupings or be uniformly spaced, as consistent with larger overall planting patterns and organization. Perimeter landscaping along a street may be located in and should be integrated with the streetscape in the street right-of-way. 
3.  Parking lot landscaping: 
i.  In addition to landscape island requirements, large surface Parking Lots shall be visually and functionally segmented into smaller sections by landscape areas or islands. Each section shall contain a maximum of two hundred (200) parking spaces. The perimeter of each module shall be landscaped with a ten-foot wide buffer landscaped with shrubs and trees, including one (1) tree every forty (40) feet. Each section shall contain a maximum of two hundred (200) parking spaces. 
ii.  Landscape medians and/or islands should strive to incorporate bioswales and/or raingardens throughout a site to manage runoff. 
4.  Buffer yards: 
i.  Applicability. These standards apply to all development applications within the CAC other than proposed single-family residential development and public parks or open space. 
ii.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide standards to separate proposed non-residential development from existing single-family residential uses, in order to eliminate, mitigate or minimize potential nuisances. 
iii.  Buffer standards. Buffer yards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel proposed for non-residential development abutting single-family detached uses when a common lot line is shared between the two (2) uses. 
iv.  Only those structures used for buffering and/or screening purposes shall be located within a buffer yard. The buffer yard shall not include any paved area, except for pedestrian sidewalks or paths. Fencing and/or walls used for buffer yard purposes shall be solid, with at least seventy-five (75) percent opacity. 
v.  Buffer yard widths are established in the chart below and specify deciduous or coniferous plants required per one hundred (100) linear feet along the affected property line, on an average basis. 
Plants per 100 linear feet along affected property line Buffer Width Plant Multiplier Shade Trees Ornamental Trees Evergreen Trees Large Shrubs 40 1.00 4 4 3 25 50 .90 3.6 3.6 2.7 22.5 60 .80 3.2 3.2 2.4 20.0  
vi.  Credit for berm. The required plant units may be reduced by 50% if a landscaped berm is provided with a minimum height of 5 feet. 
5.  Other landscape areas. Landscape areas outside of the I-25 Landscape Buffer, Parking Lot Screening and Buffer Yards shall consist of at least one (1) tree and five (5) shrubs for every 750 square feet of landscaped area. 
(7)  Enhanced design criteria-Parking. 
a.  Applicability. These standards apply to all parking lots within the CAC associated with commercial, industrial, or multifamily development. 
b.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide standards to enhance the physical appearance of development within the CAC by ensuring Parking Lots are designed to maintain and enhance the quality of commercial development, manage storm water runoff, reduce heat island effects, and promote a pedestrian friendly and safe environment. 
c.  Standards. Parking lots shall be located away from the front facade of a building to the maximum extent feasible. Such parking lots, if located between the front faade of the building and the adjacent public or street-like private drive, shall be limited to no more than a single drive aisle with a single row of parking on each side. When this layout does not provide adequate parking, additional parking shall be located on sides of a building that are not a front faade. 
d.  Parking lots containing more than one (1) drive aisle shall include walkways that are located in places that are logical, safe and convenient for pedestrians. 
(8)  Enhanced design criteria-Building design and orientation. The purpose of this Section is to provide standards to enhance the physical appearance of development within the CAC. The intent is not to limit creativity or innovation in architectural design. Applicants proposing architecture that does not comply with the following standards are encouraged to seek alternative compliance. 
a.  Orientation: 
1.  Primary facades shall face an adjacent public or street-like private drive. 
2.  For buildings with more than one (1) primary facade, facades visible from each street shall incorporate high-quality architectural materials, architectural elements and building appearance equivalent to that of the front facade. 
3.  Building details, landscaping and berming shall be combined to create a level of visual interest equivalent to that of the front faade for all primary facades on the building. 
4.  Service areas, loading docks, outdoor storage and mechanical equipment shall not face a public or street-like private drive unless completely screened from view from all adjacent roadways and properties with combined architectural and landscape materials that complement the building. 
5.  To the maximum extent feasible, buildings shall be oriented to preserve intermittent views to the west. 
b.  Form/faade treatment: 
1.  All sides of buildings shall be of high-quality architecture and building materials. 
2.  Building sides facing a public street or street-like private drive shall incorporate high-quality architectural materials, architectural elements and building appearance equivalent to that of the building front. 
3.  Entrances shall be clearly defined by architectural elements. 
4.  Facades shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) of the following architectural elements to emphasize building entries, doorways, walkways and window openings: 
i.  Canopies or awnings over at least thirty percent (30%) of the openings of the building; or 
ii.  Covered walkways, porticos and/or arcades covering at least thirty percent (30%) of the horizontal length of the front facade; or 
iii.  Projecting trim, ledges or similar architectural accent features between two (2) inches and six (6) inches in width around all windows and doorways; or 
iv.  Raised cornice parapets over entries; or 
v.  Some other architectural feature or treatment which adds definition to the building openings, walkways or entrances. 
5.  Ground floor facades that face streets or public walkways must be modulated with features such as windows, entrances, arcades, porches, pilasters, arbors, awnings, recessed or projecting display windows along no less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the length of the faade. 
6.  Openings or architectural elements simulating fenestration-like features shall occupy at least twenty percent (20%) of the wall surface area of the first floor of the primary facade and walls adjacent to public rights-of-way, or visible from adjacent properties. 
7.  No single wall plane shall exceed thirty (30) feet horizontal length or vertical height. 
8.  Wall planes shall include varying building articulation with a minimum of three (3) feet in projection or depth from an adjacent wall plane. 
9.  Wall planes shall include a variety of building materials, not to exceed 75 percent of one (1) material. 
10.  Facades greater than one hundred (100) feet in length shall provide a varying roofline. 
11.  All roof-top equipment shall be fully screened from view of adjacent roadways and properties. 
c.  Roof form: 
1.  Buildings less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Roofs on primary structures with a floor plate less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall be pitched with a minimum slope of at least 5:12 or provide the appearance of 5:12 pitch through the use of a modified mansard roof. At least one (1) of the following elements shall be incorporated into the design for each fifty (50) lineal feet of roof: 
i.  Projecting gables. 
ii.  Hips. 
iii.  Horizontal/vertical breaks. 
iv.  Three (3) or more roof slope planes shall be incorporated into the overall design. 
2.  Buildings larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Roofs on structures with a floorplate of greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall have no less than two (2) of the following features: 
i.  Parapet walls featuring three-dimensional cornice treatment that at no point exceed one-third of the height of the supporting wall. 
ii.  Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three (3) feet past the supporting walls. 
iii.  Sloping roofs not exceeding the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every one (1) foot of horizontal run. 
iv.  Three (3) or more roof slope planes. 
(9)  Enhanced design criteria-Compatibility. 
Compatibility shall mean the characteristics of different uses or activities or design which allow them to be located near or adjacent to each other in harmony. 
Compatibility does not mean "identical". Rather, compatibility refers to the sensitivity of development proposals in maintaining the character of existing development. 
a.  To the extent feasible, conditions may be imposed upon approval of a development project in or adjacent to an existing developed neighborhood to achieve compatibility in connection with: 
i.  a complementary or new high-quality standard of architectural character for the neighborhood, including building materials and colors which complement or create an enhanced architectural standard for the area; 
ii.  softening a building's mass and scale through building articulation, subdivision of building mass, and sensitive orientation of a building on the site; 
iii.  creating opportunities for privacy of abutting land uses; and 
iv.  limiting outdoor storage areas, mechanical equipment, loading and unloading. 
(10)  Enhanced design criteria-Lighting. 
a.  In addition to compliance with Windsor Municipal Code 16-10-100, the following lighting standards shall apply: 
i.  In no event shall lighting negatively affect the safe passage of traffic on public roadways adjacent to or in proximity of the site. 
ii.  Exterior building lighting and display lighting shall include fixtures with a dimming interface. 
iii.  Light poles within one hundred (100) feet of a residential use or residentially-zoned property shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
iv.  Outdoor lighting shall be limited to a maximum of one thousand (1,000) candela per square meter (nits). 
v.  Outdoor lighting shall be L.E.D. (light emitting diode) "Dark Sky" compliant, per the International Dark Sky Association requirements for reducing light pollution and minimizing glare, sky glow, spill light and obtrusive light. 
vi.  Light bulbs shall be soft-white or warm-white hues. 
vii.  A photometric plan illustrating compliance shall be submitted. 
b.  Lighting time limitations. Parking lot lighting shall require fixtures with a dimming interface. Lighting in and surrounding such parking lots shall be reduced within one (1) hour after business closing to a level sufficient for security purposes only. All exterior illumination shall be reduced to levels sufficient for security purposes only after 10:00 p.m. 
c.  Shielding. All light fixtures required to be fully shielded shall be installed to satisfy the following: 
1.  All outside light fixtures, including building-mounted lighting shall be fully shielded and be aimed so that the direct illumination shall be confined to the property boundaries of the source. 
2.  All light fixtures used on open parking garages, including those mounted to the ceilings over the parking decks, shall be fully shielded. 

d.  Certification. Outdoor lighting shall be designed and certified by an engineer as conforming to all applicable restrictions of these standards before construction commences. Further, the system shall be certified by a registered engineer following installation to verify that the installation is consistent with the certified design. 
(11)  Enhanced design criteria-Outdoor display. Outdoor display of merchandise for sale or lease is not allowed unless specifically depicted on an approved site plan. 
(Ord. 2011-1402 2; Ord. 2016-1526  3) 
Sec. 17-13-450. - Site plan process. 
    Submission of a site plan demonstrating compliance with the applicable design criteria, as established in this Division, shall be submitted and processed pursuant to the site plan review procedure set forth in Article VII of this Chapter and the requirements of the Intergovernmental Agreement Pertaining to the Development of the Interstate 25/State Highway 392 Interchange dated January 3, 2011, between the City of Fort Collins, Colorado, and Town of Windsor, Colorado, prior to the approval of any building, growth or development within any Corridor Activity Center. 
(Ord. 2011-1402 2) 
Sec. 17-13-460. - Review by Town. 
    The Town Manager is hereby authorized to retain the services of a consulting architect to examine the site plan and report to the Planning Department, Planning Commission and Town Board with respect to the site plan's compliance with the design criteria established in this Division. 
(Ord. 2011-1402 2) 
Sec. 17-13-470. - Design criteria controls other rules and regulations. 
    The requirements of this Division shall be in addition to all other building, growth and development rules and regulations set forth in this Code. Where those rules and regulations specifically conflict with the design criteria adopted hereunder, the design criteria adopted hereunder shall control. 
(Ord. 2011-1402 2) 
Sec. 17-13-480. - Incorporation of third amendment to first amended intergovernmental agreement pertaining to the development of the Interstate 25/State Highway 392 Interchange dated April 1, 2017, between the Town of Windsor and City of Fort Collins. 
    The third amendment to first amended intergovernmental agreement pertaining to the development of the Interstate 25/State Highway 392 Interchange dated April 1, 2017, between the Town of Windsor and City of Fort Collins, together with all exhibits thereto, is hereby incorporated into this Article as if set forth fully herein. The development of single-family detached residential dwellings within the Corridor Activity Center shall be subject to said third amendment to first amended intergovernmental agreement pertaining to the development of the Interstate 25/State Highway 392 Interchange. 
(Ord. 2017-1539 2) 
Division 4 - Standards for Landscaping in Developed Areas[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1574 ,  1, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as  17-13-401-17-13-403. To preserve the sequential numbering style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as  17-13-501-17-13-503. 

Sec. 17-13-501. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is to: 
(1)  Create a community that has strong aesthetic features in all aspects of its developments. 
(2)  Ensure landscaping is utilized to improve air quality, reduce dust, act as a noise buffer, promote energy and wildlife conservation, and visually facilitate traffic flow. 
(3)  Require water conservation through the use of low water wise landscaping. 
(4)  Mitigate the impact of otherwise incompatible uses. 
(5)  Enhance the visual experience, property values, and quality of life. 
(6)  Reduce the "heat island" effect that is created by large areas of exposed pavement. 
(b)  Applicability. Generally, this Division applies to new development, redevelopment, and substantial improvements to property subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Detached single family houses and duplexes are exempt from this Division except that the tree lawn requirement remains in effect and a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of all front yards shall be landscaped. 
(2)  Agriculture uses. 
(3)  Open Spaces, meaning natural areas with public access that provide for passive recreation, which are usually maintained with native vegetation. Landscaping for shade, screening and other uses may be applicable in open space areas. 
(4)  Landscaping of Parks. A landscape plan shall be developed for all lands designated as a public park. At a minimum, trees shall be planted at forty feet (40') spacing along the park boundaries. Landscape plans shall be based upon expected amenities and facilities, such as playground equipment, picnic tables, game courts, playing fields, and swimming pools. All additional planting, irrigation and maintenance standards provided herein shall be followed. 
(c)  Adjustments. 
(1)  If an existing building, parking lot, or use is expanded or improved, additional landscaping and buffering may be prorated by the Zoning Officer where full compliance is not possible or practical. 
(2)  The Zoning Officer may consider requests to allow minor adjustments to the landscape plan if the standards cannot be reasonably met by reason of: 
a.  Site constraints or impracticalities that are due to special conditions of the property that do not generally exist on other properties in the same zone 
b.  Conditions that have not been brought about by action of the applicant or owner; and 
c.  Unnecessary hardship caused by the strict interpretation of this Code. 
(Ord. 2018-1574 1) 
Sec. 17-13-502. - Landscape standards. 
(a)  Trees. Trees shall be planted according to the following guidelines: 
(1)  At least three feet (3') from any curb, sidewalk or other paved surface. 
(2)  Planted only within pervious areas with a minimum width of six feet (6'). 
(3)  At least ten feet (10') or half the mature canopy width from a building foundation, whichever is greater. 
(4)  At least ten feet (10') from any water or sewer line, and at least four feet (4') from any underground gas, electric, telephone or other similar utility. 
(b)  Shrubs, Grasses, and Ground cover. 
(1)  Ground cover, such as grass turf or seed, shrubs, and perennials, shall be planted on all disturbed and undeveloped surfaces to prevent erosion, dust and weeds; infiltrate storm water; and improve the function and aesthetics of sites. 
(2)  Ground cover shall consist of living plant material except that rock beds may be used in accordance with the following: 
a.  As ground cover within planting beds, provided organic mulch is used around the base of all plants in accordance with Section 17-13-502(b)(3)b. 
b.  Independent from planting beds, subject to the following: 
1.  Shall be limited to no more than twenty percent (20%) of required landscape area. 
2.  No rock bed shall be greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
3.  Elements from at least two (2) of the following three (3) groups are used: 
A.  Boulders (minimum size twenty-four inches (24") by thirty inches (30")), or dry creek bed or other significant landscape feature 
B.  Western collectibles (e.g.: mining cart, wagon, agricultural implement), shade structure or other structure (e.g.: small bridge, pavilion), or fine art/sculpture (NOT including small garden ornaments) 
C.  Interspersed shrubs at ratio of one (1) per two hundred (200) square feet. Evergreen trees may be used instead of shrubs at a ratio of one (1) tree per four (4) shrubs. Ornamental grasses may be used instead of shrubs at a ratio of three (3) grasses for every shrub. 
(3)  Mulch for all planting beds or other areas shall meet the following: 
a.  Black plastic or impermeable weed barriers are prohibited. 
b.  Organic mulches (i.e. bark or wood chips and wood grindings) are allowed in planting bed and are generally required around the base of all plants and trees in accordance with the Town planting details. 
c.  Inorganic mulches (i.e. gravel) and/ or decorative rock may be used in planting beds provided the required organic mulch base is provided around plants. 
(4)  Shrubs shall generally be clustered in groupings or planted to form a continuous hedge. 
(5)  One (1) gallon ornamental grasses may be substituted for up to twenty percent (20%) of the required shrubs at a ratio of three (3) grasses for one (1) shrub. 
(6)  Grass varieties in high visibility areas which are commercially available as sod must be installed by sodding. Other areas and grass varieties not commercially available as sod may be installed with plugging or seeding. 
(7)  No plants shall be placed within three feet (3') of any fire department connection, other than low-growing ground cover. 
(c)  Visibility at Intersections. All plant material shall be located to maintain compliance with the intersection visibility requirements contained in the Town of Windsor Design Criteria and Construction Specifications - Division I Streets. 
(d)  Water Wise Requirement. 
(1)  A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) of the shrubs that are installed to meet the requirements of this Division shall be classified as very low or low water use in Appendix A. 
(2)  No more than fifteen percent (15%) of shrubs or trees that are installed to meet the requirements of this Division shall be classified as high water use in Appendix A. 
(3)  Sites over three (3) acres shall be organized into distinct hydrozones according to their microclimatic needs and water requirements. Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped together in the same irrigation zones. 
(4)  Grass turf areas classified as medium or high water use in Appendix A shall be limited to high use or high visibility areas. Grass varieties listed as low water use in Appendix A may be used without limitation. 
(e)  Irrigation. 
(1)  An irrigation plan is required with all landscape plans. 
(2)  Permanent underground, automatic irrigation shall be provided for all turf areas, trees, and shrubs. 
(3)  Native, dryland, and restorative grasses shall be supplied permanent underground automatic irrigation or temporary irrigation. Temporary irrigation shall be supplied for a minimum of two (2) years to allow for establishment. The Zoning Officer may waive the irrigation requirement for remote, low visibility areas. 
(4)  Trees or shrubs within low water grass areas shall be irrigated in accordance with Section 17-13-502.E.2. 
(5)  Automatic rain shutoff sensors to all controllers in all irrigation systems shall be installed to monitor rainfall levels and to override the controller(s) to prevent unnecessary irrigation. 
(f)  Plant Selection. All landscaping shall be in accordance with Appendix A, Plant List. 
(1)  Approved Plants. Only those plants listed as approved in Appendix A may be used to meet the standards of this Division. Plants that are on neither the approved plant list nor the prohibited plant list may be installed but shall not be counted towards compliance with this Division unless approved by the Zoning Officer in consideration of Section 17-13-502.F.3. The approved plants list shall include: 
a.  Street Trees (deciduous trees with a mature height that is generally more than thirty-five feet (35')) 
b.  Shade Trees (deciduous trees with a mature height that is generally more than thirty-five feet (35')); 
c.  Ornamental Trees (deciduous trees with a mature height that is generally thirty-five feet (35') or less which typically have ornamental characteristics such as spring flowers or attractive bark) 
d.  Evergreen Trees (conifers or other evergreens with a mature height of more than twenty feet (20')); and 
e.  Shrubs (perennials or evergreens with a mature height of at least three feet (3')). 
f.  Ornamental Grasses 
g.  Turf Grasses 
h.  Classification of water needs of very low, low, medium, or high 
(2)  Prohibited Plants. The following plants are prohibited, and are subject to disapproval and removal during development or redevelopment: 
a.  Plants identified as noxious, invasive, or prohibited in Windsor by the United States or the State of Colorado; or 
b.  Plants identified as prohibited in Appendix A 
(3)  Modifications. The approved and prohibited plants listed in Appendix A may be amended by the Zoning Officer in consideration of: 
a.  USDA Climate zone; 
b.  Growth habits; 
c.  Invasiveness; 
d.  Expected lifespan; 
e.  Resistance to disease and harmful insects; 
f.  Leaf litter; 
g.  Structural strength; and 
h.  Watering needs/drought tolerance. 
(g)  Technical Specifications. All landscaping shall adhere to the technical specifications of Appendix B. The Zoning Officer is authorized to amend Appendix B in consideration of changes in best management practices. 
(h)  Plant Specifications. All landscape material shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ASNS), Appendix A and B, and the following: 
Table 7-1 Plant Specifications 
Caliper at 4.5' Above Ground (breast height) Number of Replacement trees Street Tree 2" caliper; 1.5" caliper acceptable as street tree on local residential street Shade Tree 2" caliper Ornamental Tree 1.5" caliper Evergreen 6' minimum height Shrub 5 gallon minimum Ornamental Grasses 1 gallon minimum  
(i)  Tree Diversity. The required trees planted shall promote diversity with the following species selection criteria. 
Table 7-2 Tree Diversity 
Required Trees Diversity 1-9 May be all one species but should be diverse from other species or genus in the vicinity. 10-19 At least 2 genus; AND No more than 50% of any one species 20-39 At least 2 genus; AND No more than 33% of any one species 40-59 At least 3 genus; AND No more than 25% of any one species 60 + At least 3 genus; AND No more than 15% of any one species Generally At any amount of required trees, existing trees in the vicinity may be used to specify certain species based this table to meet the intent and design objectives of this Article.  
(j)  Tree Protection and Replacement. 
(1)  Protected Trees. Existing trees greater than two inches (2") in caliper at four and one-half feet (4.5') above ground that meet standards of this Division with regard to species, condition, location, and size shall be considered protected trees. Trees less than two inches (2") in caliper at four and one-half feet (4.5') above ground which were planted to satisfy the requirement of this code shall also be considered protected trees. 
(2)  Identification on Landscape Plans. All trees eligible for protection within the project or adjacent rights-of-way shall be identified on a landscape plan noting the location, species, size and condition. The plan shall indicate whether the tree will be removed, transplanted or protected. 
(3)  Minimize Disturbance. Streets, buildings, and lot layouts shall be designed to minimize the disturbance to existing protected trees. 
(4)  Removal Criteria. Trees that meet one (1) or more of the following removal criteria may be exempt from these requirements: 
a.  Dead, dying, or naturally fallen trees, or trees found to be a threat to public health, safety, or welfare. 
b.  Trees that are determined by the Town to substantially obstruct clear visibility at driveways or intersections. 
c.  Tree species that, in the opinion of the Town Forester, constitute a nuisance to the public such as cotton bearing cottonwood, Russian olive, and female boxelder. Native cotton bearing cottonwood trees and female boxelder trees, when located in a natural habitat and feature buffer zone, as may be described in future amendments to this Chapter adopted by official action of the Town Board, are not considered nuisance tree species. 
(5)  Credits for Existing Vegetation. Any tree that is incorporated into the landscape plan and protected by the steps in this section and the specifications may count toward the required landscape. Any tree that is more than eight-inch caliper may count toward the required landscape as two (2) trees. 
(6)  Replacement. The Zoning Officer, based on the recommendation of the Town Forester, may determine that removal of any Protected Trees that could otherwise be protected requires mitigation as follows: 
a.  Replacement of between one (1) and five (5) trees for each tree removed to mitigate the loss of the eligible tree based on Table 7-3. 
Table 7-3 Tree Replacement Requirements 
Caliper at 4.5' Above Ground (breast height) Number of Replacement trees 20+ inches 5 13- 19.99 inches 4 8-12.99 inches 3 2-7.99 inches 2 0-1.99 inches 1  
b.  Replacement trees shall be in addition to those otherwise required by this section. 
c.  Replacement trees must be on the Town's recommended tree list (Exhibit A) or approved by the Town Forester. 
d.  Replacement trees shall meet the following minimum size requirements: 
Table 7-4 Minimum Replacement Tree Size Criteria 
Shade Trees Size of Tree Being Replaced Minimum Size of Replacement Less than 3" caliper 2" caliper balled and burlap or equivalent 3" caliper or larger 3" caliper balled and burlap or equivalent Ornamental Trees Size of Tree Being Replaced Minimum Size of Replacement Less than 2.5" caliper 2" caliper balled and burlap or equivalent 2.5" inch caliper or larger 2.5" caliper balled and burlap or equivalent Evergreen Trees Size of Tree Being Replaced Minimum Size of Replacement All sizes 8' height balled and burlap or equivalent  
(7)  Protection Measures. Landscape plans shall indicate protection steps in accordance with the specifications in Appendix B. At a minimum these steps shall include: 
a.  Protection of root zone from all construction activity, up to a minimum of six feet (6') from the trunk or one-half (1/2) the drip line, whichever is greater. 
b.  Limit grading or cut and fill in the drip line to no more than four-inch depth. 
c.  Locate utilities away from protected trees or, where not possible, use boring under the root system, at least twenty-four inches (24") below grade and at a sufficient distance from the face of the tree. 
d.  Barriers and marking to prevent storage of vehicles, construction equipment, waste or other materials harmful to the tree within the drip line or otherwise protected zone specified by the protection plan. 
1.  Barrier fencing shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in height. 
2.  Barriers or marking must be present for the duration of the construction period. 
3.  Barriers shall be inspected by the Town Forester prior to issuance of building permit or beginning of construction. 
e.  Deviation from these steps and specifications in Appendix B may only be authorized based on protection plans that preserve the health of the tree and that were evaluated and approved by a qualified arborist or forester. 
(k)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Tree Lawns. Tree lawns and street trees are the responsibility of the adjacent property owner unless an owners association or metropolitan district has assumed responsibility. In certain cases the Town may maintain tree lawns when where specifically approved by a development agreement or other means. Any plants determined by the Town Forester to be dead or in an unacceptable condition shall be replaced by the responsible party within a specified planting period, as soon as weather conditions allow. Replacements shall meet the minimum specifications of the materials replaced. 
(2)  Modification. No tree shall be planted or removed within the right-of-way without prior authorization of the Town. 
(3)  On-site landscaping. Ongoing compliance with approved landscape plans is required. All plant material shall be kept in healthy condition (free of dead or dying branch tips; bearing foliage of normal density, size, and color; and closely matching adjacent specimens of the same species). Any plants determined by the Town Forester to be dead or in an unacceptable condition shall be replaced by the property owner within a specified planting period, as soon as weather conditions allow. Replacements shall meet the minimum specifications of the materials replaced. 
(l)  Plan Preparation. All landscape plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect or similarly qualified professional. 
(Ord. 2018-1574 1) 
Sec. 17-13-503. - Site design. 
(a)  Calculation of Landscape Requirements. A minimum percentage of landscaped area shall be provided for all lots proposed for development in accordance with Table 7-5. Additional landscaped area may be required in order to meet other provisions of this Division. 
Table 7-5 Minimum Site Landscaping 
Site Acreage Zoning 0-3 acres 3-10 acres 10+ acres E-1 - - - E-2 - - - SF-1 - - - SF-2 - - - MF-1 20% 20% 20% MF-2 20% 20% 20% RMU Varies Varies Varies NC 15% 15% 15% GC 20% 20% 20% CB - - - IL 15% 8% 5% IH 15% 8% 5% O - - - PD-MHP 20% 20% 20%  
(b)  Landscape Components. There are eight (8) general areas of a parcel and abutting right-of-way in which landscaping may be required which are established by Table 7-6 and shown in Figure 7-1 and further described in Sections 17-13-503.B.1 through 17-13-503.B.8. These Landscape Components are not intended to be cumulative or require multiple or overlapping landscape areas, screening areas, buffer yards or perimeter treatments. When more than one (1) such standard applies, that standard which results in the higher landscaping, screening or buffering requirement shall apply. 
Table 7-6 Required Landscape Components 
Landscape Component Width (min.) Trees Shrubs A - Tree Lawn 
Sec. 17-13-503.B.1 Varies 1 Street Tree per 40' - B - Street Front 
Sec. 17-13-503.B.2 Arterial roads: 20' 
All other roads: 15' 1 per 50' of street frontage 1 per 5' of street frontage. C - Parking Lot Exterior 
Sec. 17-13-503.B.3 6' 1 per 40' 1 per 2.5' D - Parking Lot Interior 
Sec. 17-13-503.B.4 n/a 1 per single row parking lot island and 2 per double row parking lot island; and 1 per 40' of landscape separator 5 per single row landscape island E - Foundation Area 
Sec. 17-13-503.B.5 5'/ 10' 1 n/a 1 per 5' F - Detention Ponds 
Sec. 17-13-503.B.6 n/a 1 per 40' around perimeter - G - Other Planting Areas 
Sec. 17-13-503.B.7 Varies 1 per 3,000 s.f. 1 per 250 s.f. H - Bufferyards 
Sec. 17-13-503.B.8 See Sec. 17-13-503.B.8  
1  Foundation Area shall be five feet (5') in width generally and ten feet (10') in width immediately adjacent to public or private roads or access drives used by the general public. 

(1)  Tree Lawns. Tree Lawns are areas of a subject property or adjoining right-of-way that are used for the planting of street trees. The area typically is located between the street and sidewalk or in the case of an attached sidewalk may be behind the sidewalk. This landscape area may or may not be a part of the subject property. 
a.  Tree Lawn Requirements. In addition the requirements enumerated in Table 7-6, Tree Lawns shall comply with the following: 
1.  Tree lawns shall be provided along new public streets or private streets that are created on or adjacent to a parcel proposed for development or with any new development lacking adjacent street trees when adequate space exists for planting. 
2.  In the case of detached sidewalks, trees shall be centered in planting area between curb and sidewalk. 
3.  In the case of attached sidewalks without tree grates or in other cases where street trees cannot be planted within the above requirements, they may be located along the lot frontage, between three feet (3') and seven feet (7') from the back of a sidewalk. 
4.  Trees shall be spaced no closer than thirty feet (30') on center. 
5.  Trees shall be at least ten feet (10') from any street, driveway, or alley intersection. 
6.  Trees shall be at least forty feet (40') from any street light. 
7.  An attached sidewalk with integrated tree grates may be approved provided the sidewalk is at least twelve feet (12') wide and planting area has at least twenty-four (24) square feet permeable surface and at least four feet (4') wide on all sides. 
8.  Tree lawn landscaping within rights-of-way is subject to approval of the entity responsible for the right-of-way. If tree lawn landscaping is not authorized within a right-of-way it shall be accommodated on the adjacent property. 
b.  Substitution of Shade Trees. Ornamental Trees may be substituted for Street Trees in locations where overhead utilities or other site constraints require smaller trees. If such substitutions are made, then Ornamental Trees shall be spaced at intervals of twenty feet (20') on center. 
c.  Timing of installation. Street Trees shall be installed prior to the acceptance of subdivision improvements on all streets unless a landscaping phasing plan is approved or when street trees are to be located outside of right-of-way and are the responsibility of individual lot owners. If the development is not a subdivision, then Street Trees are required prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Street Front. Street Front is the portion of property immediately adjacent to the right-of-way of all public streets or private streets or drives that function similar to public streets. Street Trees shall not count toward this requirement. 
a.  Street Front Requirements. In addition the requirements enumerated in Table 7-6, Street Front areas shall be landscaped with a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of trees being Shade Trees. 
b.  Reduced setbacks. When a building setback less than the required width of the Street Front is approved, the Street Front width may be reduced proportionately to the reduced setback. 
(3)  Parking Lot Exterior. Parking Lot Exterior is the area surrounding the entire perimeter of surface parking lots, vehicle display or inventory areas, and other public vehicle use areas such as gas station fueling areas and includes drive aisles and access drives. Shared parking lots on common lot lines are not required to provide Parking Lot Exterior landscaping on the common lot line. 
a.  Parking Lot Exterior Requirements. In addition the requirements enumerated in Table 7-6, Parking Lot Exterior areas shall be landscaped as follows: 
i.  Tree requirement applies to entire perimeter of parking lot, including areas internal to the site abutting a sidewalk or building. 
ii.  Shrub requirement applies to any parking area adjacent to a public or private street and any parking areas or traffic circulation areas where headlight glare could impact activity on adjacent property. 
iii.  Unless specifically stated otherwise, shrubs shall be installed at a minimum height of fifteen inches (15"), and shall be of a species expected to reach a minimum height of thirty inches (30") within three (3) years of planting. Shrubs planted within sight distance triangles shall have a maximum mature height of thirty inches (30"). 
iv.  At least fifty percent (50%) of required shrubs shall be evergreen. 
v.  At least sixty-five percent (65%) of required trees shall be Shade Trees. 
vi.  An ornamental wall between two and one-half feet (2.5') and three feet (3') high may be used with a fifty percent (50%) reduction in shrubs for the length of the wall. Fence or wall materials shall complement the architecture of the building and have details or ornamentation compatible with the overall site design. 
vii.  All shrubs and trees shall be located at least three feet (3') from either the back of curb of the vehicular use area or back of wheel stops. 
viii.  A landscaped berm between three feet (3') and four feet (4') high, measured from the grade of the adjacent parking area, may be used with up to a fifty-percent reduction in shrubs for the area immediately on or adjacent to the berm, provided the width is at least fifteen feet (15') with a maximum slope of 3:1. 
b.  Parking lots adjacent to residential uses. Parking lots adjacent to residential shall be screened by a fence or wall six feet (6') in height in combination with plant material and of sufficient opacity to block at least seventy-five percent (75%) of light from vehicle headlights. 
c.  Drive-through uses. In addition to the requirements of Sec. 17-13-503.B.3.a, drive-through uses shall be landscaped in accordance with the following: 
i.  Adjacent to arterial and collector streets an ornamental fence or wall three feet (3') high shall be used to screen drive-through lanes and headlights glare. Fence or wall materials shall complement the architecture of the building and have details or ornamentation compatible with the overall site design. A fifty-percent reduction in shrubs shall be provided for the area immediately adjacent to the ornamental wall or fence. Landscaped berms may not be used in-lieu of ornamental fences or walls. 
ii.  Where automobiles may queue, waiting for drive-through services, their impacts must be substantially mitigated to protect adjacent residential properties from headlight glare, exhaust fumes, noise, etc. As deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer, mitigation measures shall consist of installation of solid fencing with landscaping along any residential property line which is exposed to the drive-through or the enclosure of the drive-through fixtures and lanes so as to buffer abutting residential properties and to further contain all associated impacts. 
(4)  Parking Lot Interior. Parking Lot Interior landscaping is required within surface parking lots and vehicle display or inventory areas that accommodate more than fifteen (15) vehicles and includes drive aisles and access drives. Parking lots in screened service areas are not required to provide Parking Lot Interior landscaping. 
a.  Parking Lot Interior Requirements. In addition the requirements enumerated in Table 7-6, Parking Lot Interiors shall be landscaped as follows: 
i.  At least sixty-five percent (65%) of required trees shall be Shade Trees. 
ii.  All shrubs and trees shall be located at least three feet (3') from either the back of curb of parking stalls or back of wheel stops. 
iii.  Parking lot landscaped areas shall be at least six inches (6") above the surface of the parking lot and protected with concrete curbing. 
b.  Parking Lot Islands. Parking Lot Islands shall: 
i.  Be installed on the ends of all parking rows and entry drives to separate parking from drive aisles. 
ii.  Be provided between every fifteen (15) contiguous parking spaces. 
iii.  Be the same dimensions as adjacent parking stalls. Double rows of parking shall provide parking lot islands that are the same dimension as the double row and shall provide double the landscape required for single row islands. 
iv.  Parking lot islands shall be designed to allow plant materials to survive and flourish given harsh conditions and the need to store snow during the winter. 
c.  Large Parking Lots. Large Parking Lots are surface parking lots, vehicle display or inventory areas with more than two hundred (200) spaces. Large Parking Lots shall be divided into smaller parking modules by the use of landscape separators that comply with the following standards: 
i.  Each parking module shall contain a maximum of three (3) drive aisles or one hundred fifty (150) parking spaces, whichever results in a smaller module. 
ii.  Landscape Separators shall be parallel to the parking rows. 
iii.  At least one (1) landscape separator shall contain a walkway to the front entrance of the building. 
iv.  Walkways shall connect to adjacent public sidewalks. 
v.  Where walkways cross drive-aisles, the crossing shall be distinguished through the use of raised crosswalks or special pavement treatments such as colored concrete, pavers, brick or other similar materials. 
vi.  Landscape separators with a walkway shall be a minimum of nineteen feet (19') in width. Landscape separators without a pedestrian walkway shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width. 
vii.  Pedestrian walkways within a landscape separator shall be a minimum of seven feet (7') wide. 
viii.  Vegetative ground cover and/or shrub beds shall be used in all landscape separators 
(5)  Foundation Planting. Foundation Areas are those areas along building foundations that are in high use or high visibility areas. In addition to the requirements enumerated in Table 7-6, Foundation Planting shall be landscaped as follows: 
a.  Applies to a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the length of all building faades that are in high use or high visibility areas or within fifty feet (50') of right-of-way, open or civic spaces, or other similar publicly accessible and visible spaces. 
b.  Foundation planting is not required where building facades directly abut pedestrian access such as sidewalks, plazas or other similar features provided the facade includes windows, doors, architectural detailing, or other pedestrian oriented features. 
(6)  Detention Ponds. In addition to the requirements enumerated in Table 7-6, Detention Ponds shall be landscaped with irrigated turf grass, native grasses, or drought hardy approved vegetation. 
(7)  Other Planting Areas. Other Planting Areas are all other landscaped areas not otherwise covered in this subsection that are required to comply with this Division. 
(8)  Bufferyards. Bufferyards are areas on the perimeter of a parcel proposed for development where landscaping is required to buffer the development from neighboring properties. 
a.  Generally. This Section describes four (4) types of bufferyards which are classified from less screening (Type A) to more screening (Type D). 
b.  Purposes of Bufferyards. Bufferyards are used to soften the visual interaction between differing zones and improve compatibility of adjoining uses. 
c.  Bufferyard Required. Bufferyards shall be provided in the following situations: 
1.  Along zone boundaries as listed in Table 7-7 when the zone district boundary line follows the property line of the parcel proposed for development and when the adjacent property is not separated from the parcel proposed for development by an easement, right-of-way, or permanent open space that is at least fifty feet (50') in width, such as a public street, creek and trail, utility easement, or resource protection area. 
2.  Between uses within the RMU zone district as described in Section 17-14-403.B.8.h. 
3.  Subdivisions platted with double frontage lots shall provide a Type A bufferyard along the rear frontage. 
4.  For certain uses as described in future amendments to this Chapter adopted by official action of the Town Board. 
5.  In situations where the Zoning Officer determines that the arrangement of uses or design of buildings does not adequately mitigate conflicts reasonably anticipated to exist between dissimilar uses, site elements or building designs, a bufferyard shall be used to mitigate the conflicts. 
Table 7-7 Zone Boundary Bufferyard Standards 
Zoning of Pro-
posed De-
velop-
ment Adjoining Zone PD-
MHP E-1 E-2 SF-1 SF-2 MF-1 MF-2 RMU NC GC CB IL IH PD- 
MHP - B B B B B B - A A - A A E-1 - - - - - - - - A A - A A E-2 - - - - - - - - A A - A A SF-1 - - - - - - - - A A - A A SF-2 - - - - - - - - A A - A A MF-1 B B B B B - - varies A A - A A MF-2 B B B B B - - varies A A - A A RMU varies varies varies varies varies varies varies - varies varies varies varies varies NC B B B B B B B varies - - - - - GC C C C C C C C varies - - - - - CB - - - - - - - - - - - - - IL C C C C C C C varies C C C C - IH D D D D D D D varies C C C B -  
Note: See Sec. 17-13-503.B.8.d. for RMU bufferyard requirements 
d.  Bufferyard Options. There are two (2) bufferyards options. Standard Bufferyards designed in accordance with Table 7-8 shall generally be used. For properties constrained by size or other site specific limitations, a Limited Bufferyard designed in accordance with Table 7-9 is allowed using a berm or fence in conjunction with a narrower bufferyard and lower density of plant material. 
Table 7-8 Standard Bufferyards 
Standard Bufferyards - Planting Requirements per 100 linear feet Type Width (min.) Shade Trees Ornamental Trees Evergreen Trees * Shrubs Wall, Opaque Fence, or Berm Height Type A 15' 2 2 2 10 n/a Type B 15' 2 2 2 30 n/a Type C 25' 2 3 5 30 n/a Type D 25' 2 5 10 50 n/a  
* Ornamental trees shall be used in-lieu of evergreen trees when evergreens would cast winter shadows on public roadways or sidewalks 
Table 7-9 Limited Bufferyards 
Limited Bufferyards - Planting Requirements per 100 lineal feet Type Width (min.) Shade Trees Ornamental Trees Evergreen Trees * Shrubs Wall, Opaque Fence, or Berm Height Type A 10' 1 1 1 5 3.5' Type B 10' 1 1 1 15 3.5' Type C 15' 1 2 3 20 6' Type D 15' 1 3 5 30 6'  
* Ornamental trees shall be used in-lieu of evergreen trees when evergreens would cast winter shadows on public roadways or sidewalks 
e.  Substitutions. Evergreen trees may be used in place of ornamental trees at a ratio of one (1) to one (1). 
f.  Reduced Bufferyards. In cases where development proposed for a property would be allowed in a less intense zone district (e.g. commercial development in the IL zone district), the Zoning Officer may approve use of the bufferyard required for the less intense zone district. Reduced bufferyards shall only be approved when the characteristics of the proposed development make conversion to higher intensity use unlikely. 
g.  Increased Bufferyards. Bufferyard width or bufferyard planting may be increased at the discretion of the Zoning Officer, Planning Commission or Town Board where the potential impacts from visual, audible or physical aspects of a particular use or particular site is greater than anticipated, based on the intent and design objectives of this section. 
h.  Properties Adjacent to Corporate Limits. Bufferyard requirements for properties adjacent to properties outside the Town of Windsor corporate limits shall be based on the land use depicted in the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map or adjacent community's zoning or land use designation. 
i.  RMU District Bufferyards. 
1.  In determining bufferyard requirements involving properties zoned RMU, the Zoning Officer shall assign a bufferyard type based on the bufferyard required for the most similar zoning district which would allow the land use. For example, apartment complexes shall be classified MF, retail uses GC, etc. 
2.  Bufferyards shall be required for abutting properties which are both within the RMU district using the methodology described in Section 17-13-403.B.i.i. 
j.  Minimum Shrub Size. Unless specifically stated otherwise, shrubs shall be installed at a minimum height of fifteen inches (15"), and shall be of a species expected to reach a minimum height of thirty inches (30") and a minimum spread of thirty inches (30") within three (3) years of planting. Shrubs planted within sight distance triangles shall have a maximum mature height of thirty inches (30"). 
k.  Plant Spacing. Plants in bufferyards shall generally be spaced regularly throughout the bufferyard, although concentration of some plantings can occur to emphasize gateways or entries, or to maximize the screening and buffering of specific site elements. 
(Ord. 2018-1574 1) 
Appendix A - Plant List 
Prohibited Species Botanic Name Common Name Acer negundo Boxelder Acer saccharinum Silver Maple Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven Betula species Birch Eleagnus angustifolia Russian Olive Fraxinus pennsylvanica Ash Malus species Hopa Hopa Crabapple Populus species Hybrid- cottonwoods Populus tremuloides Aspen Salix alba X Matsudana Austree Salix specie Willows Sorbus species Mountain Ash Tamarix species Tamarisk Ulmus pumila Siberian Elm  
Approved Street Trees Botanic Name Common Name Selected Cultivars Water Need Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa L-M Celtis occidentalis Northern Hackberry M Gleditsia triancanthos inermis Honeylocust L-M Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky Coffeetree L-M Quercus buckleyi Texas Red Oak L-M Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak L-M Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak L-M Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak L-M Quercus robur English Oak Species, Skymaster L-M Tilia americana American Linden Species, boulevard, Frontyard, Legend, Sentry M Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden Chancellor, Dropmore, Greenspire, Norlin, Olympic, Prestige, Shamrock M Tilia x euchlora Redmond Linden M Tilia x flavescens Glenleven Linden M Ulmus sp. Accolade Elm L-M Note: Director may approve alternatives species that are suitable for use as street trees which are rated "A" or "B" on the Front Range Tree Recommendation List(c)  
Approved Shade Trees Botanic Name Common Name Selected Cultivars Water Need Acer platanoides Norway Maple M Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye M Aesculus hipposcastanum Common Horsechestnut M Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa L-M Celtis occidentalis Northern Hackberry M Ginkgo biloba Gingko M Gleditsia triancanthos inermis Honeylocust L-M Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky Coffeetree L-M Quercus buckleyi Texas Red Oak L-M Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak L-M Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak L-M Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak L-M Saphora japonica Japanese Pagoda Tree M Quercus robur English Oak Species, Skymaster L-M Tilia americana American Linden Species, boulevard, Frontyard, Legend, Sentry M Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden Greenspire, Norlin, Olympic, Prestige, Shamrock M Tilia x euchlora Redmond Linden M Tilia x flavescens Glenleven Linden M Ulmus sp. Accolade Elm L-M Note: Director may approve alternative shade trees suitable for the site which are rated "A" or "B" on the Front Range Tree Recommendation List(c)  
Approved Ornamental Trees Botanic Name Common Name Selected Cultivars Water Need Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow Serviceberry M Cercis Canadensis Eastern Redbud M Crategus crusgalli Hawthorn Cockspur var. inermis M Crataegus ambigua Russian Hawthorne L-M Crataegus douglasii River/Douglas Hawthorne M Crataegus laevigata English 'Crimson Cloud' or 'Pauls Scarlet' Hawthorne M Crataegus mollis Downy Hawthorne L-M Crataegus x mordenensis Toba Hawthorne M Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington Hawthorne M Crataegus viridis Green - 'Winter King' Hawthorne Koelreuteria paniculata Goldenrain Tree Malus Species Crabapple Adams, Centurion&reg;, Coralburst(tm), David, Indian Magic, Indian Summer, Prairiefire, Profusion, Radiant, Spring Snow, Thunderchild M Prunus Species Plum and Cherry Pyrus sepcies Pear Syringa reticulate Japanese Lilac Note: Director may approve alternative ornamental trees suitable for the site which are rated "A" or "B" on the Front Range Tree Recommendation List(c)  
Approved Evergreen Trees Botanic Name Common Name Selected Cultivars Water Need Abies concolor White Fir H Abies lasiocarpa Subalpine or Rocky Mountain Fir H Pseudotsuga menziesli glauca Douglas Fir M Juniperus chinensis * Chinese Juniper 'Blue Point', 'Spartan', 'Spearmint' Hetzi Columnaris L-M Juniperus monosperma * One-Seed L Juniperus osteosperma * Utah L Juniperus scopulorum * Rocky Mountain 'Welchii', 'Gray Gleam',' Cologreen', 'Sky Rocket', 'Wichita Blue', 'Moonglow', 'Medora' L Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar 'Manhattan Blue' 'Hillspire', 'Idyllwild,' 'Blue Arrow', 'Taylor' L-M Larix decidua European Larch M-H Picea abies Norway Spruce 'Cupressina' M-H Picea glauca Black Hills Spruce 'Densata' M-H Picea omorika Serbian Spruce M-H Picea pungens Colorado Spruce M-H Picea pungens glauca Colorado Blue Spruce 'Baby Blue Eyes', 'Bakeri', 'Fastigiata', 'Fat Albert', Hoopsii, 'Colorado Weeping' ,'Sester's Dwarf M-H Pinus aristata Bristlecone(foxtail) Pine L-M Pinus contorta Lodgepole Pine L-M Pinus edulis Pinyon L-M Pinus flexilis Limber Pine L-M Pinus heldreichii Bosnian Pine Leucodermis M Pinus mugo * Mugo Pine Big Tuna, Tannenbaum L-M Pinus nigra Austrian Pine M Pinus ponderosa Ponderosa Pine L-M Pinus strobus Eastern White Pine M Pinus strobiformis Southwestern White Pine L-M Pinus sylvestris Scotch M Thuja standishii x Thuja plicata Green Giant Arborvitae M-H Note: Director may approve alternative Evergreen trees suitable for the site which are rated "A" or "B" on the Front Range Tree Recommendation List(c) 
* Denotes smaller tree that should be used in combination with larger trees when screening is desired.  
Approved Deciduous Shrubs Botanic Name Common Name Water Need Acanthopanax sieboldianus Fiveleaf Aralia L Acer ginnala Amur Maple L M Acer glabrum Rocky Mountain Maple M H Acer grandidentatum Wasatch Maple M Alnus tenuifolia Rocky Mountain Alder H Amelanchier alnifolia Saskatoon Serviceberry L M Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow Serviceberry L Amelanchier utahensis Utah Serviceberry VL L M Amorpha canescens Leadplant L M Amorpha fruticosa False Indigo M Amorpha nana Dwarf Leadplant L M Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry M Aronia melanocarpa Black Chokeberry M Aronia x prunifolia Purple Chokeberry M Artemesia tridentata Tall Western Sage L Artemisia cana Silver Sage VL L M Artemisia filifolia Sand Sagebrush VL Artemisia frigida Fringed Sage VL L Artemisia nova Black Sage L Artemisia versicolor Sea Spray Sage L Atriplex canescens Four-wing Saltbush VL L Atriplex confertifolia Spiny Saltbush VL L Berberis thunbergii Barberry M H Berberis x 'Emerald Carousel' Emerald Carousel Barberry L Betula fontinalis Native River Birch H Betula glandulosa Bog Birch H Buddleja alternifolia Alternate Butterfly Bush M Buddleja alternifolia 'Argentea' Silver Fountain Butterfly Bush M Buddleja davidii Butterfly Bush M Caragana arborescens Siberian Peashrub L M Caragana frutex Globe Peashrub L M Caragana microphylla Littleleaf Peashrub L M Caragana pygmaea Pygmy Peashrub L M Caragana rosea Rose Peashrub L Caryopteris incana Blue Mist Spirea L M Caryotperis x clandonensis Dark Knight Spirea L M Ceratoides lanata Winterfat L Cercocarpus breviflorus Hairy Mountain Mahogany VL Cercocarpus ledifolius Curl Leaf Mountain Mahogany VL L Cercocarpus ledifolius intricatus Little Leaf Mountain Mahogany VL L Cercocarpus montanus True Mountain Mahogany L M Chaenomeles speciosa Quince L Chamaebatiaria millefolium Fernbush VL L Chrysothamnus nauseosus Rabbitbrush VL L Cornus alba Variegated Dogwood H Cornus mas Cornelian Cherry M H Cornus seicea 'baileyi' Bailey Redtwig Dogwood M Cornus seicea 'Cardinal' Cardinal Dogwood M Cornus seicea 'Flaviramea' Yellowtwig Dogwood M Cornus seicea 'Isanti' Isanti Dogwood M Cornus stolonifera Redtwig Dogwood M H Corylus americana American Filbert M Corylus avellana European Hazel M H Cotinus coggygria Smokebush M Cotoneaster apiculatus Cranberry Cotoneaster M Cotoneaster dammeri Bearberry Cotoneaster M Cotoneaster divaricatus Spreading Cotoneaster L M Cotoneaster horizontalis Rock Cotoneaster M Cotoneaster ignavus Szechuan Fire Cotoneaster M Cotoneaster lucidus Peking Cotoneaster L Cowania mexicana Cliff Rose L Cytisus purgans Spanish Gold Broom L M Cytisus scoparius Scotch Broom L M Cytisus x praecox Warminster Broom L M Daphne x burkwoodii 'Carol Mackie' Carol Mackie Daphne M Diervilla lonicera Dwarf Bush Honeysuckle H Elaeagnus commutata Silverberry L Ephedra equisetina Bluestem Joint Fir VL L Ephedra viridis Mormon Tea VL L Euonymus alatus Burning Bush M Euonymus alatus 'Compactus' Dwarf Burning Bush M Fallugia paradoxa Apache Plume VL L Fendlera rupicola Cliff Fendler Bush L M Forestiera neomexicana New Mexico Privet L M Forsythia viridissima koreana Kumson Forsythia M Forsythia x 'Arnold Dwarf' Arnold Dwarf Forsythia M Forsythia x 'Northern Gold' Northern Gold Forsythia M Genista lydia Lydia Broom L M Genista tinctoria Woadwaxen L M Hesperaloe parviflora Red False Yucca VL L Hibiscus syriacus Althea M Hippopha rhamnoides Sea Buckthorn L M Holodiscus discolor Creambush L M Holodiscus dumosus Rock Spirea L M Hydrangea arborescens 'Annabelle Annabelle Hydrangea M H Hydrangea macrophylla Mophead Hydrangea M Hydrangea paniculata PeeGee Hydrangea M H Jamesia americana Waxflower L M Kolkwitzia amabilis Beauty Bush L M Ligustrum vulgare Common Privet L M Ligustrum x vicaryi Golden Vicary Privet L M Lonicera involucrata Twinberry Honeysuckle M H Lonicera korolkowii Blue Velvet Honeysuckle M Lonicera syringantha wolfii Tiny Trumpets Honeysuckle M H Lonicera tatarica 'Arnold Red' Arnold Red Honeysuckle L M Lonicera x 'Honeyrose' Honeyrose Honeysuckle M Lonicera xylosteum Dwarf Honeysuckle L M Peraphyllum ramosissimum Squaw Apple L M Philadelphus lewisii Lewis Mockorange L M Philadelphus microphyllus Littleleaf Mockorange L M Philadelphus x virginalis Snowflake Mockorange M Physocarpus monogynus Mountain Ninebark L M Physocarpus opulifolius Dwarf Ninebark L M Potentilla fruticosa Shrub Potentilla L M Prunus americana American Plum L M Prunus besseyi Western Sand Cherry L M Prunus besseyi 'Pawnee Buttes' Pawnee Buttes Sand Cherry L M Prunus fruticosa European Dwarf Cherry L M Prunus glandulosa 'Rosea Plena' Pink Flowering Almond M Prunus tenella Dwarf Russian Almond L M Prunus tomentosa Nanking Cherry L M Prunus trioba Double Flowering Plum L M Prunus virginiana Chokecherry L M Prunus x cistena Purple Leaf Plum M Purshia tridentata Bitterbrush VL L Rhamnus frangula Glossy Buckthorn L M Rhamnus smithii Smith's Buckthorn L M Rhododendron spp. Rhododendron H Rhus aromatica 'Gro-Low' Gro-Low Sumac Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac L M Rhus glabra cismontana Rocky Mountain Sumac L M Rhus glabra 'Laciniata' Cutleaf Smooth Sumac L M Rhus trilobata Three-leaf Sumac VL L Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac L M Ribes alpinum Alpine Currant L M Ribes aureum Golden Currant M Ribes cereum Squaw Currant L M Ribes odoratum Crandall Clove Currant L M Rosa glauca Redleaf Rose M Rosa rugosa Rugosa Rose M Rosa woodsii Wood's Rose M Rosa x var. Shrub & Climbing Roses L M Rubus deliciosus Boulder Raspberry VL L Rubus idaeus Wild Raspberry M H Salix arenaria Blue Creek Willow M Salix bebbiana Bebb's Willow M Salix discolor Pussy Willow H Salix drummondiana Drummond Willow M Salix exigua Coyote Willow M H Salix irrorata Blue Stem Willow M H Salix monticola Yellow Mountain Willow M H Salix purpurea nana Dwarf Arctic Willow M Salix purpurea pendula Blue Fountain Willow M Sambucus canadensis Elderberry M H Sambucus pubens Red Fruited Elderberry M Sambucus racemosa Red Elderberry M H Shepherdia argentea Silver Buffaloberry VL L M Sibiraea laevigata Siberian Spirea L M Sorbaria sorbifolia Ash Leaf Spirea M Sorbus scopulina Native Mountain Ash M Spiraea cineria Grefsheim M Spiraea japonica Japanese Spirea M Spiraea nipponica Snowmound Spirea M Spiraea thunbergii Mellow Yellow Spirea L Spiraea trilobata Three Lobe Spirea M Spiraea x vanhouttei Vanhoutte Spirea M Symphoricarpos albus Snowberry L Symphoricarpos orbiculatus Red Coralberry L M Symphoricarpos oreophilus Mountain Snowberry L Symphoricarpos x chenaultii Hancock Coralberry L M Syringa joskiaea Purple Single Lilac L M Syringa meyeri Dwarf Korean Lilac L M Syringa microphylla Littleleaf Lilac M Syringa oblata Cheyenne Lilac L M Syringa patula 'Miss Kim' Miss Kim Lilac L M Syringa vulgaris Common Lilac L M Syringa x chinensis Chinese Lilac L M Syringa x hyacinthiflora Single Blooming Lilac L Syringa x prestoniae Canadian Single Blooming Lilac L M Viburnum burejaeticum Manchurian Viburnum M H Viburnum carlesii Korean Spice Viburnum M H Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood Viburnum M H Viburnum lantana Wayfaring Viburnum L M Viburnum lentago Nannyberry L M Viburnum opulus Compact Cranberry Bush M H Viburnum plicatum tomentosum Doublefile Viburnum M H Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum M H Viburnum trilobum American Cranberry Viburnum M H Viburnum x bodnantense Pink Dawn Viburnum M H Viburnum x burkwookii Burkwood Viburnum M Viburnum x juddii Judd Viburnum M Viburnum x rhytidophylloides Allegany Viburnum L M  
Approved Coniferous Shrubs Botanic Name Common Name Water Needs Juniperus chinensis Chinese Juniper L M Juniperus communis Common Juniper L M Juniperus horizontalis Creeping Juniper L M Juniperus monosperma Oneseed Juniper VL L Juniperus osteosperma Utah Juniper VL L Juniperus procumbens Green Mound Juniper L Juniperus sabina Savin Juniper L Juniperus scopulorum Rocky Mountain Juniper VL L Juniperus squamata Blue Star Juniper L Juniperus virginiana Hillspire Juniper L Picea abies Dwarf Spruce M Picea pungens Globe Spruce M Pinus densiflora umbraculifera Tanyosho Pine L Pinus mugo Mugo Pine L Pinus sylvestris 'Glauca Nana' Dwarf Globe Scotch Pine L Taxus x media Dark Green Spreading Yew H Thuja occidentalis Western Arborvitae H  
Approved Broad-leafed Evergreen Shrubs Botanic Name Common Name Water Needs Agave neomexicana New Mexico Agave VL L Arctostaphylos uva-ursi Kinnikinnick L Arctostaphylos x Coloradoensis Manzanitas L M Buxus microphylla Korean Boxwood M H Buxus sempervirens Common Boxwood M H Euonymus fortunei Euonymus M H Euonymus kiautschovicus Manhattan Euonymus M H Euonymus nana turkestanicus Turkestan Burning Bush M H Ilex glabra Compact Inkberry Holly M Ilex x meserveae Mahonia aquifolium Blue Girl & Blue Boy Holly M H Mahonia aquifolium Oregon Grape Holly L M Mahonia fremontii Fremont's Desert Holly VL L Mahonia haematocarpa Desert Holly VL L VL L Mahonia repens CreepingGrape Holly L M H Nandina domestica Heavenly Bamboo M H Pyracantha angustifolia Firethorn L Pyracantha coccinea Pyracantha L M Quercus turbinella Shrub Liveoak Oak VL L Yucca baccata Banana Yucca VL L Yucca elata Elata Yucca VL L Yucca filamentosa Adam's Needle Yucca VL L Yucca glauca Soapweed Yucca VL L  
Approved Ornamental Grasses Botanic Name Common Name Water Needs Andropogon gerardii Big Bluestem L M Bouteloua curtipendula Sideoats Grama L Bouteloua gracilis Blue Grama L Briza media Rattlesnake or Quaking Grass M Calamagrostis acutiflora Feather Reed Grass M Chasmanthium latifolium Northern Sea Oats M Deschampsia caespitosa Tufted Hair Grass M Elymus arenarius Blue Lyme Grass L Eragrotis trichodes Sand Love Grass L Helictotrichon sempervirens Blue Oatgrass L Holcus lanatus Velvet Grass M Koeleria cristat, K. gracilis or K. macrantha Prairie Junegrass L M Leymus spp. or Luzula spp Woodrush M Miscanthus floridulus or M. giganeus Giant Chinese Silvergrass M Miscanthus oligostachys Japanese Silvergrass M Miscanthus sacchariflorus Silver Banner Grass M Molina caerulea Moor Grass M Muhlenbergia spp. Muhly Grass L Oryzopis hymenoides Indian Ricegrass L Panicum virgatum Switchgrass L Pennisetum alopecuroides Feathergrass M Pennisetum setaceum Tender Fountain Grass M Pennisetum villosum Feather Top M Rychelytrum neriglume Ruby Grass Schizachyrium scoparium or Andropogon scoparius Little Bluestem L Sorghastrum avenaceum or S. avenaceum Indian Grass L Spartina spp. Cordgrass M Spartina pectinata Prairie Cordgrass M Sporobolus heterolepis Prairie Dropseed M Sporobolus wrightii Giant Sacaton VL L M  
Approved Turf Grasses Botanic Name Common Name Water Requirements Bouteloua gracilis Blue Grama L Buchlo dactyloides Buffalograss L Festuca elatior cvs. Turf-type Tall Fescue M Festuca spp. Fine Fescues, chewings & hard M Lolium perenne Perennial Ryegrass H Poa pratensis Kentucky Bluegrass H  
Appendix B - Technical Specifications 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  Arborist - a tree care professional who possesses the technical competence through experience and related training to provide for or supervise the management of trees and other woody plants in the residential, commercial, and public landscape. 
2.  Branch - a secondary shoot or stem arising from a main trunk or leader of a tree or woody plant. 
3.  Branch Collar - trunk tissue that forms around the branch base between the main stem and the branch or a branch and a lateral. 
4.  Branch Bark Ridge - raised area of bark in the branch union that marks where the branch wood and trunk wood meet. 
5.  Buffer Yard - a landscaped area between incompatible uses. 
6.  Crown - the leaves and branches of a tree or shrub; the upper portion of a tree from the lowest branch on the trunk to the top. 
7.  Crown Cleaning - the removal of dead, dying, diseased, crowded, weakly attached, low-vigor branches, and water sprouts from a tree's crown. 
8.  Crown Raising - the removal of the lower branches of a tree in order to provide clearance. 
9.  Crown Reduction - the reduction of the top, sides, or individual limbs by the removal of the leader or longest portion of a limb to a lateral no less than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total diameter of the original limb and removing no more than one-quarter (1/4) of the leaf surface. 
10.  Crown Thinning - the selective removal of branches to increase light penetration and air movement, and to reduce weight. 
11.  Cut - the exposed wood area resulting from the removal of a branch or portion thereof. 
12.  Decay - degradation of woody tissue caused by biological organisms. 
13.  Deciduous Tree - a tree that looses its leaves each autumn. 
14.  Easement - a dedication of land for a specified use such as providing access for maintenance of utilities (Windsor Municipal Code Sec. 17-11(4)). 
15.  Evergreen Tree - a large tree that retains it leaves (or 'needles') for more than one (1) growing season. 
16.  Ground Cover - vegetation with the purpose of soil stabilization such as vines, turf, low growing shrubs, and perennials. 
17.  Parking Lot Interior - area within the perimeter of a parking lot. 
18.  ISA - International Society of Arboriculture. Instrumental in setting standards for the tree care industry. 
19.  Landscape - to cover, adorn, or improve property with living plants (such as trees, shrubs, vines, grass or flowers) and/or loose natural materials with limited use (such as rock, wood chips, or shavings). "Landscape" does not include improving property with artificial trees, shrubs, turf or other artificial plants. 
20.  Lateral - a branch or twig growing from a parent branch or stem. 
21.  Leader - a dominant upright stem, usually the main trunk. There can be several leaders in one (1) tree. 
22.  Limb - same as branch, but larger and more prominent. 
23.  Lot - a parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or building development having its full frontage on a public street (Windsor Municipal Code Section 17-11(5)). 
24.  Open Spaces - natural areas with public access that provide for passive recreation. Open space is usually maintained with native vegetation. 
25.  Ornamental Tree - a small tree, usually less than thirty feet (30') at maturity. Often planted for ornamental characteristics such as spring flowers or attractive bark. 
26.  Opacity - the quality or state of a body that makes it impervious to the rays of light. 
27.  Parking Lot - a paved area dedicated for the purpose of parking vehicles and space required to maneuver vehicles in and out of parking stalls. 
28.  Parking Lot Perimeter - land/area directly adjacent to the parking lot. 
29.  Planting Bed - area that is prepared for the installation of plant materials. Edging shall be used to separate all plant beds from turf and other non- paved areas. Mulch and weed barrier fabric shall be used to protect bed from weeds, and conserve moisture. All shrubs and groundcovers shall be located within plant beds. The installation of individual shrub species in turf areas is prohibited. 
30.  Pruning - selective removal of tree and shrub branches and limbs. 
31.  Public Right-of-Way - the width between property lines of a street (Windsor Municipal Code Section 17-11(8)). 
32.  Shade Tree - a large deciduous tree with a mature height of at least thirty feet (30'). 
33.  Shrub - a woody plant usually less than fifteen feet (15') in height, often formed by a number of vertical or semi-upright branches arising close to the ground. 
34.  Street - a thoroughfare for vehicular traffic (Windsor Municipal Code Section 17-2-10). 
35.  Street Tree - trees that exist or are planted in the street row or along street frontage. 
36.  Stub - an undesirable short length of a branch remaining after a break or incorrect pruning cut is made. 
37.  Topping - cutting a currently growing, larger branch, limb, or leader back to a stub or lateral branch not sufficiently large enough to assume the terminal role. 
38.  Town Forester - person responsible for the interpretation and implementation of these standards as approved by the Town Board. Also responsible for planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and shrubs in parks and public rights-of-way. 
39.  Trunk Flair - the area where the trunk widens and the roots spread at the base of the tree. 
40.  Xeriscape - a landscape designed for reduced water use. Such a landscape can include plants that have adapted so that they transpire less than others or species that can survive periods of drought. 
B.  Planting Standards. See Section G, Planting Diagrams, for planting standards and visual guidelines for planting trees and shrubs. All planting shall be done in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Plant material shall be handled in a manner so as to cause the least amount of damage during the planting process. 
2.  Balled and burlapped and container plants shall always be handled by the soil ball. Under no circumstances should they be dragged, lifted or pulled by the trunk or foliage in a manner that will loosen the roots in the ball. 
3.  During transport to the job site, plants should be handled, secured or covered so as to prevent any damage from wind or vibration. Plants should never be thrown or bounced off a truck or loader to the ground. 
4.  Plant material shall be planted the day it is delivered to the planting site or it shall be watered and covered with mulch or soil or placed in a shady area to prevent dehydration. 
5.  In cases where trees are likely to have their trunks scarred during the planting operation, the trunks should be protected with non-abrasive wrap or padding. 
6.  Trees and shrubs should not be dug, balled and burlapped, or moved with a tree spade during the active growing period unless the ball is large enough to ensure a reasonable chance of survival. 
7.  All twine or rope and plant labels secured around the trunk shall be removed after planting is completed. 
8.  Trees or shrubs that have their soil balls secured in a wire basket and burlap must have the lower one-third ( 1/3 ) of the burlap and basket removed prior to placement in hole. The upper two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the ball will be used to manipulate the tree into the hole. Once level, soil will be placed at the base to stabilize the tree. The remainder of basket and burlap will be removed including all twine and labels on the trunk and canopy. Complete the backfilling and water settle, filling all sink holes with soil. 
9.  Evergreen trees with an excessively bushy growth form shall have the boughs tied up with rope or twine during transport and planting to avoid damage to the foliage and branches. After planting, the boughs should be released, and all twine removed. 
10.  Any bark abrasions or broken limbs caused in the planting operation should be treated or corrected immediately. 
11.  Cleanup of any soil, branches, or other debris resulting from any tree or shrub planting shall be promptly completed following planting. The work area shall be kept safe at all times until the cleanup operation is completed. Under no circumstances shall the accumulation of soil, branches, or other debris be allowed in such a manner as to result in a public hazard. 
12.  Excavated pits that will be left open when work is not in progress or pose an immediate and considerable hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be adequately barricaded with warning devices. 
C.  Landscape Materials, Maintenance, and Replacement. 
1.  Topsoil. To the maximum extent feasible, topsoil that is removed during construction activity shall be conserved for later use on areas requiring revegetation and landscaping. 
2.  Soil amendments. Prior to installation of plant materials, areas that have been compacted or disturbed by construction activity shall be thoroughly loosened. Organic amendments such as compost, peat, or aged manure shall be thoroughly incorporated at a rate of at least three (3) cubic yards of amendment per one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscape area. 
3.  Plant materials. The selection of plant materials shall be based upon the Town of Windsor's climate and site conditions. A list of allowable and preferred plant species as well as a list of drought tolerant plants shall be available from the Town Forester. 
4.  Plant quality. All plants shall be A-Grade or No. 1 Grade, free of any defects, of normal health, height, leaf density, and spread appropriate to the species as defined by the American Standard for Nursery Stock. 
5.  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed according to sound horticultural practices in a manner designed to encourage quick establishment and healthy growth. All landscaping in each phase shall either be installed or the installation shall be secured with a letter of credit, escrow, or performance bond for one hundred ten percent (110%) of the value of the landscaping material prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building in such phase. 
6.  Maintenance. Trees and vegetation, irrigation systems, fences, walls, and other landscape elements shall be considered as elements of the project in the same manner as parking, building materials, and other site details. The applicant, landowner, or successors in interest shall be jointly and severally responsible for the regular maintenance of all landscaping elements in good condition. All landscaping shall be regularly maintained. Provisions for landscape maintenance shall include but not be limited to winter watering, pruning, weeding, tree and debris removal, disease and vector control, raking, re-mulching, mowing, edging and trimming, and the preserving of screens in good condition. Dead, diseased or missing plants must be replaced with the same type as provide in the approved landscape plan. Replacement must occur within the next planting season, not to exceed twelve (12) months. 
7.  Replacement. Any landscape element that dies, or is otherwise removed, shall be promptly replaced as per the site plan based upon the requirements in these standards. Healthy, mature trees that are removed by the applicant or by anyone acting on behalf of or with the approval of the applicant shall be replaced as required as outlined in these standards. 
8.  Tree Pruning and Removal. All tree pruning, removal, and other maintenance practices shall be done in accordance with the most current standards and guidelines developed by the ISA. 
D.  Landscape Plans. All landscaping plans shall include the following information: 
1.  Boundaries of the parcel(s) proposed for development and any abutting rights-of-way. 
2.  Location of existing improvements (utilities, curb, gutter, sidewalk, structures, parking areas, etc.) and existing vegetation including all trees with a diameter of two inches (2") or greater. 
3.  Location of proposed utilities, structures, parking areas, circulation ways, pedestrian ways, signs, and areas to be landscaped. 
4.  Location of all easements. 
5.  Proposed landscaping showing the location, size, species and spacing of trees and shrubs and the identification of the type of groundcover or ground treatment in all areas not covered by structures or pavement. 
6.  The locations and size of all flower, shrub, tree and/or groundcover areas shall be shown. 
7.  The locations and size of ground treatment areas, other than plantings, shall be shown and the type of material(s) to be installed shall be noted. 
8.  Landscape plans shall be drawn at a scale of 1:40 unless a modified scale is approved by the Director. 
9.  An overall landscape plan of the entire development shall be provided on first page of the landscape plan, scaled as necessary to fit. 
10.  Land Use table showing calculations for compliance with all landscape requirement. 
11.  Landscape legend: 
a.  Identifier - either alpha (more than three (3) species) or symbols (three (3) or less species); 
b.  Quantities; 
c.  Scientific Names; 
d.  Common Names; 
e.  Size; 
f.  Type - Ball and Burlap (B&B), bare root, containerized. 
12.  Town of Windsor planting details for: 
a.  Deciduous Trees; 
b.  Conifers Trees; 
c.  Shrubs; 
13.  Town of Windsor Planting notes; 
14.  Irrigation meter location - separate from building meter; 
15.  Irrigation plans. 
E.  Planting Notes. 
1.  All plant materials shall be in accordance with American Association of Nurserymen specification for number one (1) grade. 
2.  All turf areas to be irrigated with automatic pop-up irrigation system. All shrub beds and trees to be irrigated with an automatic drip (trickle) irrigation system, or acceptable alternative. The irrigation system is to be adjusted to meet the water requirements of the individual plant material. 
3.  All trees to be balled and burlapped, root control bag, or containerized. 
4.  All shrub beds to be mulched with wood mulch (three-inch average depth) on typar filter fabric. 
5.  Edging between grass and shrub beds shall be one-eighth-inch ( 1/8 ") by four-inch (4") steel set level with top of sod. 
6.  Changes in plant species or plant locations from what is listed on the landscape plan will require the approval of the Town Forester prior to installation or replacement. Overall quantity and quality to be consistent with approved plans. In the event of conflict with the quantities included in the plant list, species and quantities shall be provided. 
7.  Landscaping townhome units may be phased on a building by building basis. 
8.  The Owner's Association or Metropolitan District will be responsible for landscape maintenance including the plantings in public street rights-of-way. 
9.  Street and ornamental trees shall be planted no closer than forty feet (40') and fifteen feet (15') respectively from street lights. No trees shall be planted within ten feet (10') from water and sewer lines, four feet (4') from gas, telephone and electric utilities, and ten feet (10') from any driveway. 
10.  Minimum clearance of three feet (3') on each side of fire department connection (FDC). No vegetation other than turf or ground covers planted in front of FDC. 
11.  The irrigation system shall be reviewed and approved by the Town's Water Department prior to issuance of a building permit. The irrigation system must be installed or secured with a financial instrument deposited with the Town prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building. 
12.  Developer shall ensure that the landscape plan is coordinated with the plans done by other consultants so the proposed grading, storm drainage, or other construction does not conflict nor preclude installation and maintenance of landscape elements on this plan. 
13.  Prior to installation of plant materials, areas that have been compacted shall be thoroughly loosened. Organic amendments such as compost, peat, or aged manure shall be thoroughly incorporated at a rate of at least three (3) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
14.  Turf grass will be seeded or sodded with drought tolerant blend. Trees to be planted in turf areas will be installed with an organic mulch ring that has a radius of at least eighteen inches (18" . 
15.  To the maximum extent feasible, topsoil that is removed during construction activity shall be conserved for later use on areas requiring revegetation and landscaping. 
16.  Foundation shrubs beds to be designed and installed after completion of each building. 
17.  Contact Town of Windsor Parks and Recreation Department prior to planting in order for Town to verify proper planting. 
18.  No substantial impediment to visibility between the heights of three (3) feet and eight feet (8') shall be created or maintained at street intersections within a site triangle described as follows: beginning at the point of intersection of the edges of the driving surface, then to forty feet (40') along both intersecting edges and then along a transverse line connecting these points. 
19.  Second domestic water meter to be shown on landscape plan for irrigation connection or non-potable water source connection. 
20.  If plants are in need of replacement due to declining health, disease, or death, the plants must be replaced with the original species unless approved by the Town Forester. 
F.  Planting Diagrams. 



ARTICLE XIV - School Site Land Dedication Requirements 
Division 1 - Weld County School District RE-4 

Sec. 17-14-10. - Establishment of school site land dedication requirements or cash payments in lieu thereof for school purposes. 
    In accordance with and pursuant to the Intergovernmental Agreement Concerning Land Dedications or Payments in Lieu for School Purposes entered into by the Town and Weld County School District RE-4, the Town hereby establishes school site dedication requirements, or cash payments in lieu thereof, for residential land development projects located in the Town and Weld County School District RE-4. Dedication of land or payment in cash in lieu thereof shall be a condition of final approval of any residential land development project as that term is defined within said Intergovernmental Agreement. 
(Prior code 17-191; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-20. - Land development projects exempt from school site land dedication requirements or cash payments in lieu thereof. 
    The following land development projects shall be exempted from the school site land dedication requirements, or cash payments in lieu thereof, for school purposes, established by this Article: 
(1)  Previously approved and recorded land development projects, other than those phases for which final plats have not been approved. 
(2)  Alteration or expansion of a dwelling unit. 
(3)  Replacement of a dwelling unit. 
(4)  Construction of an accessory building, or structure. 
(5)  Long-term care facilities or group homes as defined in the Town's ordinances. 
(6)  Land development projects (or portions thereof) that are subject to recorded covenants permanently restricting the age of all residents of all dwelling units such that the dwelling units may be classified as "housing for older persons" pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. 
(7)  Commercial developments. 
Any claim for exemption as set forth herein must be made no later than at the time of the submission of the land development project to the Town for approval. Any claim not so made may be deemed to have been waived by the developer. 
(Prior code 17-192; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-30. - Fees initially established. 
    The Town Board has reviewed and hereby approves the School District Planning Standards methodology for calculating land dedication requirements and cash-in-lieu payments proposed by Weld County School District RE-4 and reflected in Exhibits A and B below. 
Exhibit A: School District Planning Standards 
Student Yields Elementary 0.330 Middle School 0.160 High School 0.210 Total 0.700 Capacity Elementary 600 Middle School 900 High School 1,200 Site Requirements Elementary 10 acres Middle School 25 acres High School 50 acres Developed Land Value $156,000  
Exhibit B: Methodology for Calculating Land Dedication and In-lieu Payments 
Student 
Yield Site 
Requirement 
Acres Capacity Acres 
Per 
Student Acres 
Per 
Unit Land 
Value Cash 
In Lieu Single Family - d Elementary 0.330 10 600 0.017 0.00550 $156,000 $858 Middle School 0.160 25 900 0.028 0.00444 $156,000 $693 High School 0.210 50 1200 0.042 0.00875 $156,000 $1,365 Total 0.700 85 0.086 0.01869 $2,916 Single Family - a Elementary 0.150 10 600 0.017 0.00250 $156,000 $390 Middle School 0.070 25 900 0.028 0.00194 $156,000 $303 High School 0.080 50 1200 0.042 0.00333 $156,000 $520 Total 0.300 85 0.086 0.00778 $1,213 Multi-Family Elementary 0.210 10 600 0.017 0.00350 $156,000 $546 Middle School 0.100 25 900 0.028 0.00278 $156,000 $433 High School 0.050 50 1200 0.042 0.00208 $156,000 $325 Total 0.360 85 0.086 0.00836 $1,304 Mobile Homes Elementary 0.289 10 600 0.017 0.00482 $156,000 $751 Middle School 0.146 25 900 0.028 0.00406 $156,000 $633 High School 0.165 50 1200 0.042 0.00688 $156,000 $1,073 Total 0.600 85 0.086 0.01575 $2,457  
(Prior code 17-193; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2007-1282; Ord. 2019-1587 1) 
_____
Sec. 17-14-40. - Annual audit and review. 
(a)  The School District and the Town shall cause to be performed annually an audit of the in-lieu payments collected and expended in accordance with this Article and the Intergovernmental Agreement referred to herein. The audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for governmental entities and may be part of any general audit annually conducted by the School District. A copy of said audit shall be furnished to the Town. The cost of the audit shall be paid from the School District's general fund. 
(b)  The Town may request an accounting from the Superintendent of the School District concerning the expenditure of in-lieu payments made to the School District. 
(Prior code 17-194; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-50. - Revision of land dedication requirements or cash-in-lieu fees. 
    The Town Board may from time to time review and update as necessary the land dedication requirements and in-lieu fee schedule requirements as set forth in said Intergovernmental Agreement between the Town and the School District. The Town shall hold a public hearing before revising the dedication requirements or in-lieu payment obligations imposed under the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 17-195; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-60. - Effective date. 
    The provisions of this Article shall become effective upon approval of the Intergovernmental Agreement referred to herein by Weld County School District RE-4. The provisions of this Article shall be deemed repealed upon the termination of said Intergovernmental Agreement by action either of the Town or Weld County School District RE-4. 
(Prior code 17-196; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Division 2 - Poudre School District R-1 

Sec. 17-14-210. - Establishment of school site land dedication requirements or cash payments in lieu thereof for school purposes. 
    In accordance with and pursuant to the Intergovernmental Agreement Concerning Land Dedications or Payments in Lieu for School Purposes entered into by the Town and Poudre School District R-1, the Town hereby establishes school site dedication requirements, or cash payments in lieu thereof, for residential land development projects located in the Town and Poudre School District R-1. Dedication of land or payment in cash in lieu thereof shall be a condition of final approval of any residential land development project as that term is defined within said Intergovernmental Agreement. 
(Prior code 17-201; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-220. - Land development projects exempt from school site land dedication requirements or cash payments in lieu thereof. 
    The following land development projects shall be exempted from the school site land dedication requirements, or cash payments in lieu thereof, for school purposes, established by this Article: 
(1)  Previously approved and recorded land development projects, other than those phases for which final plats have not been approved. 
(2)  Alteration or expansion of a dwelling unit. 
(3)  Replacement of a dwelling unit. 
(4)  Construction of an accessory building, or structure. 
(5)  Long-term care facilities or group homes as defined in the Town's ordinances. 
(6)  Land development projects (or portions thereof) that are subject to recorded covenants permanently restricting the age of all residents of all dwelling units such that the dwelling units may be classified as "housing for older persons" pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. 
(7)  Commercial developments. 
Any claim for exemption as set forth herein must be made no later than at the time of the submission of the land development project to the Town for approval. Any claim not so made may be deemed to have been waived by the developer. 
(Prior code 17-202; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-230. - Fees initially established. 
(a)  The Town Board has reviewed and hereby approves the School District Planning Standards and methodology for calculating land dedication requirements and cash-in-lieu payments proposed by Poudre School District and reflected in Exhibits A and B below. 
(b)  Based on the School District Planning Standards contained in Exhibit A, calculation of land dedication or in-lieu payments uses the following procedures: 
(1)  The student yield is determined by the number of attached dwelling units (e.g., Category A, Elementary School = 0.35). 
(2)  The amount of land required per student is calculated by dividing the acreage by the capacity (e.g., Elementary School = 15 acres/525 students = 0.029). 
(3)  The acreage per dwelling unit is determined by multiplying the student yield by the per-student land requirement (e.g., 0.35 yield  0.029 acres = 0.010). 
(4)  To convert the land dedication requirement into in-lieu payments, the acreage per dwelling unit is multiplied by the developed land value (e.g., 0.010 acres  $95,000.00 = $950.00). 
Exhibit A 
Poudre School District 2013/2014 SCHOOL DISTRICT PLANNING STANDARDS i. Student Yield Per Dwelling Unit 1 CATEGORY A
1 to 4 attached dwelling units CATEGORY B
5 or more attached dwelling units Elementary School 0.35 1/2 Category A Middle School 0.10 1/2 Category A High School 0.09 1/2 Category A Total 0.54 students ii. School Facility Enrollment Capacities 2 Elementary School 525 students Middle School 750 students High School 1,800 students iii. School Site Acreage Requirements 2 Elementary School 15 acres Middle School 30 acres High School 80 acres iv. Developed Land Value for 2013 3 $95,000.00  
1 Average student yields for elementary, middle school and high school based on information collected by Western Demographics, Inc. Includes all residential dwelling types within the School District. 
2 Based on Poudre School District's current educational specifications. 
3 Average land value based on report prepared by Shannon and Associates dated March 14, 2006, and updated per letter dated August 13, 2008, as well as December 29, 2010. Adjustments to occur every 2 years in the even year based on changes to the Larimer County Assessor's "Residential Lot Classification." 
Exhibit B 
Poudre School District 2012/2013 SCHOOL DISTRICT METHODOLOGY Based on the School District Planning Standards contained in Exhibit A, calculation of land dedication or in-lieu payments uses the following procedures: 1. The student yield is determined by the number of attached dwelling units 
(e.g., Category A, Elementary School = 0.35). 2. The amount of land required per student is calculated by dividing the acreage by the capacity 
(e.g., Elementary School = 15 acres/525 students = 0.029). 3. The acreage per dwelling unit is determined by multiplying the student yield by the per-student land requirement 
(e.g., 0.35 yield  0.029 acres = 0.010). 4. To convert the land dedication requirement into in-lieu payments, the acreage per dwelling unit is multiplied by the developed land value 
(e.g., 0.010 acres  $95,000.00 = $950.00). Summary 
The total land dedication or in-lieu payment per dwelling unit is: CATEGORY A - 1 to 4 attached units CATEGORY B - 5 or more attached units Land PILO 1 Land PILO 1 Elementary school 0.0100 acres $950.00 Elementary school 0.005 acres $475.00 Middle school 0.0040 acres 380.00 Middle school 0.002 acres 190.00 High school 0.0040 acres 380.00 High school 0.002 acres 190.00 Total 0.0180 acres $1,710.00 Total 0.009 acres $855.00  
1 PILO means "payment-in-lieu-of" land dedication. 
To determine the land or in lieu payments for a proposed residential development, the per- dwelling unit totals above would be multiplied by the total number of dwelling units in the development. (e.g. 300 single family units = 0.0180  300 = 5.4 acre dedication or $1,710  300 = $513,000 PILO). 
(Ord. 2011-1408 1-3; Ord. 2013-1453 1) 
_____
Sec. 17-14-240. - Annual audit and review. 
(a)  The School District and the Town shall cause to be performed annually an audit of the in-lieu payments collected and expended in accordance with this Article and the Intergovernmental Agreement referred to herein. The audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for governmental entities and may be part of any general audit annually conducted by the School District. A copy of said audit shall be furnished to the Town. The cost of the audit shall be paid from the School District's general fund. 
(b)  The Town may request an accounting from the Superintendent of the School District concerning the expenditure of in-lieu payments made to the School District. 
(Prior code 17-204; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-250. - Revision of land dedication requirements or cash-in-lieu fees. 
    The Town Board may from time to time review and update as necessary the land dedication requirements and in-lieu fee schedule requirements as set forth in said Intergovernmental Agreement between the Town and the School District. The Town shall hold a public hearing before revising the dedication requirements or in-lieu payment obligations imposed under the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 17-205; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-260. - Effective date. 
    The provisions of this Article shall become effective upon approval of the Intergovernmental Agreement referred to herein by Poudre School District R-l. The provisions of this Article shall be deemed repealed upon the termination of said Intergovernmental Agreement by action either of the Town or Poudre School District R-l. 
(Prior code 17-206; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Division 3 - Thompson School District R2-J 

Sec. 17-14-310. - Establishment of school site land dedication requirements or cash payments in lieu thereof for school purposes. 
    In accordance with and pursuant to the Intergovernmental Agreement Concerning Land Dedications or Payments in Lieu for School Purposes entered into by the Town and Thompson School District R2-J, the Town hereby establishes school site dedication requirements, or cash payments in lieu thereof, for residential land development projects located in the Town and Thompson School District R2-J. Dedication of land or payment in cash in lieu thereof shall be a condition of final approval of any residential land development project as that term is defined within said Intergovernmental Agreement. 
(Prior code 17-211; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-320. - Land development projects exempt from school site dedication requirements or cash payments in lieu thereof. 
    The following land development projects shall be exempted from the school site land dedication requirements, or cash payments in lieu thereof, for school purposes, established by this Division: 
(1)  Previously approved and recorded land development projects, other than those phases for which final plats have not been approved. 
(2)  Alteration or expansion of a dwelling unit. 
(3)  Replacement of a dwelling unit. 
(4)  Construction of an accessory building or structure. 
(5)  Long-term care facilities or group homes as defined in the Town's ordinances. 
(6)  Land development projects (or portions thereof) that are subject to recorded covenants permanently restricting the age of all residents of all dwelling units such that the dwelling units may be classified as "housing for older persons" pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. 
(7)  Commercial developments. 
Any claim for exemption as set forth herein must be made no later than at the time of the submission of the land development project to the Town for approval. Any claim not so made may be deemed to have been waived by the developer. 
(Prior code 17-212; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-330. - Fees initially established. 
(a)  The Town Board has reviewed and hereby approves the School District Planning Standards methodology for calculating land dedication requirements and cash-in-lieu payments proposed by Thompson School District R2-J and reflected in Exhibits A and B below. 
(b)  Based on the School District Planning Standards contained in Exhibit A, calculation of land dedication or in-lieu payments uses the following procedures: 
(1)  The student yield is determined by the number of attached dwelling units.(e.g., Category A, Middle School = 0.12). 
(2)  The amount of land required per student is calculated by dividing the acreage by the capacity (e.g., Middle School = 30 acres/900 students = 0.0333). 
(3)  The acreage per dwelling unit is determined by multiplying the student yield by the per student land requirement (e.g., 0.12 yield  0.0333 acres = 0.0040). 
(4)  To convert the land dedication requirement into in-lieu payments, the acreage per dwelling unit is multiplied by the developed land value (e.g., 0.0040 acres  $106,325 = $425.30). 
    The total land dedication or in-lieu payment per dwelling unit is: 
Exhibit A 
Thompson School District R-2J SCHOOL DISTRICT PLANNING STANDARDS i. Student Yield Per Dwelling Unit 1 CATEGORY A
1 to 4 attached dwelling units CATEGORY B
5 or more attached dwelling units Elementary School 0.19 0.15 Middle School 0.12 0.07 High School 0.16 0.11 Total 0.47 students 0.33 ii. School Facility Enrollment Capacities 2 Elementary School 550 students Middle School 900 students High School 1,500 students iii. School Site Acreage Requirements 2 Elementary School 12 acres Middle School 30 acres High School 45 acres iv. Developed Land Value for 2006 3 $106,325.00  
1 Average student yields for elementary, middle school and high school based on Census 2000 and District's October 1, 2000 enrollment report. Includes all residential dwelling types within the School District. 
2 Based on Thompson School District Board of Education Policy FBC and Regulation FBC-R. 
3 Average land value per acre of $38,170 plus raw water requirements and infrastructure costs per acre (utilities stubbed to the site, 1/2 of street development costs for a site and overlot grading) of $68,155. Details of calculations and sources of base numbers available from the Planning Services office of the District. Annual adjustments to occur based on Dodge Index changes. 
Exhibit B 
Thompson School District R-2J 
Loveland, Colorado METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATING
LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
AND IN-LIEU PAYMENTS Land PILO 1 CATEGORY A - 1 to 4 attached units Elementary school 0.0042 acres $447.00 Middle school 0.0040 acres 425.00 High school 0.0048 acres 510.00   Total 0.0130 acres $1,382.00 CATEGORY B - 5 or more attached units Elementary school 0.0033 acres $ 351.00 Middle school 0.0023 acres 245.00 High school 0.0032 acres 350.00   Total 0.0089 acres $946.00  
1 PILO means "payment-in-lieu-of" land dedication. 
To determine the land-in-lieu payments for a proposed residential development, the per dwelling unit totals above would be multiplied by the total number of dwelling units in the development (e.g., 300 single-family units = 0.0130  300 = 3.9 acre dedication or $1,382  300 = $414,600 PILO). 
(Prior code 17-213; Ord. 2004-1193 1; Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2007-1281) 
Sec. 17-14-340. - Annual audit and review. 
(a)  The School District and the Town shall cause to be performed annually an audit of the in-lieu payments collected and expended in accordance with this Division and the Intergovernmental Agreement referred to herein. The audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for governmental entities and may be part of any general audit annually conducted by the School District. A copy of said audit shall be furnished to the Town. The cost of the audit shall be paid from the School District's general fund. 
(b)  The Town may request an accounting from the Superintendent of the School District concerning the expenditure of in-lieu payments made to the School District. 
(Prior code 17-214; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-350. - Revision of land dedication requirements or cash-in-lieu fees. 
    The Town Board may from time to time review and update as necessary the land dedication requirements and in-lieu fee schedule requirements as set forth in said Intergovernmental Agreement between the Town and the School District. The Town shall hold a public hearing before revising the dedication requirements or in-lieu payment obligations imposed under the provisions of this Division. 
(Prior code 17-215; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
Sec. 17-14-360. - Effective date. 
    The provisions of this Division shall become effective upon approval of the Intergovernmental Agreement referred to herein by Thompson School District R2-J. The provisions of this Division shall be deemed repealed upon the termination of said Intergovernmental Agreement by action either of the Town or Thompson School District R2-J. 
(Prior code 17-216; Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
ARTICLE XV - Road Impact Fees[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-1541 ,  1, adopted Sep. 25, 2017, repealed the former Art. XV,  17-15-10-17-15-130, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. XV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2008-1318; Ord. 2009-1356; Res. 2009-93; Res. 2010-69; Ord. 2015-1494;  1; Ord. 2016-1517; and Res. 2016-93. 

Sec. 17-15-10. - Title, authority and application. 
(a)  Title. This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Road Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(b)  Authority. The Town has the authority to adopt this Article pursuant to the Home Rule Charter and, to the extent applicable, Section 29-20-104.5, C.R.S. 
(c)  Application. This Article shall apply to all lands within the incorporated limits of the Town. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-20. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  Intent. This Article is intended to implement and be consistent with the 2017 Updated Roadway Improvement Plan and the 2017 Road Impact Fee Update, prepared by Duncan Associates in association with Felsburg Holt & Ullevig. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish a system for the imposition of road impact fees within the Town to assure that new development contributes its proportionate share of the cost of providing, and benefits from the provision of, road capital improvements within the benefit area. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-30. - Level of service standard (LOS). 
    The Town shall endeavor to ensure that the major road system operates at level of service "C" (LOS C) or better. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-40. - Definitions. 
    Certain words or phrases unique to this Article shall be construed as herein set out, unless it is apparent from the context that they have a different meaning. 
    Building permit means that building permit issued in accordance with this Code before any building or construction activity can be initiated on a parcel of land. 
    Capacity means the maximum number of vehicles that have a reasonable expectation of passing over a given section of a road during an average weekday at the desired LOS, expressed in terms of vehicles per day. 
    Expansion of the capacity of a road includes any widening, intersection improvement, signalization or other capital improvement designed to increase the existing road's capacity to carry vehicles. 
    Fee payer means a person commencing traffic-generating development who is obligated to pay a road impact fee in accordance with the terms of this Article. 
    Level of service (LOS) means a qualitative measure describing operational conditions, from "A" (best) to "F" (worst), within a traffic stream. 
    Major road system means all major roads located in the road impact fee benefit area established in Section 17-15-80 below and depicted in Appendix 17-A, which is incorporated herein by this reference. 
    Non-site-related improvements means road capital improvements that are not site-related improvements. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, governmental agency or body, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest or any other entity. 
    Road capital improvement includes the acquisition of right-of-way, transportation planning, preliminary engineering, engineering design studies, land surveys, alignment studies, engineering, permitting and construction of all necessary features for any road on the major road system, undertaken to accommodate additional traffic resulting from new traffic-generating development, including but not limited to: 
a.  Construction of new through lanes. 
b.  Construction of new bridges. 
c.  Construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with new road construction. 
d.  Purchase and installation of traffic signals, including new and upgraded signalization. 
e.  Construction of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, medians and shoulders. 
f.  Relocating utilities to accommodate new road construction. 
g.  The construction and reconstruction of intersections. 
h.  The widening of existing roads. 
i.  Bus turnouts. 
j.  Acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
k.  Interchanges. 
l.  Traffic control devices. 
    Road impact fee administrator shall be the Town Manager or a person designated by the Town Manager to be responsible for administering this Article. 
    Road impact fee study refers to the study entitled 2017 Roadway Improvement Plan and Road Impact Fee Update prepared by Felsburg Holt & Ullevig in conjunction with Duncan and Associates, or a subsequent similar study that describes the data, assumptions and methodology used to calculate the net cost to accommodate the additional traffic generated by new development on the major road system. 
    Site-related improvements means those road capital improvements and right-of-way dedications that provide direct access to the development. Direct access improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Driveways and streets leading to and from the development. 
b.  Right- and left-turn lanes leading to those driveways and streets. 
c.  Traffic control measures for those driveways. 
d.  Internal local streets. 
    Traffic-generating development, commencement of, occurs upon the issuance of a building permit or, if a building permit is not required for the development, upon the approval for any development application that is the last application required prior to development or use of land. 
    Trip means a one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (one [1] trip end) to a destination (the other trip end). 
    Trip generation means the attraction or production of trips caused by a certain type of land development. 
    Vehicle miles of travel (VMT) means the combination of the number of vehicles traveling during a given time period and the distance (in miles) that they travel. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-50. - Imposition of fee. 
(a)  Time of fee obligation and payment. Any person or entity, including any government body, that causes the commencement of traffic-generating development within the incorporated area of the Town shall be obligated to pay a road impact fee pursuant to the terms of this Article. The fee shall be determined and paid to the Road Impact Fee Administrator at the time of issuance of a building permit for the development or, if a building permit is not required for the development or use, upon the Town's approval of any development or use that is the last application required prior to development or use of the land. The fee shall be computed separately for the amount of construction activity covered by the permit if the building permit is for less than the entire development. The obligation to pay the impact fee shall run with the land. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the terms of this Article. An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer at the time of application for a building permit. 
(1)  Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional dwelling units are created or square footage added. 
(2)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which do not add dwelling units or square footage to the principal building or use of the land. 
(3)  The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same square footage or number of dwelling units. 
(c)  Establishment of fee schedule. 
(1)  Any person who causes the commencement of traffic-generating development, except those persons exempted or preparing an independent fee calculation study pursuant to Section 17-15-60 below, shall pay a road impact fee in accordance with the following fee schedule. The descriptions of the land use codes in the most current edition of the report titled, "Trip Generation," prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used to determine the appropriate land use type. 
Land Use Type Unit Fee Single-Family Detached Dwelling $4,227.00 Multi-Family Dwelling $2,683.00 Mobile Home Park Site $1,273.00 Retail/ 
Commercial 1,000 sq. ft. $5,590.00 Office 1,000 sq. ft. $5,147.00 Public/ 
Institutional 1,000 sq. ft. $3,121.00 Industrial 1,000 sq. ft. $2,220.00 Warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. $2,069.00 Mini-Warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. $1,453.00 Oil and Gas Well Wellhead $2,325.00  
(2)  If the type of traffic-generating development for which a building permit is requested is not specified on the fee schedule, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall determine the fee on the basis of the fee applicable to the most nearly comparable type of land use on the fee schedule. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type of land use by: 
a.  Using trip-generation rates contained in the most current edition of the report titled, "Trip Generation," prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), articles or reports appearing in the ITE Journal or studies or reports done by the U.S. Department of Transportation or Colorado Department of Transportation and applying the formula set forth in Section 17-15-60 below; or 
b.  Computing the fee by use of an independent fee calculation study as provided in Section 7-15-60 below. 
(d)  Predevelopment review impact fee calculation. Any person contemplating establishing a traffic-generating development may request a preliminary determination of the impact fees due from such development. A person requesting a predevelopment review impact fee calculation shall complete and submit to the Road Impact Fee Administrator the proper application form and an application fee. Using the information regarding the proposed traffic-generating land development activity as submitted on the application, the Road Impact Fee Administrator will provide, within fifteen (15) days of the date of submittal of the completed application, a preliminary calculation of the road impact fees due for the proposed traffic-generating development. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1; Ord. 2018-89 ) 
Sec. 17-15-60. - Independent fee calculation study. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  In any case where either the fee payer or the Road Impact Fee Administrator believes the nature, timing or location of the proposed development make it likely to generate traffic impacts substantially different from the amount of the fee that would generated by the application of the fee schedule, an independent fee calculation may be prepared and presented at the expense of the person seeking the independent fee calculation. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any fee payer who requests an independent fee calculation study shall pay an additional application fee to the Town to cover all costs incurred by the Town in association with the Town's review of such independent fee calculation study. 
(3)  An independent fee calculation study shall be an administrative condition precedent to the right to pursue an appeal under subsection 17-15-60(e) below. 
(b)  Formula. 
(1)  Any independent fee calculation study prepared fee shall be calculated by the use of the following formula: 
FEE = VMT x NET COST/VMT VMT = TRIPS x % NEW x LENGTH  2 NET COST/VMT = COST/VMT - CREDIT/VMT COST/VMT = COST/VMC x VMC/VMT Where: VMT = Vehicle miles of travel placed on the major road system during an average weekday TRIPS = Average daily trip ends % NEW = Percent of primary trips, as opposed to pass-by or diverted-linked trips LENGTH = Average length of a trip on major road system 2 = Avoids double counting trips for origin and destination COST/VMC = Average cost to create a new vehicle mile of capacity (VMC) based on planned improvements VMC/VMT = The system-wide ratio of capacity to demand in the major roadway system, which shall be 1.00 CREDIT/ 
VMT = Revenue credit per VMT, based on net present value of other revenues generated by new development and used for capacity-expanding road improvements in the benefit area  
(2)  The fee calculation shall be based on data, information or assumptions contained in this Article or independent sources, provided that: 
a.  The independent source is an accepted standard source of transportation engineering or planning data or information; 
b.  The independent source is a local study on trip characteristics carried out by a qualified traffic planner or engineer pursuant to an accepted methodology of transportation planning or engineering; or 
c.  The percent new trips factor used in the independent fee calculation study is based on actual surveys prepared in the Town or a comparable jurisdiction. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  An independent fee calculation study shall be undertaken through the submission of an application for its consideration by a potential fee payer. The Road Impact Fee Administrator may initiate an independent fee calculation study at any time at the Town's initiative. 
(2)  Within ten (10) days of receipt of an application for the consideration of an independent fee calculation study by a fee payer, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall determine if the application and the independent fee study are complete. If the Road Impact Fee Administrator determines that the application and the study are not complete, a written statement specifying the deficiencies shall be sent by mail to the person submitting the application. The application shall be deemed complete if no deficiencies are specified. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall take no further action on the application until it is deemed complete. 
(3)  When the Road Impact Fee Administrator determines that the application and the independent fee study are complete, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall render a written decision within twenty (20) days on whether the fee should be modified and, if so, what the amount should be, based on the standards set forth in Subsection (d) below. 
(d)  Standards. If, on the basis of generally-recognized principles of traffic impact analysis, the Road Impact Fee Administrator determines that the data, information and assumptions used to calculate the independent fee calculation study satisfy the requirements of this Section, the fee determined in the independent fee calculation study shall be given due consideration by the Road Impact Fee Administrator in determining the fee due and owing for the proposed traffic-generating development. To the extent an adjustment is made in light of the independent fee calculation study, the adjustment shall be set forth in a written determination issued by the Road Impact Fee Administrator. If the independent fee calculation study fails to satisfy the requirements of this Section, the fee applied shall be that fee established for the traffic-generating development in Subsection 17-15-50 (c) of this Article. 
(e)  Appeal following independent fee calculation study decision. 
(1)  A fee payer affected by the decision of the Road Impact Fee Administrator following an independent fee calculation study may appeal such decision to the Town Board by filing with the Road Impact Fee Administrator, within ten (10) days of the date of the written determination, a written notice stating and specifying briefly the grounds of the appeal. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall place the appeal on the Town Board's agenda at a regularly scheduled meeting with written notice to the fee payer. 
(2)  The Town Board, after a hearing, shall have the power to affirm or reverse the decision of the Road Impact Fee Administrator. In making its decision, the Town Board shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law and apply the Standards set forth in subsection 17-15-60 (d) above. If the Town Board reverses the Road Impact Fee Administrator's determination, it shall direct the Road Impact Fee Administrator to recalculate the fee in accordance with its findings. In no case shall the Town Board have the authority to negotiate the amount of the fee or waive the fee. The decision of the Town Board shall be final, subject only to judicial review pursuant to Colorado law. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-70. - Reimbursements. 
(a)  General standards. 
(1)  Reimbursement under the terms of this Article is not provided for site-related improvements. 
(2)  Any person initiating traffic-generating development may apply for reimbursement for the cost of construction of non-site-related road capital improvements that are on the major road system. 
(3)  Reimbursement Agreements Authorized. The Town may enter into a reimbursement agreement with any person initiating traffic-generating development who proposes to construct non-site-related road capital improvements that are included in the major road system as depicted in Appendix 17-A. The reimbursement agreement shall provide proportionate reimbursement, which may take place over more than one (1) year, based on the availability of Town-wide road impact fee revenues set aside for the purpose of reimbursements in accordance with this Article. The Road Impact Fee Administrator may adopt policies and procedures, including road improvement reimbursement submittal requirements, regarding reimbursements and reimbursement agreements, consistent with the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  Amount of reimbursement. Reimbursement shall be in an amount equal to the fair market value of the construction to be estimated at the time of application, or the value of the contribution or payment at the time it is made, for construction of a non-site-related road capital improvements to the major road system. 
(c)  Procedure for reimbursement review. 
(1)  The determination of any reimbursement shall be initiated by the submission to the Road Impact Fee Administrator of an application for reimbursement agreement. 
(2)  The application for a reimbursement agreement shall include the following information: 
a.  If the proposed application involves a reimbursement for any monetary contribution, the following documentation must be provided: 
i.  A copy of the development approval in which the reimbursement was agreed; 
ii.  If payment has been made, proof of payment; or 
iii.  If payment has not been made, the proposed method of payment. 
b.  If the application for reimbursement agreement involves construction of roadway capital improvements: 
i.  The proposed plan of the specific construction prepared and certified by a duly-qualified and licensed Colorado engineer or contractor. 
ii.  The projected costs for the suggested roadway improvements, which shall be based on local information for similar improvements, along with the construction timetable for the completion thereof. Such estimated cost shall include the cost of construction or reconstruction, the cost of all labor and materials, costs of plans and specifications, surveys of estimates of costs and of revenues, costs of professional services and all other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of such construction or reconstruction. 
iii.  Within ten (10) days of receipt of the proposed application for reimbursement agreement, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall determine if the application is complete. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall send a written statement to the applicant outlining the deficiencies. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall take no further action on the application for reimbursement agreement until all deficiencies have been corrected or otherwise settled. 
iv.  Once the Road Impact Fee Administrator determines that the application for reimbursement agreement is complete, the application shall be reviewed within thirty (30) days. The application shall be approved if it complies with the standards set forth in subsections 17-15-70 (a) and (b). 
v.  If the application is approved by the Road Impact Fee Administrator, a reimbursement agreement shall be prepared and signed by the applicant and the Town. The reimbursement agreement shall specifically outline the basis for the reimbursement, the time by which any construction shall be completed and the dollar reimbursement the applicant shall receive. The reimbursement agreement shall provide for annual interest to commence upon the Town's preliminary acceptance of the improvements, in an amount equal to the Town's average annual rate of return on the pooled investments of the Town. 
(d)  Appeal of reimbursement decision. A person aggrieved by the decision of the Road Impact Fee Administrator under this Section 17-15-70 may appeal such decision to the Town Board by filing with the Road Impact Fee Administrator. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a written notice within ten (10) days of the date of the Road Impact Fee Administrator's written decision, specifying briefly the grounds of the appeal. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall place such appeal on the Town Board's agenda at a regularly scheduled meeting. The Town Board, after a hearing, shall affirm or reverse the decision of the Road Impact Fee Administrator based on the standards set forth in Subsections (a) and (b) above. If the Town Board reverses the decision, it shall direct the Road Impact Fee Administrator to approve the reimbursement in accordance with its findings. In no case shall the town board have the authority to negotiate the amount of the fee or waive the fee. The decision of the Town Board shall be final for purposes of judicial review. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-80. - Benefit area, establishment of trust fund. 
(a)  Establishment. The entire incorporated area of the Town, as well as areas outside the Town's corporate limits that fall within the Town's Growth Management Area Boundary, including the I-25/State Highway 392 interchange, is established as a single road impact fee benefit area. The current location of the Growth Management Area Boundary is shown in Appendix 17-A. 
(b)  Expenditure. The expenditure of impact fee funds shall be limited to those road capital improvement projects in the benefit area. 
(c)  Establishment of trust fund. The Town hereby establishes the Road Impact Fee Trust Fund for the purpose of ensuring that fee payers receive sufficient benefit for road impact fees paid. 
(d)  Deposit in trust fund. All road impact fees collected by the Town shall be immediately deposited into the Road Impact Fee Trust Fund. All Road Impact Fees shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account. All income derived from these investments shall be retained in the Road Impact Fee Trust Fund until transferred or expended in accordance with this Article. Record of the Road Impact Fee Trust Fund shall be retained in accordance with the Town's document retention policies and available for public inspection. 
(e)  First-in, first-out accounting. For the purposes of determining whether impact fee funds have been spent or encumbered, the first fees collected shall be considered the first monies spent or encumbered. 
(f)  Annual recommendation for expenditure of fees. Each year, at the time the Town's upcoming annual budget is reviewed, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall recommend to the Town Board appropriations to be spent from the Road Impact Fee Trust Fund. After review of the recommendation, the Town Board shall approve or modify the recommended expenditures of the Road Impact Fee Trust Fund monies. Expenditures shall be made from the Road Impact Fee Trust Fund only for road capital improvement projects in the benefit area. Each year a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the funds collected shall be designated for reimbursement of amounts due and owing under the reimbursement agreements more fully described in Section 17-15-70 (a) (2). Any amounts not appropriated from the Road Impact Fee Trust Fund, together with any interest earnings, shall be carried over to the following fiscal year in accordance with the policies and procedures adopted pursuant to Section 17-15-70(a)(2). 
(g)  Annual report on expenditures. Each year, after the decision of the Town Board with respect to the expenditure of impact fee appropriations, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall prepare an annual report identifying the projects for which the Town Board has approved funds. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-90. - Refund of unexpended road impact fees. 
(a)  General. Any road impact fees collected pursuant to this Article shall be returned to the fee payer or the fee payer's successor in interest, if the fees have not been expended or encumbered within ten (10) years from the date of fee payment, along with interest at a rate equal to the Town's average annual rate of return on the pooled investments of the Town for each year. For the purposes of determining whether impact fee funds have been spent or encumbered, the first fees collected shall be considered the first monies spent or encumbered. 
(b)  Refund procedure. The refund shall be administered by the Road Impact Fee Administrator and shall be undertaken through the following process: 
(1)  A refund application shall be submitted within one (1) year following the end of the tenth year from the date on which the fee payment was tendered in association with the proposed development. The refund application shall include the following information: 
a.  A copy of the dated receipt issued for payment of the fee. 
b.  Evidence of fee payment date and amount. 
c.  Evidence that the applicant is the fee payer or successor in interest to the fee payer. 
(2)  Within ten (10) days of receipt of the refund application, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall determine if the application is complete. If the Road Impact Fee Administrator determines that the application is not complete, a written statement specifying the deficiencies shall be forwarded by mail to the person submitting the application. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall take no further action on the refund application until the deficiencies are corrected. 
(3)  When the Road Impact Fee Administrator determines the refund application is complete, it shall be reviewed within thirty (30) days. The application shall be approved if the Road Impact Fee Administrator determines that the fee payer or a successor in interest has paid a fee which has not been expended or encumbered within the period of time permitted under this Section. The refund shall include the fee paid plus interest at a rate equal to the Town's average annual rate of return on the pooled investments of the Town for each year. 
(c)  Appeal of refund decision. A fee payer aggrieved by a refund decision of the Road Impact Fee Administrator may appeal such decision to the Town Board by filing a written notice with the Road Impact Fee Administrator within ten (10) days of the date of the written refund decision, specifying briefly the grounds of the appeal. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall place such appeal on the Town Board's agenda at a regularly scheduled meeting. The Town Board, after a hearing, shall affirm or reverse the decision of the Road Impact Fee Administrator, based on the standards set forth in this Section. If the Town Board reverses the decision of the Road Impact Fee Administrator, it shall direct the Road Impact Fee Administrator to determine the refund in accordance with its findings. In no event shall the Town Board have the authority to negotiate the amount of the refund. The decision of the Town Board shall be final for purposes of judicial review. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-100. - Review every five years. 
(a)  At least once every five (5) years, the Road Impact Fee Administrator shall recommend to the Town Board whether any changes should be made to the Road Impact Fee Study and this Article. The purpose of this review is to analyze the effects of inflation on actual costs, to assess potential changes in needs, to assess any changes in the characteristics of land uses and to ensure that the road impact fees will not exceed a proportionate share. 
(b)  In each year during which a comprehensive update is not performed, the fee schedule shall be adjusted to account for construction cost inflation, pursuant to the provisions of this Section. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall calculate adjustments to the road impact fee rates by multiplying them by a ratio, the numerator of which is the most recently available two-year moving average of the annual Colorado Construction Cost Index by the Colorado Department of Transportation, and the denominator of which is the same index for a period one (1) year earlier than the numerator. The adjusted fee schedule shall become effective upon and in accordance with the approval thereof by the Town Board. The Road Impact Fee Administrator shall make the adjusted impact fee schedule publicly available. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
Sec. 17-15-110. - Other reimbursement agreements. 
    Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Town from entering into reimbursement agreements with persons constructing roads and highways within the benefit area. 
(Ord. 2017-1541 , 1) 
ARTICLE XVI - Special Fee for Property in Close Proximity to Interstate 25 - State Highway 392 Interchange 

Sec. 17-16-10. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the defined terms contained within the recitals to Ordinance No. 2012-1440 which are incorporated into this Article as if set forth fully, the following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of this Article. 
    CAC property shall mean a parcel of real property within the CAC. 
    Developed property shall mean a CAC property for which a development proposal has been approved as of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. 
    Development proposal shall mean an application for the development of an undeveloped property. 
    Foster Study shall mean that document, with attachments, prepared by Foster Valuation Company, LLC and attached hereto as Exhibit "B" to the ordinance codified herein, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk. 
    Local contribution shall mean the total contributions of the City of Fort Collins and the Town to the reconstruction of the interchange and the construction of the local enhancements, in the approximate amount of five million one hundred thousand dollars ($5,100,000.00). 
    Property owner shall mean and include the current and any future fee owner of a CAC property. 
    Redevelopment proposal shall mean an application for the redevelopment of a developed property. 
    Undeveloped property shall mean a vacant CAC property for which no development or redevelopment proposal plan of development has been approved as of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein by the Town. 
(Ord. 2012-1440 2) 
Sec. 17-16-20. - Imposition of fee. 
    There is hereby established a special fee that shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this Article upon the owners of all CAC properties. Said fee shall consist of a proximity component and a trip generation component. The proximity component of the fee is intended to reflect the relative benefit derived by each CAC property from the construction of the improvements, as determined by the Foster Study, while the trip generation component of the fee is intended to reflect the relative traffic impacts of each CAC property. 
(1)  The proximity component of the fee for all developed and undeveloped properties shall be in the amounts shown in the following spreadsheet except to the extent that: (i) the Town Manager or the Director of Finance adjusts the amount due for a particular CAC property pursuant to an appeal taken under Section 17-16-60 of this Article; or (ii) the Town Manager, upon the recommendation of the Director of Finance, increases or decreases the amount due for a particular CAC property to more accurately reflect the developable square footage of such parcel, and so notifies the affected property owner in writing no less than thirty (30) days prior to the date that the first installment of the proximity component is due under Section 17-16-30 below. These amounts represent each CAC property's proportionate share of the sum of one million two hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($1,275,000.00), which is one-half (1/2) of the property owners' share of the local contribution. 
Larimer County Parcel # Owner Gross Land Area Developable Land Area Total Fee/SF Total Fee Proximity Component of Fee Zone A 86154-05-001 Windsor Investments LTD 73,410 73,410 $0.28 $20,426 $10,213 86154-05-002 Windsor Investments LTD 73,324 73,324 $0.28 $20,402 $10,201 86154-07-001 Bank of Choice 55,889 55,889 $0.28 $15,551 $7,776 86154-07-002 Windsor Investments LTD 74,479 74,479 $0.28 $20,723 $10,362 86154-05-007 Business Park I of 392 49,185 48,185 $0.28 $13,686 $6,843 Zone A-1 86154-05-003 Khuong Huong Tang, et al 26,196 26,196 $0.28 $7,289 $3,645 86154-05-004 Westgate Partners LLC 36,568 36,568 $0.28 $10,175 $5,088 86154-05-006 Westgate Partners LLC 60,807 60,807 $0.28 $16,919 $8,460 86221-45-002 Michael I. Maxwell, et al 55,178 55,178 $0.28 $15,353 $7,677 86221-45-001 The Bailey Company 43,963 43,963 $0.28 $12,233 $6,117 86221-43-001 Schrader Properties, LLC 66,211 66,211 $0.28 $18,423 $9,212 86221-43-002 Taco Johns International Inc. 49,223 49,223 $0.28 $13,696 $6,848 86221-45-003 Former TCE, LLC 100,887 100,887 $0.28 $28,071 $14,036 86221-45-004 Westgate Hospitality LLC 96,118 96,118 $0.28 $26,744 $13,372 86221-47-001 Meyers 4701 LLC 152,444 152,444 $0.28 $42,417 $21,209 86221-43-003 KinderCare Learning Centers 78,003 78,003 $0.28 $21,704 $10,852 Zone B 86154-06-001 Windsor Investments LTD 772,886 751,603 $0.21 $156,848 $78,424 86150-00-014 Yeager, Nancy L Trustee 786,783 733,135 $0.21 $152,994 $76,497 86154-08-001 Windsor Investments LTD 653,873 411,463 $0.21 $85,866 $42,933 86221-47-002 Poudre Valley Health Care Inc. 995,327 909,734 $0.21 $189,847 $94,924 86220-00-003 Poudre Valley Health Care Inc. 1,324,499 612,543 $0.21 $127,828 $63,914 Zone C 86154-06-003 Windsor Investments LTD 126,260 41,132 $0.12 $4,769 $2,385 86154-06-004 Windsor Investments LTD 317,882 301,985 $0.12 $35,011 $17,506 86154-06-005 Windsor Investments LTD 291,695 291,695 $0.12 $33,818 $16,909 86154-06-006 Windsor Investments LTD 37,858 37,858 $0.12 $4,389 $2,195 Zone D 86150-00-013 Burnette/Young Investments 939,698 587,429 $0.12 $68,104 $34,052 86150-00-017 JBT Associate, LLC 1,767,708 1,531,613 $0.12 $177,569 $88,785 86220-00-004 Windsor Gold Coast LLC 2,544,953 2,320,656 $0.04 $107,619 $53,810 86150-00-021 Horton, Mary A/et al 1,555,303 1,053,650 $0.04 $48,862 $24,431 86100-00-016 Horton, Mary A/et al 1,030,219 610,402 $0.04 $28,307 $14,154 86100-00-011 Three T Investments LLLP 1,045,838 559,480 $0.04 $25,945 $12,973 86150-00-001 Three T Investments LLLP 1,444,331 1,063,279 $0.04 $49,309 $24,655 86100-00-002 Three T Investments LLLP 94,626 25,393 $0.04 $1,178 $589 86100-00-015 Horton Feedlots Inc. 1,625,207 1,155,561 $0.04 $53,588 $26,794 86150-00-020 Horton Feedlots Inc. 3,452,929 2,531,870 $0.04 $117,414 $58,707  
(2)  The amount of the trip generation component shall be calculated by identifying the number of vehicular trips per day that each CAC property, as developed or redeveloped, generates or will generate, using the ITE Trip Generation Manual, 8th Edition, as amended, and by multiplying that number by seven dollars and seventy-five cents ($7.75) per trip, which amount has been determined by dividing the remaining one-half (1/2) of the property owners' share of the local contribution by the estimated total number of trips generated in the CAC. 
(Ord. 2012-1440 2; Ord. 2012-1441 1; Ord. 2013-1444 1) 
Sec. 17-16-30. - Payment of fee. 
(a)  The proximity component of the fee shall be payable in equal quarterly installments, with the first such installment due and payable on or before March 31, 2013, and the last such installment due and payable on or before March 31, 2020. 
(b)  The trip generation component of the fee shall also be payable in equal quarterly installments. For developed properties, the first installment of the trip generation component shall be due and payable on or before March 31, 2013, and the last such installment shall be due and payable on or before March 31, 2020. For undeveloped properties, the first installment of the trip generation component shall be due and payable ninety (90) days after the date of the Town's final approval of any development proposal for such property and the last installment shall be due and payable no later than seven (7) years thereafter. 
(c)  Interest on the foregoing payments shall accrue at the rate of 3.05% per annum from the effective date of the ordinance codified herein until the principal amount of such payments has been paid in full. 
(Ord. 2012-1440 2) 
Sec. 17-16-40. - Limitation on total fee collection. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this Article that may be construed to the contrary, in the event that the total amount of fee revenues paid to the City of Fort Collins and the Town by or on behalf of the CAC property owners, either under the provisions of this Article or under agreements executed pursuant to Section 17-16-80, equals or exceeds the sum of two million five hundred fifty thousand dollars ($2,550,000.00), plus interest on said amount from the effective date of the ordinance codified herein at the rate of 3.05% per annum, all CAC property owners shall be relieved of any further obligation to pay the fee imposed by this Article, notwithstanding the fact that all or a portion of said fee may remain unpaid. 
(Ord. 2012-1440 2) 
Sec. 17-16-50. - Unpaid charges a lien. 
    If any amount due and payable to the Town under the provisions of this Article is not paid on or before the due date specified in the billing notice sent to the property owner by the Director of Finance, penalty interest shall accrue and be payable on such amount at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum, and the entire unpaid balance plus interest and collection costs, if any, shall constitute a perpetual lien on the CAC property to which the fee applies. 
(Ord. 2012-1440 2) 
Sec. 17-16-60. - Appeals. 
    Property owners may appeal to the Director of Finance in writing at any time the question of whether properties owned or occupied by them are being charged the proper fee under the provisions of this Article. The burden shall be on the appellant to provide substantial, competent evidence that the CAC property that is the subject of the appeal is not being charged the proper fee. The Director of Finance may hold a hearing on the appeal in his or her discretion and may consider other competent evidence provided by Town staff. The Director of Finance's written decision shall be mailed to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal. The appellant may appeal the Director of Finance's decision to the Town Manager, whose determination of the appeal shall be deemed final agency action for purpose of judicial review. 
(Ord. 2012-1440 2) 
Sec. 17-16-70. - Fee not an impact fee or development charge subject to state regulation. 
    It is the intention of the Town Board that the fee imposed under the provisions of this Article not be construed as an impact fee or development charge within the meaning of Section 29-20-104.5, C.R.S., but a special fee imposed under the home rule authority of the Town. Accordingly, to the extent that any of the provisions of said Section 29-20-104.5, C.R.S., may conflict with the provisions of this Article, the provisions of this Article shall control. 
(Ord. 2012-1440 2) 
Sec. 17-16-80. - Payment by agreement. 
(a)  In lieu of paying the fee imposed by this Article according to the terms and conditions set forth above, property owners may elect to pay the fee pursuant to the terms and conditions of a written agreement with the Town, which agreement shall include the following provisions: 
(1)  No interest shall accrue or be due on the principal amount of the fee for the first two (2) years following the execution of the agreement; thereafter, interest will accrue at the rate of 2.35% per annum for the first eight (8) years and at the rate of 3.05% for each additional year until the fee, together with accrued interest, is paid in full. 
(2)  Payment of the full amount of the fee and all interest due thereon will be deferred in its entirety for undeveloped properties in the CAC until the first building permit is issued for such properties pursuant to an approved development proposal for the property. 
(3)  Payment of the fee will not be required for developed properties in the CAC unless the amount of traffic that will be generated by such property, as redeveloped under a redevelopment proposal, will increase by at least thirty-five percent (35%), as compared to the amount of traffic generated by the current use of the property. 
(4)  The total amount of the fee will be capped at the amount stated in the agreement. 
(b)  No such agreement may be entered into by the Town unless the property owner electing to enter into the agreement notifies the Town Manager in writing of his or her desire to do so on or before November 30, 2012, and the agreement is approved by the Town Board on or before December 31, 2012. 
(Ord. 2012-1440 2) 
ARTICLE XVII - Reimbursement Agreements 

Sec. 17-17-10. - Generally. 
(a)  Any person constructing a street, water line, storm drainage line or sewer line through undeveloped areas of the Town to reach and serve such person's property, or any person constructing such a street or line on the perimeter of his or her property, shall be responsible for the entire cost of such construction. Any person constructing such improvements shall hereinafter be referred to as the "developer." 
(b)  Any developer who constructs a street, water line, storm drainage line or sewer line as aforesaid may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the Town, the terms of which are more fully described herein. In the event such an agreement is entered into, the Town is hereby authorized to assess a charge against each property owner specially benefited by the improvements for the cost of the improvements at the time access to the street is granted or a connection permit to the water line, storm drainage line or sewer line is issued. 
(c)  In the event an agreement is entered into and a charge is collected, the Town shall reimburse the developer to the extent of such collection after deducting a service charge of three percent (3%), representing the Town's administrative costs. All costs of construction of the street, water line, storm drainage line or sewer line must be fully paid by the developer before the developer will be entitled to any reimbursement under any agreement which may be entered into pursuant to this Section. Reimbursement to the developer is absolutely contingent upon actual collection of the charge by the Town. 
(d)  The amount of reimbursement which the Town shall assess shall be based upon the original cost of design and construction. In order to obtain approval of a reimbursement agreement with the Town, the developer shall first provide the Town with copies of the following: 
(1)  Completed bid forms from at least three (3) qualified contractors with an indication of which contractor was awarded the project. All bid forms must contain the description, estimated quantity and unit price for each item included in the project. 
(2)  Satisfactory evidence that all engineering, construction and other costs in connection with the project have been paid in full. 
(3)  A map which shall include the following: 
a.  The location of the improvements; 
b.  The name of the owner of each property specially benefited by the improvement and the amount of that benefit; 
c.  The legal description of each property benefited by the improvement; and 
d.  Such additional information which the Town Manager or Town Engineer may deem necessary. 
(e)  In the event the foregoing information is not submitted by the developer within ninety (90) days from final acceptance of the improvement by the Town, there shall be no reimbursement agreement. In the event the information is timely submitted, the Town will review such information and prepare an appropriate reimbursement agreement to be executed by the developer and the Town. 
(f)  The term of any reimbursement agreement shall not exceed a period of ten (10) years from the date of its execution. The Town Board may approve one (1) extension of the agreement not to exceed an additional ten (10) years if application for extension is made prior to the expiration of the original ten-year period. The Town is not liable for any portion of the uncollected balance. 
(g)  The books and records of the developer relating to the cost of the construction of the improvements for which the developer seeks reimbursement shall be open to the Town at all reasonable times for the purpose of auditing and verifying the developer's costs. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 13) 
ARTICLE XVIII - Park, Open Space and Trail Fees, Dedications, Reservations 

Sec. 17-18-10. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The provisions of this Article are intended to set forth certain land dedication requirements and development fees for the purpose of fulfilling additional capital requirements with regard to parks, open space and trails, reflective of the Town's projected population increases. The land dedication requirements shall be part of the approval of any new subdivision of land within the Town that results in the creation of one (1) or more lots for residential dwelling units. 
(b)  The land dedication requirements and the imposition of development fees in this Article are intended to regulate the use and development of land by ensuring that new growth and development in the Town bear a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide for the establishment of new parks, establishment of new open space. establishment of trails and capital improvement of these recreational resources. The land dedication requirements and fees set forth in this Article shall not be used to collect more than is necessary to fund such category of capital improvements. The land dedication requirements and development fees set forth in this Article are based upon the following documents, together with such other evidence considered by the Town Board in the adoption of this Article: (1) The 2016 Town of Windsor Parks, Recreation, Trails and Open Lands Master Plan; (2) the Park Funds/Buildout analysis presented to the Town Board by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Culture on May 21, 2018; and (3) the Town's current Trails Master Plan and any cost analysis prepared by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Culture in association therewith, all of which are reaffirmed and incorporated herein by this reference. 
(c)  Dedicated lands and funds collected pursuant to this Article shall not be used to remedy existing deficiencies but only to provide new capital improvements necessitated by new development. The dedicated land and amount of revenue generated shall not exceed the cost of providing the capital improvements for which they are imposed, and the same shall be expended solely to provide the specified capital improvements. The Town Board finds that, based upon the foregoing documentation, an adequate, justifiable and reasonable basis exists upon which to require the dedication of land and to assess the fees established by this Article. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-20. - Definitions. 
    When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Capital facilities shall mean the purchase or long-term lease or lease-purchase of real property, the construction of public facilities or the purchase or long-term lease or lease-purchase of equipment or materials needed to facilitate the operation of such facilities or the delivery of services therefrom. Such facilities shall be directly related to services that the Town is authorized by Charter or state law to provide. The useful life of such facilities shall, in each instance, be no less than five (5) years. 
    Community parks shall mean parks within the benefit area, including Boardwalk Park, Eastman Park, Chimney Park and Diamond Valley Sports Complex, and all other community parks identified as such in the Town of Windsor Parks, Recreation, Trails and Open Lands Master Plan and subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Community Open Space shall mean open space and conservation easements that serve the purpose of providing community-wide recreational areas consistent with the intent of the Town of Windsor Parks. Recreation, Trails and Open Lands Master Plan 
    Complete application means an application wherein all of the required information and submittal materials in the particulars required by this Code, together with the required application fee have been submitted to and received by the Town department or official specified in this Code, and the zoning officer of the Town has certified the application as complete. 
    Developed neighborhood park shall mean a park constructed by the Town to its standards, and includes the infrastructure facilities, equipment and improvements as defined in the Park Impact Fee Study. 
    Development shall mean any construction of a new residential dwelling unit, any improvement or expansion of an existing structure that creates a new residential dwelling unit or any change in the use of land that creates a new residential dwelling unit. 
    Level of service shall mean a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for capital facilities. 
    Neighborhood parks shall mean all parks within the benefit area other than community parks, identified in the Town of Windsor Parks, Recreation, Trails and Open Lands Master Plan. Neighborhood parks shall include open space and conservation easements that serve the purpose of providing neighborhood recreational areas consistent with the intent of the Town of Windsor Parks, Recreation, Trails and Open Lands Master Plan. 
    Residential dwelling unit shall mean any housing facility in the Town, but shall not include any commercial enterprise such as a hotel, motel, inn or nursing home designed for lease as a transient residence. 
    Trails shall mean a pedestrian or bicycle access facility constructed by the Town to its standards, and includes the infrastructure facilities, equipment and improvements for pedestrian and bicycle access facilities as defined in the Town's adopted Trails Master Plan. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-30. - Benefit areas and expenditures. 
(a)  The Town Board finds and determines that all new development in the Town will benefit from the trails, open space, neighborhood parks and community parks to be developed hereunder. Therefore, the boundaries of the area to be benefited by such capital facilities are hereby determined to be identical to the boundaries of the Town, as those boundaries may be expanded or modified from time to time. 
(b)  All fee revenue generated under this Article shall be used only to acquire, construct, improve or expand capital facilities within the Town or within the Town's urban growth boundary, as may be permitted by law. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-40. - Neighborhood park land dedication under former Chapter 18, Article I. 
(a)  No neighborhood park land dedication, including the dedication of open space and conservation easements that serve the purpose of providing neighborhood-specific recreational areas, will be required following the effective date of this Article. 
(b)  All neighborhood park land dedicated under the former Chapter 18, Article I of the Windsor Municipal Code is hereby reaffirmed for the purposes for which such park land was dedicated. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-50. - Disposition of Neighborhood Park Development Fees paid under the former Chapter 18, Article I. 
(a)  All fee revenue derived from the Neighborhood Park Development Fees paid under the former Chapter 18, Article I of the Windsor Municipal Code shall be exclusively devoted to the construction of developed neighborhood parks. These funds shall be used to address the need for such capital facilities brought about by development, including the need for pedestrian and bicycle connectivity between neighborhood parks. These funds are separate and distinct from the impact fees otherwise addressed by this Article and other provisions of this Code. No Neighborhood Park Development Fee funds collected under the former Chapter 18, Article I of the Windsor Municipal Code shall be used for the maintenance, improvement or redevelopment of existing parks, trails or open space. These fees shall be segregated, credited and deposited into a special fund and shall not be transferred therefrom except to pay for the expenses directly attributable to the development of neighborhood parks as addressed herein. These fees shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the Town except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting and management thereof. 
(b)  Until such accumulated funds are exhausted or refunded in accordance with this Article, the Town Board shall annually appropriate all revenues heretofore accumulated in the Neighborhood Park Development Fee fund for the construction of developed neighborhood parks, and including new capital facilities necessary for pedestrian and bicycle connectivity between neighborhood parks, in general compliance with the Town of Windsor 2016 Parks, Recreation, Trails and Open Lands Master Plan. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-60. - Park and trail development fee. 
(a)  There is hereby established a Park and Trail Development Fee, which shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this Article for the purpose of funding capital facilities related to the provision of community parks and recreational trails in accordance with (i) the 2016 Town of Windsor, Colorado, Parks, Recreation and Culture Master Plan and (ii) the Town's current Trails Master Plan and any cost analysis to be prepared at the direction of the Director of Parks, Recreation and Culture in association therewith. All fees collected pursuant to this Article shall be expended for the acquisition of community park land. construction of developed community parks, acquisition of easements for trails, and development of trails. This Park and Trail Development Fee is designed to address the need for such capital facilities brought about by development and is separate and distinct from the impact fees otherwise addressed by this Article and other provisions of this Code. Such fee shall be due and payable upon the issuance of every building permit and shall initially be established at five thousand two hundred thirteen dollars ($5,213.00) per dwelling unit, subject to annual adjustment as provided in Section 17-18-100 below. 
(b)  No Park and Trail Development Fee funds shall be used for the maintenance, improvement or redevelopment of existing capital facilities. These fees shall be segregated, credited and deposited into a special fund and shall not be transferred therefrom except to pay for the expenses directly attributable to the acquisition of community park land, construction of developed community parks, acquisition of easements for trails, and development of trails as addressed herein. These fees shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the Town except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting and management thereof. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-70. - Unpaid charges constitute lien. 
    Any unpaid fee imposed under this Article shall constitute a lien upon each lot or parcel of land for which a building permit is issued. In the event such a fee is not paid when due, in addition to any other legal and equitable means of collection provided by law, the Town Clerk shall certify such delinquent charges to the treasurer of the county or counties in which the development is located and the fee shall be collected in the same manner as though it were part of the taxes on the property. The Town reserves the right to withhold or revoke any permit, certificate or other approval of an applicant or obligor of the fee or other approvals to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of the fee. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-80. - Refunds. 
(a)  All fees collected pursuant to the former Chapter 18, Article I of the Windsor Municipal Code shall be expended by the Town for purposes approved therein within ten (10) years of the date of payment. Any fee not so expended shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the property for which the fee was paid or, if the fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund equal to the average rate of return on the Town's pooled investments during such period, plus two percent (2%); provided, however, that the Town shall retain an additional two percent (2%) of the total refunded fee to offset the cost of refund. 
(b)  All fees collected pursuant to this Article this Article shall be expended by the Town for purposes approved herein within ten (10) years of the date of payment. Any fee not so expended shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the property for which the fee was paid or. if the fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund equal to the average rate of return on the Town's pooled investments during such period, plus two percent (2%); provided, however, that the Town shall retain an additional two percent (2%) of the refunded fee to offset the cost of refund. 
(c)  Any application for a refund under the provisions of this Article shall be presented to the Town as provided in Section 17-18-90 below within one hundred eighty (180) days of the expiration of the ten-year period following the date of payment of such fee, in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth. If a refund is due hereunder, the amount of such refund shall be divided proportionately among all applicants for refunds who have filed applications during said one-hundred-eighty-day period; provided, however, that in no event shall the amount of any refund exceed the amount of the fee paid on behalf of the property for which the refund is sought, plus interest at a rate equal to the average rate of return on the Town's pooled investments during such period, plus two percent (2%). 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-90. - Procedure to obtain refund. 
(a)  All applications for refund under this Article shall be submitted in writing to the Town Manager. Each application shall be in a form established by the Town Manager and shall contain the following: 
(1)  A copy of the dated receipt issued for payment of the fee, or other form of verification deemed sufficient by the Town Manager; 
(2)  A notarized, sworn statement that the applicant is the current owner of the real property for which the fee was paid; and 
(3)  A certified copy of the current deed to such property. 
(b)  The Town Manager shall determine within five (5) working days whether or not the application for a refund is sufficient on its face. If the Town Manager determines that the application is not sufficient, a written notice shall be mailed to the applicant within said period, specifying the deficiencies. No further action shall be taken on the application unless the deficiencies are remedied. Any deficiencies must be remedied within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing of the notice from the Town Manager or prior to the expiration of the period of time for filing an application for a refund, whichever is later. If the application is determined to be sufficient, the Town Manager shall notify the applicant, in writing, that the application will be reviewed pursuant to the procedures and standards of this Article. 
(c)  Within ten (10) working days after the application is deemed sufficient, the Town Manager shall determine whether the Town has expended the fee paid by the fee payer within the period required under this Article. If so, the application for refund shall be denied. If not, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund, except that the Town shall retain an additional two percent (2%) of the refunded fee to offset the cost of administering the refund. 
(d)  The decision of the Town Manager with regard to any refund shall be final. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-100. - Annual adjustment of fees, costs and land valuation. 
    The fees established by this Article shall be adjusted annually to reflect the effects of inflation. Commencing on January 1, 2019, and on January 1 of each following year, unless the fees herein established are otherwise revised or replaced, such amounts set forth in this Article shall be adjusted for inflation by multiplying them by a ratio, the numerator of which is the most recently available two-year moving average of the annual Colorado Construction Cost Index by the Colorado Department of Transportation, and the denominator of which is the same index for a period one (1) year earlier than the numerator. The adjusted fee schedule shall be maintained by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Culture and made publicly-available upon request. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-110. - Future amendments (open space). 
    In the event the costs of new capital facilities associated with the provision of open space are quantified through future legislatively-adopted master plans and studies, the Town Board shall have the authority to legislatively approve further impact fees as provided by law, which fee revenue shall be devoted exclusively to the provision of open space in accordance with such master plans and studies. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Sec. 17-18-120. - Application of article. 
    This Article shall apply to all complete applications for development and complete building permit applications received after July 31, 2018. 
(Ord. 2018-1563 2) 
Appendix 17-A - Windsor Major Road System and Benefit Area 

(Ord. 2006-1236 1; Ord. 2008-1318, Exh. 17-A) 
Appendix 17-B - Road Impact Fee Benefit District 

(Ord. 2006-1236 1) 
CHAPTER 18 - Building Regulations 
ARTICLE I - Reserved[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-1563 ,  1, adopted July 9, 2018, repealed Art. I,  18-1-10-18-1-140, which pertained to park fees, dedications, reservations and derived from Ord. 2011-1415,  1; and Ord. 2012-1430,  2. 

Secs. 18-1-10-18-1-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - International Building Code 

Sec. 18-2-10. - Adoption of International Building Code. 
    Pursuant to state law, the International Building Code , 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, Chapters 1 through 35 inclusive and Appendix Chapter I, is hereby adopted by reference as the Town Building Code as if fully set forth fully herein, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
(1)  IBC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Windsor" where indicated. 
(2)  IBC Section 101.4.3 (Plumbing) is amended by deletion of the last sentence. 
(3)  IBC Section 101.4.5 (Fire prevention) is amended by replacing "International Fire Code" with "adopted fire code." 
(4)  IBC Section 101.4.6 (Energy) is amended by replacing the words "International Energy Conservation Code" with "2009 International Energy Conservation Code." 
(5)  IBC Section 105.1 (Required) is amended by replacing the words "building official" with "town." 
(6)  IBC Section 105.2 (Work exempt from permit) is amended as follows: 
a.  Deleting Exception #1 and replacing it with: 
    "One-Story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the roof height does not exceed 8 feet above grade measured from a point directly outside the exterior walls of the structure." 
b.  Deleting Exception #2 and replacing it with "Fences not over 6 feet (2134 mm) high." 
c.  Adding Exception #14: 
    "Shingle repair or replacement work not exceeding one square (100 square feet in area) of covering per building." 
(7)  IBC Section 105.5 (Expiration) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety and replacing it with: 
    "Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee." 
(8)  IBC Section 109.4 (Work commencing before permit issuance) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with: 
    "Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits may be subject to an investigation fee established by the town. The amount of the investigation fee may be in the amount up to the amount of the permit fee that would normally be assessed for the specific type of construction activity, with any such investigation fee being in addition to all other required permit fees. The investigation fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is then subsequently issued." 
(9)  IBC Section 109.6 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing the section with the following: 
    "The Town may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
    "The Town may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
    "The Town may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any plan reviewing is done. 
    "The Town shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment." 
(10)  IBC Section 111.3 (Temporary occupancy) is amended by deleting the words "building official" in the first and second sentences and replacing them with "Town." 
(11)  IBC Section 113.1 (General) is amended by deleting the last two sentences and inserting the following: 
    "The members of the Board of Appeals shall be comprised of the members of the Town Board of Adjustment." 
(12)  IBC Section 113.3 (Qualifications) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(13)  IBC Section 114.2 (Notice of violation) is amended by adding "Notice of Violations shall be delivered in accordance with section 107 of the IPMC" after the last paragraph. 
(14)  IBC Section 202 (Definitions) is amended by addition of the following: 
    "'Sleeping Room' (Bedroom) is any enclosed habitable space within a dwelling unit, which complies with the minimum room dimension requirements of IBC Section 1208 and contains a closet, an area that is useable as a closet, or an area that is readily convertible for use as a closet. Living rooms, family rooms and other similar habitable areas that are so situated and designed so as to clearly indicate these intended uses, shall not be interpreted as sleeping rooms." 
(15)  IBC Section 501.2 (Address identification) is amended by deleting the second paragraph and replacing it with: 
    "Each character shall be not less than 3 inches in height and not less than 0.5 inch in width." 
(16)  IBC Section 1013.2 (Where required) is amended by the addition of a second paragraph inserted before the exceptions as follows: 
    "All area wells, stair wells, window wells and light wells attached to any building that are located less than 36 inches (914.4 mm) from the nearest intended walking surface and deeper than 30 inches (762 mm) below the surrounding ground level, creating an opening greater than 24 inches (610 mm) measured perpendicular from the building, shall be protected with guardrails conforming to this section around the entire opening, or be provided with an equivalent barrier." 
(17)  IBC Section 1029.5.1 (Minimum size) is amended by the addition of the following: 
    "For all building permits issued after the effective date of Ordinance 1999-1021, June 14, 1999, all escape and rescue windows requiring a window well pursuant to the International Building Code shall comply with the dimension requirements set forth in this section, whether or not said escape or rescue window is located in a sleeping room. 
    "With regard to building permits issued prior to the effective date of Ordinance 1999-1021, June 14, 1999, for additions to or alterations of existing buildings or structures, any window well with a finished sill height below adjacent ground level shall be deemed in compliance with the Town's regulations if said window well meets the dimensions set forth in the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code, previously in effect in the Town." 
(18)  IBC Section 1301.1.1 (Criteria) is amended by replacing "International Energy Conservation Code" with "2009 International Energy Conservation Code." 
(19)  IBC Section 1612.3 (Establishment of flood hazard areas) is amended by the insertion of "Town of Windsor" where indicated in [Name of Jurisdiction] and the date of the latest flood insurance study for the Town of Windsor dated September 27, 1991, or any flood insurance study for the Town of Windsor subsequently adopted and in effect. 
(20)  IBC Section 3401.3 (Compliance with other codes) is amended by deleting International Fire Code and inserting in its place "adopted fire code," deleting International Private Sewage Disposal Code, and deleting NFPA 70 and inserting in its place "National Electrical Code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(21)  IBC Section 3412.2 (Applicability) is amended by the insertion of "the effective date of this Building Code pursuant to the Ordinance codified herein." (Ord. 2013-1452 1) 
Sec. 18-2-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the International Building Code is to safeguard the public health and safety by establishing minimum regulations for building systems using prescriptive and performance-related provisions. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 1) 
Sec. 18-2-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The International Building Code, together with any appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the International Building Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 1) 
Sec. 18-2-40. - Copy on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the International Building Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 1) 
ARTICLE III - International Residential Code 

Sec. 18-3-10. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to state law, the International Residential Code , 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, Chapters 1 through 43 inclusive and Appendix Chapters G and H, is hereby adopted by reference as the Town Residential Building Code as if set forth fully herein, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
(1)  IRC Section R101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Windsor" where indicated. 
(2)  IRC Section R105.1 (Required) is amended by replacing the words "building official" with "Town." 
(3)  IRC Section R105.2 (Work exempt from permit) is amended as follows: 
a.  Exception #1 is deleted and replaced with: 
    "One-Story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the roof height does not exceed 8 feet above grade measured from a point directly outside the exterior walls of the structure." 
b.  Exception #2 is deleted in its entirety. 
c.  Exception #10 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with: 
    "Shingle repair or replacement work not exceeding one square (100 square feet in area) of covering per building." 
(4)  IRC Section 105.5 (Expiration) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety and replacing it with: 
    "Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee." * 
* SOURCE: Section 106.4.4 1997 Uniform Building Code 
(5)  IRC Section R108.4 (Related fees) is amended by creating a new subsection as follows: 
    "Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits may be subject to an investigation fee established by the town. The amount of the investigation fee may be in the amount up to the amount of the permit fee that would normally be assessed for the specific type of construction activity, with any such investigation fee being in addition to all other required permit fees. The investigation fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is then subsequently issued." 
(6)  IRC Section R108.5 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing the section with the following: 
    "The Town may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
    "The Town may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
    "The Town may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any plan reviewing is done. 
    "The Town shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment." 
(7)  IRC Section R109.1.5 (Other inspections) is amended by the addition of a new subsection as follows: 
    " R109.1.5.2 Insulation inspection. Inspection of the structure shall be made following installation of the wall, ceiling and floor insulation and exterior windows and before wall coverings are installed." 
(8)  IRC Section R110.4 (Temporary occupancy) is amended by deleting the words "building official" in the first and second sentences and replacing them with "Town." 
(9)  IRC Section R112.1 (General) is amended by deleting the last three sentences and inserting the following: 
    "The members of the Board of Appeals shall be comprised of the members of the Town Board of Adjustment." 
(10)  IRC Section R112.3 (Qualifications) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
(11)  IRC Section R113.2 (Notice of violation) is amended by adding the following after the last paragraph: 
    "Notice of Violations shall be delivered in accordance with section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference in this Chapter." 
(12)  IRC Section R202 (Definitions) is amended by the addition of the following: 
    "'Sleeping Room' (Bedroom) is any enclosed habitable space within a dwelling unit, which complies with the minimum room dimension requirements of IRC Sections R304 and R305 and contains a closet, an area that is useable as a closet, or an area that is readily convertible for use as a closet. Living rooms, family rooms and other similar habitable areas that are so situated and designed so as to clearly indicate these intended uses, shall not be interpreted as sleeping rooms." 
_____ 
(13)  IRC Table R301.2 (1) is filled to provide the following: 
Table R301.2(1) 
"Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria 
Ground Snow Load Wind Design Subject to Damage From Winter 
Design 
Temp Ice barrier 
Underlayment 
Required Flood 
Hazard Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp Speed (mph) Topographic effects Seismic Design Category Weathering Frost Line Depth Termite 30 psf 90 No B Severe 30 in. Slight to Moderate 1 NO 9-27-91 * 1000 45 F  
* or any flood insurance study for the Town of Windsor subsequently adopted and in effect. 
(14)  IRC Section R302.1 (Exterior walls) is amended by the deletion of the wording: "or dwellings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section P2904 shall comply with table R302.1(2)." 
(15)  IRC Table R302.1(2) is deleted in its entirety. 
(16)  IRC Section R302.2 (Townhouses) is amended by replacing "1-Hour fire resistance-rated wall" with "2-Hour fire resistance-rated wall." 
(17)  IRC Section R302.3 (Two-family dwelling) is amended by replacing "1-Hour fire-resistance rating" with "2-Hour fire-resistance rating." 
(18)  IRC Section R303.4 (Mechanical ventilation) is amended by replacing "5 air changes per hour" with "7 air changes per hour" and replacing the words "in accordance with section N1102.4.1.2" with "in accordance with section 402.4.2.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code 2009 Edition." 
(19)  IRC Section R309.5 (Fire sprinklers) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(20)  IRC Section R310.1 (Emergency escape and rescue openings) is amended by the deletion of the first paragraph and replacing it with: 
    "All windows located in basements, habitable attics and sleeping rooms shall meet all the requirements of section R310.1 through R310.2.2." 
(21)  IRC Section R310.1.1 (Minimum opening area) is amended by the deletion of the exception. 
(22)  IRC Section R310.2 (Window wells) is amended by the addition of the following: 
    "For all building permits issued after the effective date of Ordinance 1999-1021, June 14, 1999, all escape and rescue windows requiring a window well pursuant to the International Residential Code shall comply with the dimension requirements set forth in this section, whether or not said escape or rescue window is located in a sleeping room. 
    "With regard to building permits issued prior to the effective date of Ordinance 1999-1021, June 14, 1999, for additions to or alterations of existing buildings or structures, any window well with a finished sill height below adjacent ground level shall be deemed in compliance with the Town's regulations if said window well meets the dimensions set forth in the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code, previously in effect in the Town. 
    "For all building permits issued after June 14, 1999, all escape and rescue windows requiring a window well pursuant to the International Residential Code shall comply with the dimension requirements set forth in this section. 
    "Exceptions: 
"a.  Window wells located in rooms other than sleeping rooms are not required to comply with the minimum dimensions of this section provided they are not located in areas of an "unfinished basement" where a sleeping room could be located. 
"b.  Where at least one window well complying with this section is installed in a sleeping room, additional window wells in said sleeping room are not required to comply with this section. 
    "With regard to building permits issued prior to June 14, 1999, for additions to or alterations of existing buildings or structures, any window well with a finished sill height below adjacent ground level shall be deemed in compliance with the Town's regulations if said window well meets the dimensions set forth in the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code." 
(23)  IRC Section R310.2.1 (Ladder and steps) is amended by the addition of the following exception to read as follows: 
    "Exception: Only one window well ladder shall be required in an unfinished basement." 
(24)  IRC Section R312.1 (Guards required) is amended by the addition of a third paragraph as follows: 
    "All area wells, stair wells, window wells and light wells attached to any building that are located less than 36 inches (914 mm) from the nearest intended walking surface and deeper than 30 inches (762 mm) below the surrounding ground level, creating an opening greater than 24 inches (610 mm) measured perpendicular from the building, shall be protected with guardrails conforming to this section around the entire opening, or be provided with an equivalent barrier. 
    "Exceptions: 
    "The access side of stairways need not be protected. 
    "Area and window wells provided for emergency escape and rescue windows may be protected with approved grates or covers that comply with Section R310.4 of this Code. 
    "Covers and grates may be used over stairways and other openings used exclusively for service access or for admitting light or ventilation." 
(25)  IRC Section R313 (Automatic fire sprinkler systems) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(26)  IRC Section R319 is amended by the deletion of the fourth paragraph and replacing it with: 
    "Numbers shall be a minimum of 3 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch." 
(27)  IRC Section R401.2 (Requirements) is amended by the addition of the following: 
    "Foundations shall be designed and the construction drawings stamped by a Colorado registered design professional. The foundation design must be based on an engineer's soils report. The drawings must be noted with the engineering firm name, specific location for design and soils report number. A site certification prepared by a State of Colorado registered design professional is required for setback verification on all new Group R Division 3 occupancies." 
(28)  IRC Section R405.1 (Concrete or masonry foundations) is amended with the addition of the following after the first sentence: 
    "All foundation drains shall be designed and inspected by a State of Colorado registered design professional." 
(29)  IRC Section R405.2.3 (Drainage system) is amended by the deletion of this section and replacing it with: 
    "If the Town determines that pre-subdivision geotechnical groundwater analysis reveals the presence of high ground water levels within a location, the issuance of a building permit for each lot within such location shall be conditioned upon a lot-specific ground water test as further described in this sub-section. No foundation components shall be installed until the location of the ground water table is determined and applicability of sump and/or sump pump requirements are addressed as provided herein. 
    "In no case shall the bottom of the basement floor or crawl space finished grade lie within three (3) feet of the ground water table (determined as provided in this subsection below). In cases where the bottom of the basement floor or crawl space finished grade is proposed to lie between three (3) feet and five (5) feet of the ground water table (determined as provided in this subsection below), a sump and functioning sump pump shall be provided to drain the porous layer and footings. In cases where the bottom of the basement floor or crawl space finished grade is proposed to lie five (5) feet or more above the ground water table (determined as provided in this subsection), a sump shall be provided to drain the porous layer and footings. 
    "The sump required in this Section shall be at least 24 inches (610 mm) in diameter or 20 inches square (0.0129 m 2 ), shall extend at least 24 inches (610 mm) below the bottom of the basement floor and shall be capable of positive gravity or mechanical drainage to remove any accumulated water. The drainage system shall discharge into an approved sewer system or to daylight. 
    "For purposes of this subsection, the "lot-specific ground water test" required herein shall be certified by a Licensed Professional Engineer, and shall be subject to the following additional criteria: 
    "1. The lot-specific ground water test hole shall be drilled within fifteen feet (15') of the lowest point of the proposed foundation; 
    "2. The data from the lot-specific ground water test hole shall be valid for one (1) year from the date the test data was certified by the Licensed Professional Engineer; and 
    "3. Upon expiration of the aforesaid one-year time period, another lot-specific ground water test must be obtained in accordance with the criteria set forth in subparagraphs 1 and 2 above, and the data from each subsequent lot-specific ground water test shall be valid for one (1) year from the date such subsequent test data was certified by the Licensed Professional Engineer." 
(30)  IRC Section R501.3 (Fire protection of floors) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(31)  IRC Chapter 11 (Energy Efficiency) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code. 
(32)  IRC Section M1502.4.4.2 (Manufacturers instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(33)  IRC Section G2415.12 (Minimum burial depth) is amended by the addition of the following: 
    "All plastic fuel gas piping shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade." 
(34)  IRC Section G2415.12.1 (Individual outside appliances) is deleted in its entirety. 
(35)  IRC Section G2417.4.1 (Test pressure) is amended by changing "3 psig" to "10 psig." 
(36)  IRC Section G2417.4.2 (Test duration) is amended by replacing "10 Minutes" with "15 Minutes." 
(37)  IRC Section P2503.5.1 (Rough plumbing) is amended by deleting the first paragraph and replacing it with: 
    "DWV systems shall be tested on completion of the rough piping installation by water or air with no evidence of leakage." 
(38)  IRC Section P2603.5.1 (Sewer depth) is amended by filling in both areas where indicated to read "12 inches (305 mm)." 
(39)  IRC Section P3009 (Grey Water Recycling Systems) is deleted in its entirety. 
(40)  IRC Section P3103.1 (Roof extension) is amended by replacing the words "6 inches" with "12 inches." 
(Ord. 2013-1452 2; Ord. 2015-1496, 1 ) 
(Ord. No. 2015-1508 , 10-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-3-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the International Residential Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 2) 
Sec. 18-3-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The International Residential Code, together with any appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the International Residential Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 2) 
Sec. 18-3-40. - Copy of code on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the International Residential Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 2) 
ARTICLE IV - International Mechanical Code 

Sec. 18-4-10. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to state law, the International Mechanical Code , 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, Chapters 1 through 15 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the Town Mechanical Code as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
(1)  IMC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Windsor" where indicated. 
(2)  IMC Section 504.6.4.2 (Manufacturers instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 3) 
Sec. 18-4-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the International Mechanical Code is to safeguard the public health and safety by establishing minimum regulations for mechanical systems using prescriptive and performance-related provisions. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 3) 
Sec. 18-4-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The International Mechanical Code, together with any appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 3) 
Sec. 18-4-40. - Copy of code on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the International Mechanical Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 3) 
ARTICLE V - International Fuel Gas Code 

Sec. 18-5-10. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to state law, the International Fuel Gas Code , 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, Chapters 1 through 8 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the Town Fuel Gas Code as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
(1)  IFGC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Windsor" where indicated. 
(2)  IFGC Section 404.12 (Minimum burial depth) is amended by the addition of the following: 
    "All plastic fuel gas piping shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade." 
(3)  IFGC Section 406.4.1 (Test pressure) is amended by changing "3 psig" to "10 psig." 
(4)  IFGC Section 406.4.2 (Test duration) is amended by changing the second paragraph to read: 
    "When testing a system having a volume less than 10 cubic feet or a system in a single family dwelling, the test duration shall be not less than 15 minutes." 
(5)  IFGC Section 614.6.5.2 (Manufacturers instructions) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 4) 
Sec. 18-5-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the International Fuel Gas Code is to safeguard the public health and safety by establishing minimum regulations for fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances, using prescriptive and performance-related provisions. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 4) 
Sec. 18-5-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code, together with any appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 4) 
Sec. 18-5-40. - Copy of code on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the International Fuel Gas Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 4) 
ARTICLE VI - International Plumbing Code 

Sec. 18-6-10. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to state law, the International Plumbing Code , 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, Chapters 1 through 13 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the Town Plumbing Code as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
(1)  IPC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Windsor" where indicated. 
(2)  IPC Section 305.4.1 (Sewer depth) is amended by filling in both areas where indicated to read "12 inches (305 mm)." 
(3)  IPC Section 312.3 (Drainage and vent air test) is amended by deleting the first paragraph. 
(4)  IPC Section 904.1 (Roof extension) is amended by inserting the number "12 (152.4 mm)" where indicated in the second sentence. 
(5)  IPC Chapter 13 (Grey Water Recycling Systems) is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 5) 
Sec. 18-6-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the International Plumbing Code is to safeguard the public health and safety by establishing minimum regulations for plumbing systems, using prescriptive and performance-related provisions. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 5) 
Sec. 18-6-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The International Plumbing Code, together with any appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 5) 
Sec. 18-6-40. - Copy of code on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the International Plumbing Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 5) 
ARTICLE VII - International Energy Conservation Code 

Sec. 18-7-10. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to state law, the International Energy Conservation Code , 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, Chapters 1 through 5 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the Town Energy Conservation Code as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
(1)  IECC Section C101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Windsor" where indicated. 
(2)  IECC Section 109.1 (General) is amended by deleting the last three paragraphs and inserting the following: 
    "The members of the Board of Appeals shall be comprised of the members of the Town Board of Adjustment." 
(3)  IECC Section 109.3 (Qualifications) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 6) 
Sec. 18-7-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the International Energy Conservation Code is to safeguard the public health and safety by establishing minimum regulations for energy conservation systems, using prescriptive and performance-related provisions. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 6) 
Sec. 18-7-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code, together with any appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 6) 
Sec. 18-7-40. - Copy of code on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the International Energy Conservation Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 6) 
ARTICLE VIII - International Property Maintenance Code 

Sec. 18-8-10. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to state law, the International Property Maintenance Code , 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, Chapters 1 through 8 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the Town Property Maintenance Code as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
(1)  IPMC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Windsor" where indicated. 
(2)  IPMC Section 102.3 (Application of other codes) is amended by the deletion of the last paragraph. 
(3)  IPMC Section 103.5 (Fees) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(4)  IPMC Section 111.2 (Membership of board) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and inserting the following: 
    "The members of the Board of Appeals shall be comprised of the members of the Town Board of Adjustment." 
(5)  IPMC Section 111.2.1 (Alternate members) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(6)  IPMC Section 111.2.2 (Chairman) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(7)  IPMC Section 111.2.3 (Disqualification of member) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(8)  IPMC Section 111.2.4 (Secretary) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(9)  IPMC Section 111.2.5 (Compensation of members) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(10)  IPMC Section 111.3 (Notice of meeting) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(11)  IPMC Section 111.4 (Open hearing) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(12)  IPMC Section 302.3 (Sidewalks and driveways) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(13)  IPMC Section 302.4 (Weeds) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
(14)  IPMC Section 302.8 (Motor vehicles) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
(15)  IPMC Section 304.3 (Premises identification) is amended by deleting the fourth paragraph and replacing it with: 
    "Numbers shall be a minimum 3 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of .5 inch." 
(16)  IPMC Section 304.14 (Insect screens) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(17)  IPMC Section 308 (Rubbish and Garbage) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(18)  IPMC Section 309 (Pest Elimination) is amended by the deletion of this section in its entirety. 
(19)  IPMC Section 604.2 (Service) is amended by replacing "NFPA 70" with "Electrical Code adopted by the State of Colorado." (Ord. 2013-1452 7) 
Sec. 18-8-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the International Property Maintenance Code is to safeguard the public health and safety by establishing minimum regulations for property maintenance, using prescriptive and performance-related provisions. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 7) 
Sec. 18-8-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, together with any appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 7) 
Sec. 18-8-40. - Copy of code on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the International Property Maintenance Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 7) 
ARTICLE IX - International Existing Building Code 

Sec. 18-9-10. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to state law, the International Existing Building Code , 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001, Chapters 1 through 15 inclusive, is hereby adopted by reference as the Town Existing Building Code as if fully set out in this Article, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes as follows: 
(1)  The International Existing Building Code is amended by replacing all references to "ICC Electrical Code" with "Electrical Code adopted by the State of Colorado." 
(2)  IEBC Section 101.1 (Title) is amended by the addition of the term "Town of Windsor" where indicated. 
(3)  IEBC Section 1301.1 (Conformance) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
    "Structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provision of this Code for new structures." 
(Ord. 2013-1452 8) 
Sec. 18-9-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the International Existing Building Code is to safeguard the public health and safety by establishing minimum regulations for existing buildings, using prescriptive and performance-related provisions. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 8) 
Sec. 18-9-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The International Existing Building Code, together with any appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the International Existing Building Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 8) 
Sec. 18-9-40. - Copy of code on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the International Existing Building Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 8) 
ARTICLE X - National Electrical Code 

Sec. 18-10-10. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    The rules and regulations adopted by the Colorado State Electrical Board pursuant to Section 12-23-104 (2), C.R.S., and as amended by the Colorado State Electrical Board from time to time, are hereby adopted as minimum standards governing the planning, laying out, and installing or the making of additions, alterations, and repairs in the installation of wiring apparatus and equipment for electric light, heat, and power in the Town of Windsor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1507 , 10-26-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1507 , adopted Oct. 26, 2015, repealed the former  18-10-10, and enacted a new  18-10-10 as set out herein. The former  18-10-10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-1452 9. 
Sec. 18-10-20. - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of the National Electrical Code is the practical safeguarding of persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 9) 
Sec. 18-10-30. - Modifications and amendments. 
    The National Electrical Code, together with all appendices thereto, is adopted by reference with the following specific deletion: All sections purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of the National Electrical Code shall be deleted. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 9) 
Sec. 18-10-40. - Copy of code on file. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of the National Electrical Code and shall make copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 9) 
ARTICLE XI - Fire Zones 

Sec. 18-11-10. - Fire Zone I established. 
    All areas in the Town as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town to be in a Central Business CB District shall be in Fire Zone I, as described in the adopted building code as adopted in Article II of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 10) 
Sec. 18-11-20. - Fire Zone II established. 
    All areas in the Town as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town to be in a High-Density Multifamily Residential MF-2 District and Neighborhood Commercial NC District shall be in Fire Zone II, as described in the adopted building code, as adopted in Article II of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 10) 
Sec. 18-11-30. - Fire Zone III established. 
    All other zoning classifications shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town and all areas in the Town not specifically zoned shall be in Fire Zone III, as described in the adopted building code, as adopted in Article II of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 10) 
ARTICLE XII - Building Numbering 

Sec. 18-12-10. - Numbering required; system established. 
    All buildings that are now or shall hereafter be erected within the corporate limits of the Town, facing upon any street or avenue, shall be separately numbered by the owner, occupant or the agent thereof according to the following plan, to wit: 
(1)  Buildings on streets or avenues running east and west in the Town shall be numbered from 0 Street, as a base line, with odd numbers on the south side and even numbers on the north side, progressing alternately from side to side. 
(2)  Buildings on streets or avenues running north and south in the Town shall be numbered from Ash Street, as a base line, with odd numbers on the east side and even numbers on the west side, progressing alternately from side to side. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 11) 
Sec. 18-12-20. - Size and placement of numbers. 
    The figures of each number shall be not less than three (3) inches in length, shall be legible and shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the front of each building. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 11) 
Sec. 18-12-30. - Town Clerk to assign numbers. 
    It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, upon request therefor, to advise the owner, occupant or the agent thereof of the proper number assigned, under the provisions of this Article, to any building that is now or may hereafter be erected in the Town. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 11) 
ARTICLE XIII - General Provisions 

Sec. 18-13-10. - Code indemnification provisions repealed. 
(a)  Any and all provisions contained in any international or uniform codes pertaining to building inspection and construction adopted by reference by the Town and purporting to provide indemnification by the Town for inspections conducted pursuant to the provisions of such codes are, by force of this Article, excluded from such international or uniform codes as adopted by the Town, and are hereby repealed. 
(b)  This Section shall generally apply to all indemnification provisions contained in any international or uniform codes adopted by the Town relating to building inspection and construction, which contravene the stated purpose of this Article, but shall be applicable specifically to the following sections of the following international codes: 
(1)  2012 International Building Code, Section 104.8. 
(2)  2012 International Residential Code, Section 104.8. 
(3)  2012 International Fuel Gas Code, Section 103.4. 
(4)  2012 International Plumbing Code, Section 103.4. 
(5)  2012 International Mechanical Code, Section 103.4. 
(6)  2012 International Existing Building Code, Section 104.8. 
(7)  2012 International Property Maintenance Code, Section 103.4. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 12) 
Sec. 18-13-20. - Town not liable for inspectors. 
    Under no circumstances shall the Town defend, insure, indemnify, hold harmless or be responsible for the actions of private inspectors with whom the Town may contract to perform services pursuant to the codes referred to in Section 18-13-10 above. 
(Ord. 2013-1452 12) 
ARTICLE XIV - Appeals 

Sec. 18-14-10. - Applicability. 
    The appeal of any notice, order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Code Official pursuant to the codes adopted by reference within this Chapter shall be subject to the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 2010-1379 1) 
Sec. 18-14-20. - Application for appeal. 
    Any person directly affected by any notice, order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Code Official under the codes adopted by reference within this Chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustment, provided that a written application for appeal is filed with the Director of Planning within twenty (20) days after the day the notice, order, requirement, decision or determination was issued. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the applicable code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the code upon which the Code Official relied do not fully apply or the requirements of this applicable code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
(Ord. 2010-1379 1) 
Sec. 18-14-30. - Procedure. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall adopt and make available to the public procedures under which any hearing pursuant to this Article will be conducted. The procedures shall not require strict compliance with established rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
(Ord. 2010-1379 1) 
Sec. 18-14-40. - Court review. 
    Any party to the appeal shall have the right to apply to the Weld County District Court for judicial review of any decision rendered by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to this Article. Application for judicial review shall be made in the manner and within the time required by Rule 106, C.R.C.P. 
(Ord. 2010-1379 1) 
Sec. 18-14-50. - Stay of enforcement. 
    Appeals of any notice, order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Code Official (other than that portion of any notice, order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Code Official to prevent imminent danger to persons or property) shall stay the enforcement of the notice, order, requirement, decision or determination until the appeal is heard by the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. 2010-1379 1) 
ARTICLE XV - Priority Liens for Administrative and Enforcement Expenses 

Sec. 18-15-10. - Establishment of first priority lien. 
(a)  Any lien, the right to which is expressly established pursuant to Articles II, III, IV, VI and VIII of this Chapter, shall be a first and prior lien upon the real property upon which any building or structure is located and which has been subject to remediation efforts of the Town pursuant to such Articles, so long as all requirements of this Article have been followed. The lien provided under this Article remains attached to the property from the date the lien attaches as provided in Subsection (b) below until all applicable remediation costs, together with simple interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date the costs were incurred, are satisfied in full. 
(b)  Notwithstanding that the right to a lien is not expressly provided in Articles II, III, IV, VI and VIII of this Chapter, there shall be a right for the Town to claim a lien for any costs incurred by the Town for enforcement of said Articles, so long as all requirements of this Article are followed. 
(c)  The lien created by Subsections (a) and (b) above shall be a lien and encumbrance upon the specific real property, shall be a first and prior lien, shall take precedence over all other liens, encumbrances or claims of whatsoever nature and shall immediately attach to such items without the necessity of the filing of any notice of lien thereof, but only with respect to real property which is unfit for human occupancy or unsafe under any provision of the International Building Code (IBC), International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) or International Existing Building Code (IEBC) at the time of issuance of the notice required under Subsection 18-15-20(a) below. 
(Ord. 2011-1413) 
Sec. 18-15-20. - Perfection of Town's priority lien rights. 
    The Town shall not enforce any priority lien rights under Articles II, III, IV, VI, VIII of this Chapter and this Article unless each and every one (1) of the following requirements have first been met: 
(1)  Notice. Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation of this Code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be issued to the property owner of record as follows: 
a.  The notice shall be in writing and signed by the Building Official. 
b.  The notice shall include a description of the real property sufficient for identification. 
c.  The notice shall include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
d.  The notice shall include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
e.  The notice shall inform the property owner of the right to appeal any determination under this Article to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the applicable portions of this Chapter. 
f.  The notice shall include a statement of the Town's right to file a first priority lien in accordance with Section 18-15-10 of this Article. 
g.  The notice shall include a statement that any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the applicable provisions of this Code, and that each day a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
h.  The notice shall include a statement as follows: 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee with a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to the Code Official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(2)  Service of notice. The notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is: 
a.  Delivered personally to the property owner of record; 
b.  Sent by certified or first-class mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of the property owner of record; or 
c.  If the notice is returned showing that the notice was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about or upon the structure affected by such notice. 
(Ord. 2011-1413) 
Sec. 18-15-30. - Enforcement of first priority lien rights. 
(a)  The Town is not required to seek payment of remediation costs from any person other than the owner of the property. No change of ownership, occupancy or possession affects the application of this Article, and the failure of the owner to discover that property was purchased against which a lien for remediation costs exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full. 
(b)  The Town may enforce its lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the lien. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid remediation costs and allowable court costs in the manner provided for foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(c)  The lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to the treasurer of the county wherein the property is located for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special assessments upon such property are collected or by any other means provided by law. 
(d)  Unpaid remediation costs, together with simple interest at eight percent (8%) per annum and costs of collection, may also be collected by civil suit against the owner of the property, commenced at any time after the lien attaches as provided in Section 18-15-10 above. 
(e)  The remedies provided under this Section are cumulative and supplemental to each other. 
(Ord. 2011-1413) 
CHAPTER 19 - Special Districts 
ARTICLE I. - Service Plans for Title 32 Special Districts (Including Metropolitan Districts)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-1504 ,  1, adopted Aug. 24, 2015, repealed the former Art. I.,  19-1-10-19-1-110, and enacted a new Art. I.,  19-1-10-19-1-110 as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2007-1306 2. 

Sec. 19-1-10. - Introduction. 
(a)  The Town establishes the following as its Special District policy for: (i) the review and approval or disapproval of service plans, including any amendment thereof, for metropolitan districts and other Title 32 special districts (collectively, "Districts"); (ii) the regulation of districts; and (iii) the review of and response to metropolitan district-related inquiries from the public. 
(b)  This policy is intended as a guide only. Nothing in this Article is intended, nor shall it be construed, to limit the discretion of the Town Board, which retains full discretion and authority regarding the terms and limitations of all district service plans. 
The Town generally accepts the formation of districts where it is demonstrated that the formation of a district is needed to provide public services or facilities to local development and will result in a demonstrated public benefit, whether such demonstrated public benefit is provided by the district or made possible to be provided by the developer because the district exists to provide public improvements. 
(1)  Districts will be permitted to conduct ongoing operations and maintenance activities where, it can be demonstrated that having the district provide operations and maintenance is in the best interest of the Town and the existing or future residents and taxpayers of the district. 
(2)  For districts whose primary revenue source is property taxes, and in the absence of special circumstances, district formation will not be favorably received where the future assessed value of all property within the district at full build-out is projected to be less than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). The five-million-dollar-assessed valuation threshold, for districts whose primary revenue source is property taxes, will increase biennially after 2015 to adjust for increases in the Consumer Price Index for the Denver-Boulder statistical region as prepared by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Special circumstances and special cause must be demonstrated for exceptions to be granted. 
(3)  Districts, when properly structured, can enhance the quality of growth in the Town. The Town is receptive to district formation as an instrument to provide competitive financing for projects, build better and enhanced infrastructure and, where needed, create a quasi-governmental entity to provide essential and beneficial services which are otherwise not available and could not be practically provided by the Town or any other existing municipal or quasi-municipal entity, including existing special districts, within a reasonable time and on a comparable basis. It is not the intent of the Town to create multiple entities which could be construed as "competing governments." 
(4)  District formation will not be favorably received, unless the district enables the underlying project to result in a demonstrated public benefit by either the district or the entity developing the district. In determining whether such project results in a demonstrated public benefit, the Town may consider all or any of the following: 
a.  Whether the district contributes to needed regional and sub-regional infrastructure. 
b.  Whether the district results in enhanced amenities. 
c.  Ways in which the proposed services or improvements exceed the Town's minimum requirements and standards. 
d.  Ways in which the existence of the district facilitates the enhancement of the services or improvements and whether the enhancements are feasible without the district. 
e.  Any other factors the Town deems relevant under the circumstances. 
(c)  It is the Town's policy that (i) the costs of public improvements are to be paid from taxes and not from fees (with the exception of the a limited capital improvements fee) and that (ii) property shall not be taxed for more than a period of thirty (30) years to pay the costs of the public improvements necessary for or part of the master planned development of the project of which such property is a part. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-20. - Service plans. 
(a)  Any service plan or service plan amendment submitted to the Town for approval must comply with all state, federal and local laws and ordinances, including Title 32, Article 1, C.R.S. (the Special District Act). 
(b)  The service plan shall include all information required by the Act. 
(c)  The service plan shall enumerate and describe all powers requested on behalf of the district. Demonstration of the need or benefit of each power is required. Powers which are not clearly needed will not be approved in the service plan. 
(d)  The service plan shall describe any intergovernmental agreement which is required, or known at the time of formation of the district to likely be required, to fulfill the purposes of the district, along with supporting rationale. Execution of intergovernmental agreements or agreements for extraterritorial services (e.g., outside of the Service Area) that are not described in the service plan shall require the prior approval of the Town Board. 
(e)  The service plan shall include the description of any planned inclusion into, or exclusion of property from, the district's boundaries. The service plan shall provide that inclusions or exclusions by the district that are not described in the service plan shall require the prior approval of the Town Board. 
(f)  The service plan shall describe any planned extraterritorial service agreement. The service plan shall provide that any extraterritorial service agreements by the district that are not described in the service plan shall require the prior approval of the Town Board. 
(g)  The service plan shall outline any anticipated plans or needs for the exercise, by the district, of its power of eminent domain. The service plan shall contain language limiting the use of the district's power of eminent domain to carry out the district's essential functions and services, as well as to implement the intent of the preliminary infrastructure plan as defined in the Model Service Plan described in Section 19-1-60 below. Additionally, the use of eminent domain will be undertaken strictly in compliance with state laws and subject to prior consent by the Town Board. 
(h)  The service plan shall restrict the district's debt service mill levy authorization to thirty-four (34) mills (the "maximum debt mill levy") and operations and maintenance mill levy authorization to thirty-nine (39) mills (the "maximum operations and maintenance mill levy"). The service plan shall restrict the district's total aggregate mill levy (debt service mill levy plus operations and maintenance mill levy) to thirty-nine (39) mills (the "maximum aggregate mill levy"). This means that the district shall not simultaneously levy a debt service mill levy equal to the maximum debt mill levy and an operation and maintenance mill levy equal to the maximum operations and maintenance mill levy. The service plan shall also limit the maximum number of years a property can be subject to a mill levy for purposes of paying the costs of public improvements to thirty (30) years. The maximum debt mill levy, the maximum operations and maintenance mill levy and the maximum aggregate mill levy shall be adjustable from the base year of 2015; provided, however, that, in the event the method of calculating assessed valuation is changed after the base year of 2015, the mill levy limitation applicable to such debt may be increased or decreased to reflect such changes, such increases or decreases to be determined by the District Board in good faith (such determination to be binding and final), so that, to the extent possible, the actual tax revenues generated by the mill levy, as adjusted, are neither diminished nor enhanced as a result of such changes. For purposes of the foregoing, a change in the ratio of actual valuation to assessed valuation shall be deemed to be a change in the method of calculating assessed valuation. 
(i)  The service plan shall include debt and operating financial projections prepared by an investment banking firm or financial advisor qualified to make such projections. Said firm shall be listed in the Bond Buyers Marketplace as a provider of financial projections. The debt financial projections shall include debt issuance and service schedules and calculations establishing the district's projected maximum debt capacity based on assumptions of: 
(1)  The projected interest rate on the debt to be issued by the district; 
(2)  The projected assessed valuation of the property within the district; and 
(3)  The projected rate of absorption of the assessed valuation within the district. These assumptions must use market-based, market-comparable valuation and absorption data and shall not use an annual inflation rate which exceeds the greater of three percent (3%) and the Consumer Price Index for the preceding twelve-month period for the Denver-Boulder statistical region as prepared by the U.S. Department of Labor Statistics. The maximum debt authorization in the service plan shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the projected maximum debt capacity. The operating financial projections shall include foreseeable administrative and operation and maintenance costs. 
(j)  If, after the service plan is approved, the state legislature includes additional powers or grants new or broader powers for special districts by amendment of Title 32, Article 1, Part 10, C.R.S., no such powers shall be available to or exercised by an existing district without the prior approval of the Town Board. 
(k)  Every service plan shall include, in addition to all materials, plans and reports required by the Act, a preliminary infrastructure plan ("PIP") as defined in the Model Service Plan. This PIP shall include, at a minimum, a map or maps of such scale, detail and size as required by the Planning Department, providing an illustration of public improvements proposed to be built, acquired or financed by the district, along with a written narrative and description of those items and a general description of the district's proposed role with regard to the same. Due to the preliminary nature of the PIP, the service plan shall indicate that the Town's approval of the PIP shall not bind the Town in reviewing and making land use approvals. 
(1)  Development fees shall not be imposed by the district, except that the service plan may authorize the imposition and collection of a one-time capital improvement fee as a source of revenue for repayment of debt and/or costs of public improvements in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per dwelling unit (the "Capital Improvement Fee"). No Capital Improvement Fee related to repayment of debt shall be imposed upon or collected from taxable property owned or occupied by any owner, or tenant of any owner, of any taxable property within the Districts, held as a dwelling or in connection with a business other than real estate development or construction within the district subsequent to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for said taxable property. 
(m)  All of the limitations mandated by the Town and contained in service plans, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to the maximum aggregate mill levy and mill levy imposition term have been established under the authority of the Town to approve a service plan with conditions pursuant to Section 32-1-204.5, C.R.S. It is expressly intended that such limitations: (a) shall not be subject to set-aside for any reason or by any court of competent jurisdiction, absent a service plan amendment; and (b) are, together with all other requirements of Colorado law, included in the "political or governmental powers" reserved to the State under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code (11 U.S.C., Section 903) and are also included in the "regulatory or electoral approval necessary under applicable non-bankruptcy law" as required for confirmation of a Chapter 9 Bankruptcy Plan under Bankruptcy Code Section 943(b)(6). 
(n)  The service plan's limitations on the debt mill levy, the operations and maintenance mill levy, the limitation on the use of fees for public improvements, and certain other financial limitations are intended to strike a balance between (i) providing adequate project control and revenue to the project developer to facilitate desirable development which will result in demonstrated public benefit and (ii) providing adequate safeguards for protection of residents and taxpayers. When a district board is composed entirely of end users, the balance may shift in favor of removing some of the limitations on financial powers. The Town Board may be more inclined to remove financial limitations in scenarios where the district board wants to add public improvements which were not contemplated as part of the project developer's master plan for the project (e.g., twenty (20) years after development a neighborhood wants to renovate and expand the uses of its community center), a district-owned public improvement requires significant repairs, maintenance or upgrades and the cost properly rests with the district, or the restructuring of debt would result in a net present value savings as set forth in Section 11-56-101 et seq., C.R.S. In the event such circumstances are present, the district board should consider approaching the Town for authorization. 
(o)  The service plan shall require that the district's annual public hearing regarding the subsequent year's budget, as required pursuant to Section 29-1-108, C.R.S., shall be held within the boundaries of the district or Town corporate limits, if there is property within the district which is owned by an end user. At least once every two (2) years, such public hearing shall be held after 5:00 p.m., in order to facilitate attendance by property owners and residents with daytime work schedules. 
(p)  The service plan shall require that any regular or special meeting at which the district's board intends to make a final determination to issue general obligation indebtedness shall be held within the district or Town corporate limits if any property within the district is owned by an end user. 
(q)  The service plan shall require that the districts post a copy of each call for nominations, required pursuant to Section 1-13.5-501, C.R.S., in the designated locations for posting notices of meetings per Section 24-6-402(2)(c), C.R.S. 
(Ord. 2018-1555 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-1555 ,  1, adopted Feb. 26, 2018, repealed the former  19-1-20 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former  19-1-20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2015-1504,  1. 
Sec. 19-1-30. - Bonded indebtedness. 
(a)  Original issuance of bonded indebtedness by the district prior to build-out shall be limited to that debt which can be sized, serviced and defeased with no more than thirty-four (34) mills as described in Subsection 19-1-20(h) above. 
(b)  The district shall be limited to issuing new debt as provided in the financial plan set forth in the service plan. The financial plan shall limit the term for taxation of property for payment of the costs of public improvements to thirty (30) years, and such taxes are generally to be imposed within five (5) years of the first building permit within the district. Districts shall not have any authority to impose or collect a mill levy for purposes of paying the costs of public improvements on any single property for a period greater than thirty (30) years after the year of the initial imposition of the mill levy. The mill levy imposition term shall apply to refundings unless such refundings result in a net present value savings as set forth in Section 11-56-101, et seq., C.R.S., and are otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-40. - Multiple-district structures. 
(a)  It is the intent of the Town that citizen/ resident control of districts be encouraged to occur as early as possible. 
(b)  Multiple-district structures may be proposed: 
(1)  When the projected absorption of the project and the public improvements to be financed are reasonably projected to occur over an extended period of time after the date of organization of the district. 
(2)  When the project has varying projected uses, such as residential and commercial. 
(c)  The service plan must fully describe and articulate the need, reasoning and mechanics if a multiple-district structure is proposed. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-50. - Dissolution of district. 
    The service plan shall provide for the dissolution of the district after the district's debts and financial obligations are fully defeased and the district has completed all of its operations and maintenance responsibilities. A district with long-term, ongoing operations and maintenance will not be obligated to dissolve. However, the service plan must provide that, in the event said obligations are someday undertaken by another party or are otherwise no longer the responsibility of the district, it shall be required to dissolve. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-60. - Model Service Plan. 
(a)  A Model Service Plan shall be developed consistent with these policies, approved and modified from time to time by resolution of the Town Board. The Model Service Plan shall be made available to the public upon request. 
(b)  All service plans submitted to the Town should follow the basic outline, form, sequence and structure of said model. Service plans should duplicate the language contained in the Model Service Plan, and justification shall be provided for any material departures. Notwithstanding the preceding, any service plan approved by the Town, or changes thereto approved in the manner set forth in such service plan, shall be deemed to be in compliance with all Town requirements. 
(c)  Service plans shall be submitted in such numbers and format as specified by the Town Manager. The initial submittal shall be accompanied by a mark-up copy showing departures from the Model Service Plan. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-70. - Default of district. 
(a)  In the event that a district fails to pay its debt when due or defaults in the performance of any obligation that has been agreed to between the district and the Town, which obligation has been identified by the Town in writing as a material obligation, and such default is continuing after the delivery of notice thereof to the district and the expiration of any cure periods, the district shall be precluded from issuing additional debt, except refunding bonds issued to avoid or to cure a payment default, without the prior approval of the Town Board. 
(b)  In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction has made a final determination that a district has defaulted on any of its financial obligations, and such determination is not subject to further appellate review, the district shall be precluded from issuing additional debt, except to refund or refinance a financial obligation for the purpose of avoiding or curing a default without receiving written permission from the Town Board following a public hearing on the matter. 
(c)  In the event of a material modification of the service plan, the Town and the electors of the district shall be entitled to exercise their respective rights under the Act. Departures from the service plan that constitute a material modification include, without limitation: 
(1)  Actions or failures to act that create greater financial risk or burden. 
(2)  Performance of a service or function or acquisition of a major facility that is not closely related to a service, function or facility authorized in the service plan. 
(3)  Failure to perform a service or function or to acquire a facility required by the service plan. 
Actions that are not to be considered material modifications include, without limitation, changes in quantities of facilities or equipment, immaterial cost differences and actions expressly authorized in the service plan. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-80. - Annual report. 
(a)  The service plan shall obligate the district to file an annual report not later than September 1 of each year with the Town Clerk for the year ending the preceding December 31; the requirements of which may be waived in whole or in part by the Town Board. The service plan shall require the annual report to include the following, unless waived by the Town from year to year or completely: 
(1)  A narrative summary of the progress of the district in implementing its service plan for the report year. 
(2)  Except when exemption from audit has been granted for the report year under the Local Government Audit Law, the audited financial statements of the district for the report year, including a statement of financial condition (i.e., balance sheet) as of December 31 of the report year and the statement of operations (i.e., revenues and expenditures) for the report year. 
(3)  Unless disclosed within a separate schedule to the financial statements, a summary of the capital expenditures incurred by the district in development of improvements in the report year. 
(4)  Unless disclosed within a separate schedule to the financial statements, a summary of the financial obligations of the district at the end of the report year, including the amount of outstanding indebtedness, the amount and terms of any new district indebtedness or long-term obligations issued in the report year, the amount of payment or retirement of existing indebtedness of the district in the report year, the total assessed valuation of all taxable properties within the district as of January 1 of the report year and the current mill levy of the district pledged to debt retirement in the report year. 
(5)  Any other information deemed relevant by the Town Board or deemed reasonably necessary by the Town Manager. 
(b)  In the event the annual report is not timely received by the Town Clerk or is not fully responsive, notice of such default shall be given to the board of such district at its last known address. The failure of the district to file the annual report within forty-five (45) days of the mailing of such default notice by the Town Clerk may constitute a material modification of the service plan, at the discretion of the Town. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-90. - Sanctions. 
    Should any district undertake any act which constitutes a material modification to the service plan, the Town Board may impose one (1) or more of the following sanctions, as it deems appropriate: 
(1)  Exercise any applicable remedy under the Act. 
(2)  Withhold the issuance of any permit, authorization, acceptance or other administrative approval or withhold any cooperation necessary for the district's development or construction or operation of improvements or provision of services. 
(3)  Exercise any legal remedy under the terms of any intergovernmental agreement under which the district is in default. 
(4)  Exercise any other legal remedy, including seeking injunctive relief against the district, to ensure compliance with the provisions of the service plan or applicable law. 
All remedies available to the Town under this Section shall be cumulative and non-exclusive. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-100. - Review and approval process. 
(a)  District proponents are encouraged to submit proposed service plans well in advance of election deadlines. Service plans will be reviewed once the application fee and deposit have been received. Once the Town Manager has determined compliance with the special district policy, the Town Manager shall, within a reasonable time, place before the Town Board for its consideration an ordinance adopting or amending the proposed service plan. Official action with respect to the ordinance shall be processed and governed by the Home Rule Charter and this Code. First Reading of an ordinance to approve a service plan will occur no sooner than sixty (60) days from the date of submission of the service plan and payment of the application fee and deposit. The period may be reduced to forty-five (45) days if there are no significant departures from the model service plan. The period may be otherwise reduced only with the consent of the Town Board upon good cause shown. 
(b)  The proponents of the district shall cause a notice of the proposed ordinance to be mailed by first-class mail to the owners of record of all property within the proposed district and within any inclusion area specifically identified in the service plan, as such owners of record are listed on the records of the County Assessor. The notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to first reading of the ordinance. The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  A description of the general nature of the proposed services and public improvements. 
(2)  A description of the property to be included in the district and the inclusion area, if any, which description shall be by street address, by reference to lots or blocks on any recorded subdivision plat thereof or by metes and bounds if not subdivided, by tax identification number or by any other method reasonably calculated to apprise owners of the property to be included in the district. 
(3)  The place at which a map of the district, preliminary plans and specifications and the service plan may be examined. 
(4)  The date, time and place of first reading, which shall be no less than twenty (20) days following mailing of the notice required by this section (b). 
(5)  A statement that all protests and objections must be submitted in writing to the Town Manager at or prior to first reading, in order to be considered. 
(6)  A statement that all protests and objections to the district, as proposed, shall be deemed to be waived unless presented in writing at the time and in the manner specified in this Subsection. 
(c)  In the event a district seeks approval for a material modification to its service plan and within the boundaries of the district is property owned by an end user, then the district shall provide notice to all owners as required by the preceding paragraph and also publish such notice in the district's legal publication. First reading shall occur no earlier than twenty (20) days after publication of such notice. Additionally, the district shall provide the Town with a detailed report on the progress of the district and why the original service plan is no longer adequate. If there is no property within the boundaries of the district owned by an end user, the district shall provide substantiation of the same to the Town by delivery of an ownership and encumbrance report or other documentation acceptable to the Town. 
(d)  Such ordinance shall be conclusive of the Town's determination. No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings or to question the validity of the Town Board's determination pursuant to this Article, whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained unless commenced within thirty (30) days after the adoption of the Town Board's ordinance, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. In the manner and to the extent provided in this Article, the Town Board shall maintain continuing jurisdiction over the operations and affairs of the district and shall exercise its rights in relation thereto, as deemed appropriate by the Town Board, pursuant to the Special District Act and as consistent with this Article. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
Sec. 19-1-110. - Fees. 
(a)  With the submittal of a proposed service plan, the proponent of the district shall also pay the Town Clerk a nonrefundable application fee not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), together with a five-thousand-dollar ($5,000.00) deposit to reimburse the Town for staff, legal and consultant time. 
(b)  A request for an amendment or modification to a service plan shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and a one-thousand-five-hundred-dollar ($1,500.00) deposit to reimburse the Town for staff, legal and consultant time. 
(c)  Any other metropolitan district inquiry referred by the Town Manager for legal or consultant review shall, in the Town Manager's sole discretion, be accompanied by a deposit deemed reasonably necessary to reimburse the Town for staff, legal and consultant time with respect to such inquiry. 
(d)  Town draws against such deposit shall be based upon then-current hourly rates (including benefits) of employees working on the service plan and the applicable rates for legal and other consultants. If the amount reimbursable exceeds the deposit, the balance shall be due the Town on a monthly basis and prior to consideration of the service plan or amendment by the Town Board. Any deposit amounts remaining shall be returned. 
(e)  The purpose of staff, legal and consultants' review is to provide the Town Board with expert advice in considering the adequacy of the service plan and in forming a basis for adopting an ordinance approving, disapproving or conditionally approving the service plan for the district. 
(Ord. 2015-1504 , 1) 
CODE COMPARISON TABLE 
Prior Code New Code 1-1 1-1-10 1-2 1-1-20 1-3 1-1-30 1-4 1-1-40 1-5 1-1-50 1-6 1-1-60 1-7 1-1-70 1-8 1-1-80 1-9 1-1-90 1-21 1-2-10 1-22 1-2-20 1-23 1-2-30 1-41 1-3-10 1-42 1-3-20 1-43 1-3-30 1-44 1-3-40 1-45 1-3-50 1-46 1-3-60 1-47 1-3-70 1-48 1-3-80 1-49 1-3-90 1-50 1-3-100 1-51 1-3-110 1-52 1-3-120 1-53 1-3-130 1-54 1-3-140 1-71 1-4-10 1-72 1-4-20 1-73 1-4-30 1-74 1-4-40 1-91 1-5-10 1-92 1-5-20 1-101 1-6-10 2-1 Deleted 2-2 2-1-10 2-3 Deleted 2-4 2-1-20 2-5 Deleted 2-6 2-1-30 2-7 Deleted 2-8 2-1-40 2-9 2-1-50 2-10 2-1-60 2-12 2-1-70 2-13 Deleted 2-14 Deleted 2-31 Deleted 2-32 2-2-10 2-33 2-2-20 2-34 Deleted 2-35 Deleted 2-36 Deleted 2-37 Deleted 2-38 Deleted 2-39 2-2-30 2-40 2-2-40 2-41 2-2-50 2-51 2-3-10 2-52 2-3-20 2-61 Deleted 2-62 Deleted 2-63 2-4-10 2-64 2-4-20 2-65 2-4-30 2-66 2-4-40 2-67 2-4-50 2-68 2-4-60 2-69 2-4-70 2-70 Deleted 2-71 2-4-80 2-72 2-4-90 2-91 2-5-10 2-92 2-5-20 2-93 2-5-30 2-94 2-5-40 2-95 2-5-50 2-96 2-5-60 2-97 2-5-70 2-98 2-5-80 2-99 2-5-90 2-111 2-6-10 2-112 2-6-20 2-113 2-6-30 2-114 2-6-40 2-131 2-7-10 2-132 2-7-20 2-133 2-7-30 2-134 2-7-40 2-141 2-8-10 2-142 2-8-20 2-143 2-8-30 2-161 2-9-10 2-162 2-9-20 2-181 2-10-10 2-182 2-10-20 2-201 2-11-10 2-202 2-11-20 2-203 2-11-30 2-204 2-11-40 4-1 4-1-10 4-11 4-2-10 4-12 4-2-20 4-13 4-2-30 4-21 4-3-10 4-22 4-3-20 4-23 4-3-30 4-24 4-3-40 4-25 4-3-50 4-26 4-3-110 4-27 4-3-120 4-28 4-3-130 4-29 4-3-140 4-30 4-3-150 4-31 4-3-160 4-32 4-3-170 4-33 4-3-180 4-34 4-3-190 4-35 4-3-200 4-36 4-3-210 4-37 4-3-310 4-38 4-3-320 4-39 4-3-330 4-40 4-3-340 4-41 4-3-350 4-42 4-3-410 4-43 4-3-420 4-44 4-3-430 4-45 4-3-440 4-46 4-3-450 4-47 4-3-460 4-48 4-3-470 4-49 4-3-480 4-50 4-3-490 4-51 4-3-500 4-52 4-3-510 4-53 4-3-610 4-54 4-3-620 4-55 4-3-630 4-56 4-3-640 4-57 4-3-650 4-58 4-3-660 4-59 4-3-670 4-60 4-3-680 4-61 4-3-690 4-62 4-3-700 4-63 4-3-810 4-64 4-3-820 4-65 4-3-830 4-66 4-3-840 4-67 4-3-850 4-68 4-3-860 4-69 4-3-870 4-70 4-3-880 4-71 4-3-890 4-72 4-3-900 4-91 4-4-10 4-92 4-4-20 4-93 4-4-30 4-94 4-4-40 4-101 4-5-10 4-102 4-5-20 4-103 4-5-30 4-121 4-5-110 4-122 4-5-120 4-123 4-5-130 4-124 4-5-140 5-31 5-2-10 5-32 5-2-20 5-33 5-2-30 5-34 5-2-40 5-35 5-2-50 5-36 5-2-60 5-37 5-2-70 5-38 5-2-80 5-39 5-2-90 5-40 5-2-100 5-41 5-2-110 5-42 5-2-120 5-43 5-2-130 5-44 5-2-140 5-45 5-2-150 5-46 5-2-160 5-47 5-2-170 5-48 5-2-180 5-49 5-2-190 5-50 5-2-200 5-51 5-2-210 5-52 5-2-220 5-53 5-2-230 5-54 5-2-240 5-55 5-2-250 5-56 5-2-260 5-57 5-2-270 5-58 5-2-280 5-59 5-2-290 5-60 5-2-300 5-61 5-2-310 5-62 5-2-320 5-63 5-2-330 5-64 5-2-340 5-65 5-2-350 5-66 5-2-360 5-67 5-2-370 5-68 5-2-380 5-69 5-2-390 5-70 5-2-400 5-71 5-2-410 5-72 5-2-420 5-73 5-2-430 5-74 5-2-440 5-75 5-2-450 5-76 5-2-460 5-77 5-2-470 5-78 5-2-480 5-79 5-2-490 5-80 5-2-500 5-81 5-2-510 5-82 5-2-520 5-91 5-3-10 5-92 5-3-20 5-93 5-3-30 5-94 5-3-40 5-95 5-3-50 5-96 5-3-60 5-111 5-4-10 5-112 5-4-20 5-113 5-4-30 5-114 5-4-40 5-115 5-4-50 5-116 5-4-60 5-117 5-4-70 5-118 5-4-80 5-119 5-4-90 5-120 5-4-100 5-121 5-4-110 5-122 5-4-120 5-123 5-4-130 5-124 5-4-140 5-125 5-4-150 5-126 5-4-160 5-127 5-4-170 5-128 5-4-180 5-129 5-4-190 5-130 5-4-200 5-131 5-4-210 5-132 5-4-220 5-133 5-4-230 5-134 5-4-240 5-135 5-4-250 5-136 5-4-260 5-137 5-4-270 5-138 5-4-280 5-139 5-4-290 5-140 5-4-300 5-141 5-4-310 5-142 5-4-320 5-143 5-4-330 5-144 5-4-340 5-145 5-4-350 5-146 5-4-360 5-147 5-4-370 5-148 5-4-380 5-149 5-4-390 5-150 5-4-400 5-151 5-4-410 5-152 5-4-420 5-153 5-4-430 5-154 5-4-440 5-155 5-4-450 5-156 5-4-460 5-171 5-5-10 5-172 5-5-20 5-173 5-5-30 5-174 5-5-40 5-175 5-5-50 5-176 5-5-60 5-177 5-5-70 5-178 5-5-80 5-191 5-6-10 5-201 5-7-10 5-202 5-7-20 5-203 5-7-30 5-204 5-7-40 5-205 5-7-50 5-206 5-7-60 5-207 5-7-70 5-208 5-7-80 5-209 5-7-90 6-1 6-1-10 6-2 6-1-20 6-3 6-1-30 6-4 6-1-40 6-5 6-1-50 6-6 6-1-60 6-7 6-1-70 6-8 6-1-80 6-9 6-1-90 6-10 6-1-100 7-1 7-1-10 7-2 7-1-20 7-3 7-1-30 7-4 7-1-40 7-5 7-1-50 7-6 7-1-60 7-7 7-1-70 7-8 7-1-80 7-21 7-2-10 7-22 7-2-20 7-23 7-2-30 7-24 7-2-40 7-25 7-2-50 7-41 7-3-10 7-42 7-3-20 7-43 7-3-30 7-44 7-3-40 7-61 7-4-10 7-62 7-4-20 7-63 7-4-30 7-64 7-4-40 7-65 7-4-50 7-81 7-5-10 7-82 7-5-20 7-83 7-5-30 7-101 7-6-10 7-102 7-6-20 7-103 7-6-30 7-104 7-6-40 7-105 7-6-50 7-106 7-6-60 7-107 7-6-70 7-108 7-6-80 7-109 7-6-90 7-110 7-6-100 7-111 7-6-110 7-112 7-6-120 7-113 7-6-130 7-114 7-6-140 7-115 7-6-150 7-116 7-6-160 7-117 7-6-170 7-118 7-6-180 7-119 7-6-190 7-120 7-6-200 7-121 7-6-210 7-122 7-6-220 7-123 7-6-230 8-1 8-1-10 8-2 8-1-20 8-3 8-1-30 8-4 8-1-40 8-5 8-1-50 8-6 8-1-60 8-7 8-1-70 8-21 8-2-10 8-22 8-2-20 8-24 8-2-30 8-25 8-2-40 8-41 8-3-10 8-42 8-3-20 8-43 8-3-30 8-44 8-3-40 8-45 8-3-50 8-61 8-4-10 8-62 8-4-20 8-63 8-4-30 8-64 8-4-40 8-65 8-4-50 8-66 8-4-60 10-1 10-1-10 10-2 10-1-20 10-11 10-2-10 10-12 10-2-20 10-13 10-2-30 10-31 10-3-10 10-41 10-4-10 10-42 10-4-20 10-43 10-4-30 10-44 10-4-40 10-45 10-4-50 10-46 10-4-60 10-47 10-4-70 10-48 10-4-80 10-49 10-4-90 10-50 10-4-100 10-51 10-4-110 10-52 10-4-120 10-53 10-4-130 10-54 10-4-140 10-55 10-4-150 10-56 10-4-160 10-56.1 10-4-170 10-57 10-4-180 10-58 10-4-190 10-59 10-4-200 10-81 10-5-10 10-82 10-5-20 10-91 10-6-10 10-92 10-6-20 10-101 10-7-10 10-102 10-7-20 10-103 10-7-30 10-104 10-7-40 10-105 10-7-50 11-1 11-1-10 11-2 11-1-20 11-3 11-1-30 11-11 11-2-10 11-12 11-2-20 11-13 11-2-30 11-14 11-2-40 11-15 11-2-50 11-16 11-2-60 11-17 11-2-70 11-18 11-2-80 11-19 11-2-90 11-20 11-2-100 11-21 11-2-110 11-22 11-2-120 11-23 11-2-130 11-24 11-2-140 11-41 11-3-10 11-42 11-3-20 11-43 11-3-30 11-44 11-3-40 11-45 11-3-50 11-46 11-3-60 11-47 11-3-70 11-48 11-3-80 11-49 11-3-90 11-50 11-3-100 11-51 11-3-110 11-71 11-4-10 11-81 11-5-10 11-82 11-5-20 11-83 11-5-30 11-84 11-5-40 11-85 11-5-50 11-86 11-5-60 11-87 11-5-70 11-88 11-5-80 11-89 11-5-90 11-90 11-5-100 11-91 11-5-110 11-92 11-5-120 11-93 11-5-130 11-94 11-5-140 11-95 11-5-150 11-111 11-6-10 11-112 11-6-20 11-113 11-6-30 11-114 11-6-40 11-115 11-6-50 11-116 11-6-60 11-117 11-6-70 11-118 11-6-80 11-119 11-6-90 11-131 11-7-10 11-141 11-8-10 11-142 11-8-20 11-143 11-8-30 11-144 11-8-40 11-145 11-8-50 11-146 11-8-60 11-147 11-8-70 11-148 11-8-80 11-149 11-8-90 11-150 11-8-100 11-161 11-9-10 11-162 11-9-20 13-1 13-1-10 13-2 13-1-20 13-3 13-1-30 13-4 13-1-40 13-5 13-1-50 13-6 13-1-60 13-7 13-1-70 13-8 13-1-80 13-9 13-1-90 13-21 13-2-10 13-22 13-2-20 13-23 13-2-30 13-24 13-2-40 13-25 13-2-50 13-26 13-2-60 13-27 13-2-70 13-28 13-2-80 13-29 13-2-90 13-30 13-2-100 13-31 13-2-110 13-32 13-2-120 13-33 deleted 13-34 13-2-140 13-35 13-2-150 13-36 13-2-160 13-37 13-2-170 13-38 13-2-180 13-39 13-2-190 13-40 13-2-200 13-41 13-2-210 13-42 13-2-220 13-43 13-2-230 13-44 13-2-240 13-45 13-2-250 13-46 13-2-260 13-47 13-2-270 13-48 13-2-280 13-49 13-2-290 13-50 13-2-300 13-51 13-2-310 13-52 13-2-320 13-53 13-2-330 13-54 13-2-340 13-55 13-2-350 13-56 13-2-360 13-57 13-2-370 13-58 13-2-380 13-59 13-2-390 13-60 13-2-400 13-61 13-2-410 13-62 13-2-420 13-81 13-3-10 13-82 13-3-20 13-83 13-3-30 13-84 13-3-40 13-85 13-3-50 13-86 13-3-60 13-87 13-3-70 13-88 13-3-80 13-89 13-3-90 13-90 13-3-100 13-91 13-3-110 13-92 13-3-120 13-93 13-3-130 13-94 deleted 13-101 13-4-10 15-1 15-1-10 15-2 15-1-20 15-3 15-1-30 15-4 15-1-40 15-5 15-1-50 15-6 15-1-60 16-1 16-1-10 16-11 16-2-10 16-12 16-2-20 16-21 16-3-10 16-22 16-3-20 16-23 16-3-30 16-24 16-3-40 16-31 16-4-10 16-32 16-4-20 16-33 16-4-30 16-34 16-4-40 16-35 16-4-50 16-36 16-4-60 16-51 16-5-10 16-52 16-5-20 16-53 16-5-30 16-61 16-6-10 16-62 16-6-20 16-63 16-6-30 16-64 16-6-40 16-65 16-6-50 16-66 16-6-60 16-67 16-6-70 16-68 16-6-80 16-76 16-6-90 16-101 16-8-10 16-102 16-8-20 16-103 16-8-30 16-104 16-8-40 16-105 16-8-50 16-121 16-10-10 16-122 16-10-20 16-123 16-10-30 16-124 16-10-40 16-125 16-10-50 16-126 16-9-10-16-9-180 16-127 16-10-60 16-141 16-11-10 16-142 16-11-20 16-143 16-11-30 16-144 16-11-40 16-145 16-11-50 16-146 16-11-60 16-147 16-11-70 16-148 16-11-80 16-149 16-11-90 16-150 16-11-100 16-161 16-12-10 16-162 16-12-20 16-163 16-12-30 16-164 16-12-40 16-165 16-12-50 16-166 16-12-60 16-181 16-13-10 16-182 16-13-20 16-183 16-13-30 16-184 16-13-40 16-185 16-13-50 16-186 16-13-60 16-201 16-14-10 16-202 16-14-20 16-203 16-14-30 16-204 16-14-40 16-205 16-14-50 16-206 16-14-60 16-207 16-14-70 16-208 16-14-80 16-209 16-14-90 16-210 16-14-100 16-211 16-14-210 16-212 16-14-220 16-213 16-14-230 16-214 16-14-240 16-215 16-14-250 16-216 16-14-260 16-217 16-14-270 16-218 16-14-280 16-219 16-14-290 16-221 16-15-10 16-222 16-15-20 16-223 16-15-30 16-224 16-15-40 16-225 16-15-50 16-226 16-15-60 16-241 16-16-10 16-242 16-16-20 16-243 16-16-30 16-244 16-16-40 16-245 16-16-50 16-246 16-16-60 16-261 16-17-10 16-262 16-17-20 16-263 16-17-30 16-264 16-17-40 16-265 16-17-50 16-266 16-17-60 16-267 16-17-70 16-281 16-18-10 16-282 16-18-20 16-284 16-18-40 16-301 16-19-10 16-302 16-19-20 16-303 16-19-30 16-304 16-19-40 16-305 16-19-50 16-321 16-20-10 16-322 16-20-20 16-323 16-20-30 16-283 16-18-30 16-324 16-20-40 16-325 16-20-50 16-326 16-20-60 16-327 16-20-70 16-341 16-21-10 16-342 16-21-20 16-343 16-21-30 16-344 16-21-40 16-345 16-21-50 16-346 16-21-60 16-347 16-21-70 16-361 16-22-10 16-362 16-22-20 16-363 16-22-30 16-364 16-22-40 16-381 16-23-10 16-382 16-23-20 16-383 16-23-30 16-384 16-23-40 16-385 16-23-50 16-401 16-24-10 16-402 16-24-20 16-403 16-24-30 16-404 16-24-40 16-405 16-24-50 16-406 16-24-60 16-407 16-24-70 16-421 16-25-10 16-422 16-25-20 16-423 16-25-30 16-424 16-25-40 16-425 16-25-50 16-426 16-25-60 16-441 16-26-10 16-442 16-26-20 16-443 16-26-30 16-444 16-26-40 16-445 16-26-50 16-446 16-26-60 16-447 16-26-70 16-448 16-26-80 16-461 16-27-10 16-462 16-27-20 16-463 16-27-30 16-464 16-27-40 16-465 16-27-50 16-466 16-27-60 16-467 16-27-70 16-468 16-27-80 16-469 16-27-90 16-470 16-27-100 16-471 16-27-110 16-472 16-27-120 16-473 16-27-130 16-474 16-27-140 16-475 16-27-150 16-476 16-27-160 16-477 16-27-170 16-478 16-27-180 16-521 16-29-10 16-522 16-29-20 16-523 16-29-30 16-524 16-29-40 16-525 16-29-50 16-526 16-29-60 16-527 16-29-70 17-1 17-1-10 17-11 17-2-10 17-21 17-3-10 17-22 17-3-20 17-31 17-4-10 17-32 17-4-20 17-51 17-5-10 17-52 17-5-20 17-61 17-6-10 17-62 17-6-20 17-63 17-6-30 17-71 17-7-10 17-72 17-7-20 17-73 17-7-30 17-74 17-7-40 17-75 17-7-50 17-91 17-8-10 17-92 17-8-20 17-93 17-8-30 17-94 17-8-40 17-95 17-9-10 17-96 17-9-20-17-9-60 17-111 17-10-10 17-112 17-10-20 17-113 17-10-30 17-114 17-10-40 17-115 17-10-50 17-131 17-11-10 17-132 17-11-20 17-133 17-11-30 17-134 17-11-40 17-135 17-11-50 17-136 17-11-60 17-137 17-11-70 17-151 17-12-10 17-152 17-12-20 17-153 17-12-30 17-171 17-13-10 17-172 17-13-20 17-173 17-13-30 17-174 17-13-40 17-175 17-13-50 17-176 17-13-60 17-181 17-13-210 17-182 17-13-220 17-183 17-13-230 17-184 17-13-240 17-185 17-13-250 17-186 17-13-260 17-187 17-13-310 App 17-C 17-13-320 App. 17-C 17-13-330 App. 17-C 17-13-340 App. 17-C 17-13-350 App. 17-C 17-13-360 App. 17-C 17-13-370 App. 17-C 17-13-380 App. 17-C 17-13-390 App. 17-C 17-13-400 App. 17-C 17-13-410 App. 17-C 17-13-420 App. 17-C 17-13-430 App. 17-C 17-13-440 App. 17-C 17-13-450 App. 17-C 17-13-460 App. 17-C 17-13-470 App. 17-C 17-13-480 17-191 17-14-10 17-192 17-14-20 17-193 17-14-30 17-194 17-14-40 17-195 17-14-50 17-196 17-14-60 17-201 17-14-210 17-202 17-14-220 17-203 17-14-230 17-204 17-14-240 17-205 17-14-250 17-206 17-14-260 17-211 17-14-310 17-212 17-14-320 17-213 17-14-330 17-214 17-14-340 17-215 17-14-350 17-216 17-14-360 17-231 17-15-10 17-232 17-15-20 17-233 17-15-30 17-234 17-15-40 17-235 17-15-50 17-236 17-15-60 17-237 17-15-70 17-238 17-15-80 17-239 17-15-90 17-240 17-15-100 18-1 18-1-10 18-1-5 18-1-20 18-2 18-1-30 18-2.5 18-1-40 18-3 18-1-50 18-3.5 18-1-60 18-4 18-1-70 18-4.5 18-1-80 18-5 18-1-90 18-5.5 18-1-100 18-6 18-1-110 18-6.5 18-1-120 18-7 18-1-130 18-7.5 18-1-140 18-8 18-1-150 18-8.5 18-1-160 18-9 18-1-170 18-9.5 18-1-180 18-11 18-2-10 18-12 18-2-20 18-13 18-2-30 18-14 18-2-40 18-21 18-3-10 18-22 18-3-20 18-23 18-3-30 18-24 18-3-40 18-31 18-4-10 18-32 18-4-20 18-33 18-4-30 18-34 18-4-40 18-61 18-5-10 18-62 18-5-20 18-63 18-5-30 18-71 18-6-10 18-72 18-6-20 18-73 18-6-30 18-74 18-6-40 18-81 18-7-10 18-82 18-7-20 18-83 18-7-30 18-84 18-7-40 18-91 18-8-10 18-92 18-8-20 18-93 18-8-30 18-94 18-8-40 18-111 18-9-10 18-112 18-9-20 18-113 18-9-30 18-131 18-10-10 18-132 18-10-20 18-133 18-10-30 18-134 18-10-40 18-151 18-11-10 18-152 18-11-20 18-153 18-11-30 18-154 18-11-40 18-171 18-12-10 18-172 18-12-20 18-173 18-12-30 18-174 18-12-40  
DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCES TABLE 
Ord. No. Subject Section Disposition 2004-1163 General transportation requirements       Added 17-1-60 2004-1193 Changes relating to Charter 1 Chs. 1-18 2, 3 1-21 4-6 1-47 Qualifications, vacancies of elected officials 7, 8       Rpld 2-1 Compensation of Board Members 9       Rpld 2-5 Special meetings of Town Board 10       Rpld 2-7 Quorum of Town Board 11 2-8 Write-in candidates 12       Rpld 2-13 Cancellation of election 13       Rpld 2-14 Appointed officers 14-22       Rpld 2-31 Powers and duties of officers 23 2-32 Town Manager 24       Rpld 2-34 Town Clerk 25       Rpld 2-36 Removal of Town officers 26, 27       Rpld 2-37 Employees 28       Rpld 2-38 Compensation 29       Rpld 2-39       Rnctd 2-39 Residency requirement 30       Rpld 2-40       Rnctd 2-40 Original jurisdiction 31       Rpld 2-64       Rnctd 2-64 Compensation of Court Clerk 32       Rpld 2-70 Advisory Board 33 2-112 Planning Commission 34 2-133 Tree Board 35 2-141 Water and Sewer Board 36 2-161 2004-1194 Historic preservation 1-17 Ch. 16 Art. XXVII       Rnctd Ch. 16 Art. XXVII 2004-1204 Design standards for large retail establishments 1 App 17-C 2005-1209 Monthly Basin User Fee - mosquito control 1-3 13-3-120 2005-1211 Historic Preservation Commission 1 16-490 2005-1212 Special event permits 1-12       Added Ch. 6, Art. II 2005-1213 General Commercial GC District 1 16-301 Building location 2       Rpld 16-303       Rnctd 16-303 2005-1215 Water rates 1-3       Added 13-62 2005-1216 Sewer Plant Investment Fee 1 13-1 2005-1221 Building height regulations 1       Rpld 16-125       Rnctd 16-125 2005-1224 Cable television systems 1-4       Rpld Ch. 5 Art. I       Rnctd Ch. 5 Art. I 2005-1230 Sales and use tax 1, 2 4-23 2006-1232 Conditional use grants 1 16-12 2       Rpld Ch. 16, Art. VII       Rnctd Ch. 16, Art. VII 3, 4 16-162 5 16-182 6, 7 16-204 8, 9 16-214 10, 11 16-222 12 16-242 13 16-262 14 16-282 15 16-301 16 16-322 17 16-342 18 16-362 2006-1233 Building height regulations 1 16-12 2 16-125 2006-1235 Dangerous dogs 1 17-101 1-6       Added 7-124-7-128 2006-1236 Adopting ordinance 1-1-10-1-6-10, 2-1-10-2-11-40, 4-1-10-4-5-140, 5-1-10-5-7-90, Appx 5-A, 6-1-10-6-2-120, 7-1-10-7-6-350, 8-1-10-8-4-60, 10-1-10-10-7-50, 11-1-10-11-9-20, 13-1-10-13-4-20, 15-1-10-15-1-60, 16-1-10-16-29-70, 17-1-10-17-15-100, Appx 17-A, Appx. 17-B, 18-1-10-18-12-40 2006-1237 Unpaid utility charges 1       Rpld 13-2-130 2       Rpld 13-3-140 3       Rpld/Rnctd 13-4-10 4, 5       Added 13-4-20 2006-1238 Electric personal assisted mobility devices 1       Added 8-1-80 2006-1240 Dedication of parks 1 18-1-20 2 18-1-50 2006-1241 Variances 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-6-60 2006-1242 Municipal water rates 1 13-2-420 2006-1243 Monthly basin user fee 1 13-3-120 2006-1244 Plant investment fees 1 13-2-70 2 13-1-10 2006-1245 Utility facility construction or relocation 5-1-20       Rpld 18-10-40 2006-1246 Fireworks 1       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 10, Art. VII 2006-1251 Submittals 15-1-60, 16-5-20, 17-4-20, 17-5-20, 17-6-30, 17-7-50, 17-8-30, 17-9-20 2006-1252 Variances 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-6-80 Subdivision procedure 2 17-4-20 3 17-7-40 2006-1254 Parking regulations       Rpld/Rnctd 8-2-10 2006-1260 Large retail establishments 1       Rpld/Rnctd 17-13-310 2       Rpld/Rnctd 17-13-330 3       Rpld 17-13-360 4       Rpld/Rnctd 17-13-420 5       Rpld/Rnctd 17-13-450 6       Rpld 17-13-480 2006-1268 Annexations & master plans procedures 2       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 15 2006-1269 Construction of public improvements 1 17-11-10 2006-1270 Awning-mounted signs 1 16-9-100 2006-1271 Public hearings 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-4-60 Subdivision procedure 2 17-4-20 2006-1273 Motorized utility vehicles       Added Ch. 8, Art. V 2007-1280 Poudre School District R-1 1 17-14-230 2007-1281 Thompson School District R2-J 1 17-14-330 2007-1282 Weld County School District RE-4 1 17-14-30 2007-1287 Referendum procedures       Added Ch. 1, Art. VII 2007-1290 Water plant investment fee 1 13-2-70 Sewer plant investment fee 2 13-1-10 2007-1291 Watering restrictions and usage charges 1, 2       Rpld/Rnctd 13-2-420 2007-1292 Stormwater drainage 1 13-3-120 2007-1296 Single-family detached dwellings standards 1 16-11-70 2007-1297 Fencing regulations 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-8-30 2007-1298 Neighborhood meetings 1-8       Added Ch. 15, Art. III       Added 16-4-70, 17-3-30 2007-1299 Annexation and master plan procedures 1 15-1-30 2 15-2-30 2007-1300 Site plans 1       Rpld/Rnctd 17-9-20, 17-9-40 2007-1306 Special districts 1, 2       Added Ch. 19, Art. I 2007-1307 Wireless telecommunications facilities       Added Ch. 16, Art. XXX 2008-1315 Building regulations       Rpld Ch. 18, Arts. III, IV       Rpld/Rnctd 18-2-10, 18-2-30, 18-2-40, 18-3-10, 18-3-30, 18-3-40, 18-4-10, 18-4-20, 18-4-30, 18-4-40, 18-6-10, 18-6-30, 18-6-40, 18-8-10, 18-8-30, 18-8-40, 18-12-10, 18-12-30, 18-12-40       Added Ch. 18, Art. XIII 2008-1316 Indemnification exclusions 1, 2 18-10-10 3 18-10-20 2008-1317 Nuisances Art. I       Rpld/Rnctd 7-1-10, 7-1-40       Added 7-1-50       Rnmbrd 7-1-50-7-1-80       as 7-1-60-7-1-90       Added 7-3-40, 7-3-50       Rnmbrd 7-3-40       as 7-3-60 2008-1318 Road impact fees       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 17, Art. XV 2008-1321 Zoning A 16-2-20 B 16-10-20 C       Rpld/Rnctd 16-7-10 D 16-13-20, 16-14-40, 16-14-240, 16-15-20, 16-16-20, 16-17-20, 16-18-20, 16-19-10, 16-21-20, 16-22-20 E 16-20-20 F 16-17-20, 16-18-20, 16-19-10, 16-20-20, 16-21-20, 16-22-20 G 16-4-60 H 16-7-80 2008-1323 Park regulations       Rpld/Rnctd 11-8-10 2008-1324 Vehicles       Rpld/Rnctd 8-5-10 2008-1326 Sidewalks, curbs and gutters       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 11, Art. V 2008-1329 Subdivisions       Rpld/Rnctd 17-5-10 2008-1335 Beekeeping 7-5-10       Added Ch. 7, Art. VII 2008-1336 Sign regulations 1 16-2-20 2-4 16-9-70 5       Rpld/Rnctd 16-9-130 6       Added 16-9-135 2009-1339 Town sales tax 1 4-3-180 2009-1340 Electric franchise 1-3       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 5, Art. III 2009-1341 Sign regulations 1 16-9-130 2009-1342 Stormwater facilities 1, 2       Added Ch. 7, Art. VIII 2009-1344 Land use activities 1       Rpld/Rnctd 15-1-60 2       Rpld/Rnctd 15-2-50 3 16-2-20 4 16-5-20 5 17-4-20 6 17-5-20 7 17-6-30 8 17-7-50 9 17-8-30 10 17-9-20 11 17-4-20 12 17-5-20 13 17-6-30 14 17-7-50 15 17-8-30 16 17-9-30 2009-1355 Street design standards 1       Rpld/Rnctd 11-6-90 2       Rpld/Rnctd 17-10-20 3       Rpld/Rnctd 17-11-20 2009-1356 Road impact fees 17-15-40, 17-15-50 2009-1357 Golf cars 1       Added Ch. 8, Art. VI 2009-1360 Election signs 1-10       Added Ch. 16, Art. 9.5 2009-1361 Water discharge 1       Rpld/Rnctd 7-2-50 2       Added 7-2-60 Reso. 2009-93 Road impact fees 17-15-50 2010-1365 Residential developments advertising 1       Added 16-9-190 2010-1369 Parks and Recreation Advisory Board 1 2-6-10 2 2-6-20 2010-1370 Zoning regulations 1, 2 16-2-20 3 16-22-20 Subdivision regulations 4 17-4-20 5 17-7-40 Annexations 6 15-3-20 Subdivision regulations 7       Added 17-3-40 2010-1372 Oil, gas and mineral extraction 1, 2 16-2-20 3 16-13-20, 16-14-40, 16-14-240, 16-15-20, 16-16-20, 16-17-20, 16-18-20, 16-19-10, 16-21-20, 16-22-20 4 16-12-20 5 16-7-60 6       Rpld/Rnctd 16-7-70 7       Rpld/Rnctd 16-7-80 8       Added 16-7-90 9, 10 16-20-20 2010-1375 Business licenses       Added Chap. 6, Art. III 2010-1376 Mail Ballot Elections 1       Added Chap. 2, Art. XII 2010-1379 Appeals of building regulations 1       Added Chap. 18, Art. XIV 2 18-2-10, 18-3-10, 18-4-10, 18-4-20, 18-6-10, 18-8-10, 18-12-10 2010-1382 Notification requirements for land use 1       Added Chap. 16, Art. XXXI 2       Added 16-31-10 3       Rpld 15-3-60       Amended 15-1-30, 16-4-60, 16-7-90, 17-4-20 4       Rpld/Rnctd 16-5-10 5 16-6-70 6, 7 16-10-50 2010-1383 Supplementary district regulations       Added 16-10-70-16-10-90 2010-1385 Sign regulations 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-9-100 2       Rpld/Rnctd 16-9-110 2010-1386 Zoning definitions 1 16-2-20 Sign regulations 2 16-9-40 3 16-9-70 4       Rpld/Rnctd 16-9-80 5 16-9-130 6       Added 16-9-131 2010-1387 Keeping of chicken hens 1       Added Chap. 7, Art. IX 2       Rpld/Rnctd 7-5-30 2010-1388 Boards and commissions 1       Rpld/Rnctd 2-1-70 2010-1390 Building permit fees 1 16-4-30 2010-1392 Municipal Court 1       Rpld/Rnctd 2-4-10 2       Rpld/Rnctd 2-4-20 3       Rpld/Rnctd 2-4-70 4       Rpld/Rnctd 2-4-90 5       Added 2-4-100 6 1-4-20       Rpld/Rnctd 1-4-30 2-4-60       Rpld/Rnctd 5-5-50 8-1-60, 8-1-70 7       Added 2-4-110 2010-1393 Commercial Corridor design criteria       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 17, Art. XIII Reso. 2010-69 Road impact fees 17-15-50, 17-15-100 2010-1395 Conditional use grants 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-7-20 2       Rpld/Rnctd 16-20-20 3       Rpld/Rnctd 16-29-20 2011-1396 Sales and use tax       Rpld/Rnctd 4-3-180 2011-1397 Medical marijuana 2       Added Chap. 6, Art. IV 2011-1398 Dogs 1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 7, Art. VI 2011-1402 Corridor Activity Center 2       Added Chap. 17, Art. XIII, Div. 3 3       Rpld/Rnctd 17-13-40 2011-1403 Municipal Court       Rpld/Rnctd 2-4-110 2011-1404 Seasonal sales and farmers markets 1       Added 4-3-360 2 16-2-20 3, 4 16-17-20 5 16-24-30 6       Added Chap. 16, Art. XXXII 2011-1406 Zoning regulations 1 16-2-20 2       Rpld/Rnctd 16-7-10 3 16-9-80 4, 5 16-10-50 6, 7 16-12-20 8 16-13-20 9 16-14-20 10       Rpld/Rnctd 16-14-40 11       Rpld/Rnctd 16-14-220 12       Rpld/Rnctd 16-14-240 13, 14 16-15-20 15 16-16-20 16 16-17-20 17 16-18-20 18 16-19-10 19 16-20-20 20 16-21-20 21 16-24-40 22 16-25-40 2011-1407 Oil, gas and mineral extraction 1       Rpld/Rnctd 15-3-20 2       Rpld/Rnctd 15-3-30 3       Rpld/Rnctd 16-31-10 2011-1408 School site land dedication requirements 1       Rpld/Rnctd 17-14-230 2011-1410 Sign regulations 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-9-190 2011-1411 General penalty 1 1-4-20 2011-1412 Methamphetamine cost recovery 1       Added Chap. 7, Art. X 2011-1415 Park fees, dedications, reservations 1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. I 2011-1416 Administrative site plan review 1       Rpld/Rnctd 17-8-30 2011-1420 Zoning definitions 1, 2 16-2-20 Zoning easements 3       Added 16-4-45 Subdivision easements 4 17-2-10 2011-1421 Keeping of chicken hens 1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 7, Art. IX 2012-1423 Charter revisions 3 Chart. 3.1, 3.3, 3.5, 3.7, 4.7, 4.10, 5.10, 6.4, 11.5, 15.1, 16.3 2012-1425A Outdoor lighting standards 1       Added 16-10-100 2 16-8-30 3 16-10-60 2012-1429 Outdoor storage in industrial zones 1 16-2-20 2 16-20-20 3 16-21-20 2012-1430 Parks, Recreation and Culture Advisory Board 1 Chap. 2, Art. VI 2 2-1-70, 16-24-60, 18-1-50, 18-1-60 3, 4 2-6-60 2012-1433 Keeping of chicken hens 1       Rpld 7-9-60 3 7-9-40 2012-1434 Adhesive window advertising 1 16-2-20 2 16-9-100 2012-1435 Wireless telecommunications facilities 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-30-80 2012-1436 Conditional use grants 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-7-10 2 16-14-40 2012-1440 Special fee, I-25 - SH 392 interchange 2       Added Chap. 17, Art. XVI 2012-1441 Special fee 1 17-16-20 2012-1442 Liquor occupation tax renewal fees 6-1-70 2013-1444 Special fee, I-25 - SH 392 interchange 1 17-16-20 2013-1446 Mobility devices 1       Added Chap. 8, Art. VII 2013-1448 Marijuana enterprises 1       Added Chap. 10, Art. VIII 2013-1449 Private marijuana clubs 2       Added 10-4-210 2013-1450 Marijuana cultivation facilities 2       Added 10-4-220 2013-1451 Town-owned parks and open space areas 1       Added Chap. 10, Art. IX 2       Rpld/Rnctd 11-8-20 3 11-8-10 4       Added 11-8-110 5       Added 11-8-120 6       Rpld/Rnctd 8-5-20 7       Rpld/Rnctd 11-8-90 2013-1452 International Building Code 1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. II International Residential Code 2       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. III International Mechanical Code 3       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. IV International Fuel Gas Code 4       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. V International Plumbing Code 5       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. VI International Energy Conservation Code 6       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. VII International Property Maintenance Code 7       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. VIII International Existing Building Code 8       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. IX National Electrical Code 9       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. X Fire Zones 10       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. XI Building numbering 11       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. XII General provisions 12       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. XIII Reimbursement agreements 13       Added Chap. 17, Art. XVII 2013-1453 School district payments 1       Rpld/Rnctd 17-14-230 2013-1454 Building location requirements 16-11-50 2013-1456 Alcoholic beverages       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 6, Art. I 2013-1457 Development review procedures 1       Rpld/Rnctd 15-1-30 2       Rpld/Rnctd 15-2-30 3       Rpld/Rnctd 16-4-30 4       Rpld/Rnctd 16-4-40 5       Rpld/Rnctd 16-5-20 6       Rpld/Rnctd 17-4-20 7       Rpld/Rnctd 17-5-20 8       Rpld/Rnctd 17-6-30 9       Rpld/Rnctd 17-7-40 10       Rpld/Rnctd 17-7-50 11       Rpld/Rnctd 17-8-30 12       Rpld/Rnctd 17-9-20 13       Rpld/Rnctd 17-9-30 14       Rpld/Rnctd 17-9-40 2013-1458 Central Business CB District       Rpld/Rnctd 16-18-20 2013-1464 Flood damage prevention       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 16, Art. XXVII 2014-1466 Model Traffic Code 1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 8, Art. I 2014-1467 Elections 1       Added 2-12-20 2014-1470 Maximum fine 1 1-4-20 2 7-9-40 2014-1472 Maximum fine 1 1-4-20 2       Rpld/Rnctd 1-4-30 2014-1475 Accessory outdoor storage areas 16-21-20 Reso. 2014-37 Schedule of water and sewer plant investment fees 1, 2 13-1-10(a) 13-2-70(1) 2014-1476 Nuisance abatement 1       Rpld/Rnctd 7-1-40 2014-1481 Accessory dwelling units 1       Added 16-33-10-16-33-70 2 16-8-40 2014-1485 Internet sweepstakes facilities 1       Added Chap. 10, Art. 10, 10-10-10-10-10-60 2014-1487 Large retail facilities and large entertainment facilities 1 17-13-210 2 17-13-280(2) 3 17-13-320(1) 2014-1488 Signs 1       Added 16-9-60(f) 2 16-9-70(b) 2015-1494 Oil and gas site impact fee 1 17-15-50(c) 2015-1496 Basement window wells 1 18-3-10(22) 2015-1498 Windsor Community Recreation Center Expansion Fund 1       Added 4-2-20(9) Imposition of sales tax 2       Rpld/Rnctd 4-3-110 Imposition of use tax 3       Rpld/Rnctd 4-3-120 2015-1501 Parking requirements 16-10-30 2015-1502 Minimum standards for appearance of building exteriors 16-11-70 2015-1503 Regulation of mobile food vending 1       Added 16-10-110 2 16-17-20 3 16-18-20 4 16-19-20 5 16-20-20 6 16-21-20 7 16-23-40 8 16-24-30 Business licenses 9       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 6, Art. III, 
6-3-10-6-3-110 2015-1504 Metropolitan District approvals 1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 19, Art. I, 
19-1-10-19-1-110 2015-1506 Municipal mail ballot elections       Rpld Chap. 2, Art. XII, 
2-12-10, 2-12-20 2015-1507 Minimum standards governing the installation of wiring apparatus and equipment for electric light, heat, and power       Rpld/Rnctd 18-10-10 2015-1508 Exceptions for building permit issuance 18-3-10(3) 2015-1509 Election and ideological signs       Rpld Chap. 16, Art. 9.5, 16-9.5-10-16-9.5-100 2015-1510 Permit requirements for temporary advertising intended to promote residential development       Rpld 16-9-190 2015-1512 Weld County Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study       Rpld 16-27-70       Added 16-27-70 2015-1515 Snow and ice removal       Rpld/Rnctd 11-7-70 2016-1517 Road impact fees       Rpld/Rnctd 17-15-40 17-15-50(a), (b) 17-15-90(b)(3) 2016-1518 Home occupations involving tutoring or instruction 16-10-20(1)(i)       Added 16-7-85 2016-1524 Authorizes local licensing authority to assign administrative functions to town clerk 1, 2       Rpld/Rnctd 6-1-10, 6-1-20 3       Rpld/Rnctd 6-1-110 2016-1525 Parking regulations 1       Rpld 8-2-20       Rpld 8-2-40 2       Rpld/Rnctd 8-2-30 2016-1526 Enhanced design standards within the Corridor Activity Center 1       Rpld/Rnctd 17-13-410 2       Rpld/Rnctd 17-13-430 3       Added 17-13-440(5)-(11) 2016-1527 Grant of water rights required 1       Rpld/Rnctd 13-2-80 2016-93(Res.) Road impact fees 17-15-50(c)(1) 2017-1532 Amending various parts of the Code to update definitions, titles of positions, and other archaic language 1       Rpld/Rnctd 1-3-100 2 2-1-70(a)(1) 3       Rpld/Rnctd 2-3-20 4 2-4-60(a) 5       Rpld/Rnctd 2-4-70 6       Rpld/Rnctd 2-4-80 7 2-6-30(b) 8 2-8-20(b) 9       Rpld/Rnctd 2-11-30 9       Rpld/Rnctd 4-2-30 10       Rpld/Rnctd 5-5-30 11       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 6(title) 12 6-3-10-6-3-110 13       Rpld/Rnctd 8-3-10 14       Rpld/Rnctd 8-3-50 15 13-1-40(a), (b) 2017-1533 Wild or exotic animals       Rpld/Rnctd 7-5-10-7-5-30 2017-1534 Sales and use tax credits, rebates and waivers 1       Added 4-6-10-4-6-80 2017-1538 Tax measures 1 4-3-190(2) 2017-1539 Permitted uses within the Corridor Activity Center 1       Rpld/Rnctd 17-13-420 2       Added 17-13-480 2017-1540 Special events permits 1 6-1-10(2)a. 2017-1541 Road impact fees 1       Rpld 17-15-10-17-15-130       Added 17-15-10-17-15-110 2017-1542 Entertainment Districts 1       Added 6-5-10-6-5-70 2017-1543 Storm drainage 1       Rpld 13-3-10-13-3-130       Added 13-3-10-13-3-130 2017-1553 Land use post-approval document submittal requirements 1       Rpld/Rnctd 15-1-60       Rpld/Rnctd 15-2-50 2 16-5-20(d)(3) 3 17-4-20(e)(1)g. 17-5-20(b)(5) 17-6-30(c)(1) 17-7-50(a)(7) 17-8-30(a)(6) 17-9-20(8) 2018-89 Road impact fees 17-15-50(c)(1) 2018-1555 Service plans 1       Rpld/Rnctd 19-1-20 2018-1561 Expansion of the Windsor Community Recreation Center 1       Rpld/Rnctd 4-3-350 2       Rpld/Rnctd 4-3-490 2018-1562 Definitions 1       Rpld/Rnctd 4-3-30 2 4-3-180(a) 2018-1563 Parks, open space, and trail development 1       Rpld 18-1-10-18-1-140 2       Added 17-18-10-17-18-120 2018-1565 Site plan review procedure 1       Rpld/Rnctd 17-9-20 2 17-8-30(a)(2) 2018-1569 Administrative approvals of minor variances 1       Rpld/Rnctd 16-6-90 2018-1568 Parking ratios for multifamily residential developments 1, 2 16-10-30(a)(6), (7) 2018-1572 Storage and display of business-related items 1       Added 16-19-10(b)(3)-(5) 2018-1574 Standards for landscaping in developed areas 1       Added 17-13-501-17-13-503 2018-1575 Public consumption of alcohol 1       Added 10-11-10, 10-11-20 2018-1576 Alcohol regulations 1       Rpld/Rnctd 6-1-10 2       Rpld/Rnctd 6-1-20 3       Rpld/Rnctd 6-1-50 4       Rpld 6-1-60-6-1-100 5       Rpld 6-1-110       Added 6-1-60 2018-1579 Establishing procedures for entry of judgements and collections       Added 1-4-50 2018-1580 Vagrancy 1 10-4-110 2019-1586 Municipal separate storm sewer system regulations 1       Added 13-5-10-13-5-170 2019-1587 Calculating land dedication requirements and cash in lieu payments 1 17-14-30 2019-1588 Business licenses 1 4-3-310(h),(i) 2       Rpld/Rnctd 4-3-320 3 6-3-20  
