10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 1/313
PREFACE
The City Code of the City of Yuma, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1983, has been kept current
by regular supplementation. In 1994, Sterling Codifiers began providing supplement service for the City Code.
This City Code of the City of Yuma, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2-2019,
passed March 5, 2019. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City
Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain
whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ARTICLE I
NAME - BOUNDARIES
The municipal corporation heretofore existing as a town in the county of Yuma, state of Colorado, historically
known as the town of Yuma, shall remain and continue as a body politic and corporate and under this charter
shall be known as "city of Yuma" (hereinafter "city") with boundaries the same as presently established until
changed in a manner authorized by law. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE II
MUNICIPAL POWERS
Section 2.1. Rights And Liabilities:
By the name of the city of Yuma, the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession, shall own,
possess, and hold all property, real and personal, heretofore owned, possessed and held by the town of
Yuma, and does assume and shall manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall
succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all benefits and does assume and shall pay all
bonds, obligations and indebtedness of said town of Yuma; may, by the name of the city of Yuma, sue and
defend, plead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters and proceedings; may purchase,
receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of, real and personal property; may have and use a common
seal and alter the same at pleasure. (1981 Charter)
Section 2.2. Powers:
The city shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all power possible for a city to
have under the constitution of the state of Colorado. The city shall also have all powers that now or
hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the laws of the state of Colorado, and the enumeration of
particular powers in this charter is not exclusive of others. All such powers shall be exercised in the manner
prescribed in this charter or, if not provided for herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance of
the council of the city. (1981 Charter)
Section 2.3. Present Ordinances:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 2/313
All ordinances of the city of Yuma in force at the time this charter goes into effect shall continue in force
except insofar as they may conflict with the provisions of this charter or shall be amended or repealed by
ordinances enacted under the authority of this charter. (1981 Charter)
Section 2.4. Form Of Government:
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as "council-manager government".
Pursuant to the chapter provisions and subject only to limitations imposed by the state constitution and by
this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective mayor and elective council, hereinafter
referred to as "the council". The council shall determine policies, enact local legislation, adopt budgets and
appoint the city manager. The city manager shall execute the laws and administer the city government. All
powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter. If the manner be not so
prescribed, then they shall be exercised as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, or by other
applicable law. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE III
ELECTIONS
Section 3.1. Colorado Municipal Election Laws Adopted:
City elections shall be governed by the Colorado municipal election laws as now existing or hereafter
amended or modified, except as otherwise provided by this charter, or by ordinance hereafter enacted.
(1981 Charter)
Section 3.2. Nonpartisan Elections:
All special and regular elections shall be nonpartisan. No candidate for any municipal office shall run under
any party label. (1981 Charter)
Section 3.3. Municipal Elections:
A regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April 1982, and biennially thereafter. Any
special municipal election may be called by resolution or ordinance of the council at least thirty two (32)
days in advance of such election. The resolution or ordinance calling a special municipal election shall set
forth the purpose or purposes of such election. Polling places for all municipal elections shall be open from
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on election day. (1981 Charter)
Section 3.4. Election Precincts:
The city shall constitute one voting precinct. Provided that the council may, by resolution or ordinance, for
the convenience of voters, establish additional precincts forty five (45) days or more prior to any election.
The precincts so established by ordinance shall remain for subsequent elections until otherwise provided by
ordinance. (1981 Charter)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 3/313
Section 3.5. Recall:
Any elected officer of the city may be recalled at any time after six (6) months in office by the electors
entitled to vote for a successor of such incumbent as provided for in article XXI of the state of Colorado
constitution. Consistent with the constitution and this charter, the council may provide by ordinance for
further recall procedures. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE IV
COUNCIL
Section 4.1. The Council:
The city shall be governed by a council of six (6) councilmen and one mayor. All councilmen and the mayor
shall be nominated and elected at large from the entire city. The city council may, however, by ordinance,
provide that the council in whole or in part shall be elected from wards so long as said wards are equally
apportioned. (1981 Charter)
Section 4.2. Terms Of Office:
The terms of office for councilmen shall be four (4) years as hereinafter provided. The council as constituted
on the effective date of this charter shall continue as follows:
(a) The councilmen previously elected shall continue throughout their elected terms;
(b) In the regular municipal election to be held in 1982, the three candidates receiving the highest number
of votes shall be elected for four (4) year terms.
(c) In the regular municipal election to be held in 1984 and thereafter the three (3) candidates receiving
the highest number of votes shall be elected for four (4) year terms. (1981 Charter)
Section 4.3. Mayor:
The mayor shall be elected at large from the entire city for a term of four (4) years. In the regular municipal
election to be held in April, 1984, and every four (4) years thereafter, the mayoral candidate receiving the
highest number of votes shall be elected mayor.
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall exercise such powers and perform such other
duties as are or may be conferred and imposed upon him by this charter or by ordinance or other applicable
law. He shall have all of the powers, rights, and privileges of a council member including the right to vote.
He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial and legal purposes and he
shall execute and authenticate legal instruments requiring his signature as such official. (1981 Charter)
Section 4.4. Mayor Pro Tem:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 4/313
The mayor pro tem shall be elected by a majority vote of the council at the first organizational meeting after
the election and shall serve at the pleasure of the council.
In the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall perform all duties and have all powers of
the mayor. (1981 Charter)
Section 4.5. Powers Of Council:
The council shall be the legislative and governing body of the city and shall exercise, except as otherwise
provided in this charter, all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city and shall adopt such laws,
ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper. (1981 Charter)
Section 4.6. Qualifications:
Each councilman and the mayor, when nominated and elected shall be an elector of the city, a citizen of the
United States, and shall have resided in the city for one year immediately preceding such election.
No councilman nor the mayor shall be a salaried employee of the city during his term of office. The council
shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members. (1981 Charter)
Section 4.7. Compensation:
The members of the council shall receive such compensation and the mayor such additional compensation
as the council shall prescribe by ordinance, provided, however, that they shall neither increase nor decrease
the compensation of any member during his term of office. The mayor and councilmen may, upon order of
the council, be paid their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of
office. (1981 Charter)
Section 4.8. Vacancies:
(a) A councilman or the mayor shall continue to hold his office until his successor is duly qualified.
(b) A council seat or the mayor's office shall become vacant whenever he is recalled, dies, becomes
incapacitated, resigns, refuses to serve, is convicted of a felony, or ceases to be a resident of the city or
ward, if elected by ward. A council seat or the mayor's office shall further become vacant upon failure to
attend three (3) consecutive regular council meetings unless council for good cause votes to retain him.
(c) Within a reasonable time after a vacancy occurs, the council shall choose, by majority vote, a duly
qualified person to fill such vacancy. He shall serve only until the next regular municipal election, at which
time the electors shall elect a councilman to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. The councilman
candidates receiving the fourth, fifth, and sixth highest number of votes, depending on the number of
vacancies to be filled, shall serve the remainder of any unexpired terms. If three (3) or more vacancies exist
simultaneously, the remaining council members shall, at the next regular meeting of the council, call a
special election to fill such vacancies, provided there will not be a regular municipal election within ninety
(90) days and provided that their successors have not previously been elected.
(d) If a vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall assume the office of mayor until
the next regular municipal election. (1981 Charter)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 5/313
Section 4.9. Oath Of Office:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, every councilman, the mayor, city clerk, police chief, city
manager, judge and city attorney(s) shall take, subscribe before, and file with the city clerk, an oath or
affirmation that he will support the constitution of the United States, the constitution of the state of Colorado,
this charter and the ordinances of the city, and will faithfully perform the duties of the office. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE V
COUNCIL PROCEDURE
Section 5.1. Regular Meetings:
The council shall meet regularly at least once each month at a day and hour to be fixed by the rules of
council. The council shall determine the rules of procedure governing meetings. The first meeting following
each regular municipal election shall be the organizational meeting. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.2. Special Meetings:
Special meetings shall be called by the city clerk at the request of the mayor, city manager, or of any two (2)
members of the council, with notice communicated to each member of the council. Notice of such meeting
shall be posted in a public place. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.3. Business At Special Meetings:
No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the council unless it has been stated in the notice
of such meeting. Any ordinance approved or adopted at such meeting shall require five (5) affirmative votes.
(1981 Charter)
Section 5.4. Quorum Adjournment Of Meeting:
A majority of the members of the council in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business at all council meetings, but in the absence of a quorum, a lesser number may adjourn any meeting
to a later time or date. In the absence of all members, the city clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer
than one week. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.5. Meetings To Be Public:
All regular and special meetings of the council shall be open to the public, and citizens shall have a
reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules and regulations as the council may prescribe. Any
other council sessions may be opened to the public in accordance with the Colorado statutes and case law
as they relate to municipalities. (1981 Charter)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 6/313
Section 5.6. Council Acts:
The council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. All legislative enactments shall be in the form
of ordinances. All other actions, except as herein provided, may be in the form of resolutions or motions. A
true copy of every ordinance and resolution as hereafter adopted shall be numbered and recorded in the
official records of the city. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.7. Voting:
The vote by "yes" and "no" shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions, and entered
upon the minutes of the council proceedings. Every ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of the
majority of entire council for final adoption. Resolutions and motions shall require the affirmative vote of a
majority of the members present. No member of the council shall vote on any question on which he has a
substantial personal or financial interest, as determined by a majority of the council, other than the common
public interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct, and in said instances the members shall
disclose this interest to the council. On all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his
name is called. Any member refusing to vote except when not so required by this paragraph shall be guilty
of misconduct in office. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.8. Action By Ordinance Required:
In addition to such acts of the council as are required by other provisions of this charter to be by ordinance,
every act making an appropriation, creating an indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money for a period
exceeding one year, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is
imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property, shall be by ordinance. Provided,
however, this section shall not apply to the budget adoption. All ordinances shall be confined to one subject
except repealing ordinances. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.9. Forms Of Ordinance:
Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall
be: BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF YUMA, COLORADO. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.10. Procedure:
Except for emergency ordinances, the following procedure for enactment of ordinances shall be followed:
(a) The ordinance shall be introduced at any regular meeting of the council by any member thereof.
(b) The ordinance shall be read in full or, in cases where copies of the ordinance are available to the
council and to those persons in attendance at said council meeting, said ordinance may be read by title
only.
(c) After the first reading of the ordinance, the same shall be approved or rejected by a vote of the council.
(d) If the ordinance is approved on first reading, it shall be published in full unless otherwise provided
herein. The council shall set a day, hour and place at which council shall hold a public hearing on the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 7/313
ordinance and notice of said day, hour and place shall be included in the first publication.
(e) The ordinance shall be introduced at council a second time, at a regular or special meeting not earlier
than four (4) days after first publication, for final adoption, rejection, or other action as may be taken by
vote of the council. This meeting may be the same meeting at which the public hearing on the ordinance
is held. The ordinance may be amended before final adoption by vote of the council.
(f) Except as otherwise provided herein, upon final adoption of an ordinance, it shall be published either
by title or in full as the council may determine. If an ordinance is amended prior to final adoption, only the
amended section need be published in full.
(g) Whenever an ordinance shall be published by reference or by title, the publication shall contain a
notice to the public that copies of the proposed ordinance are available at the office of the city clerk. The
publication of any ordinance by reference or by title as provided herein must set forth in full any penalty
clause contained in said ordinance. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.11. Emergency Ordinances:
Emergency ordinances for the preservation of public property, health, welfare, peace, or safety, shall require
five (5) affirmative votes. The facts showing such urgency and need shall be specifically stated in the
measure itself. No ordinance making a grant of any special privilege, levying taxes, or fixing rates charged
by any city-owned utility shall be passed as an emergency measure. An ordinance authorizing a municipal
borrowing in accordance with article XI of this charter which merely provides for the levying of a tax or which
makes covenants with respect to the levy or imposition of a tax to secure the repayment of such a borrowing
shall not be deemed an ordinance levying taxes within the meaning of the preceding sentence. An
emergency ordinance shall require a passage at one (1) meeting of the council. However, neither a public
hearing nor a first publication as provided in section 5.10 shall be required. An emergency ordinance shall
take effect upon final adoption. One publication shall be required within ten (10) days after adoption, or as
soon thereafter as possible. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.12. Codification:
The council shall cause the ordinances to be codified at least every five years and thereafter maintained in
current form; revisions to the codes to be accomplished by reference as provided in section 5.13. (Ord. 1-
1992 §A, 1992: 1981 Charter)
Section 5.13. Codes:
Standard codes, promulgated by the federal government, the state of Colorado, or by any agency of either
of them, or by any municipality within the state of Colorado, or by recognized trade or professional
organizations, or amendments or revisions thereof, may be adopted with or without amendment by
reference thereto in an enacting ordinance and without reading or publishing such codes in full. Such
primary code, thus adopted, may in turn adopt by reference, in whole or in part, any secondary codes
described therein. The enactment of ordinances adopting any said code or codes shall be as provided in
section 5.10 herein. The publication thereof shall advise that copies and amendments are available for
inspection at the office of the city clerk. Any penalty clause in said codes may be adopted only if set forth in
full in the adopting ordinance, and the same shall be published along with the adopting ordinance or the title
thereof. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.14. Disposition Of Ordinances:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 8/313
A true copy of every ordinance, as adopted by council, shall be numbered and recorded in the official
records of the city. Its adoption and publication shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor, or
mayor pro tem, the city clerk, and by the certificate of publication. A true copy of every ordinance, as
adopted by the vote of the electors of the city, shall be separately numbered and recorded commencing with
people's ordinance no. 1. (1981 Charter)
Section 5.15. Public Records:
All public records of the city of Yuma shall be open for inspection by any person at reasonable times in
accordance with applicable law. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE VI
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 6.1. General Authority:
The electors of the city shall have the rights of initiative and referendum and the same shall be instituted
and conducted consistent with the provisions of the Colorado constitution and statutes. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE VII
CITY ADMINISTRATION
Section 7.1. City Manager:
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The council, by a majority
vote, shall appoint a city manager within a reasonable time whenever a vacancy exists in such position. Such
appointment shall be without definite term and shall be at a salary to be fixed from time to time by the council.
The manager shall be appointed without regard to any consideration other than his fitness, competency,
training and experience in professional urban administration. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a
resident of the city or state. No member of the council shall be appointed manager while he is in office.
The council, at a regular or special meeting, may, upon the vote of the majority of the entire council, remove
the city manager from office. Upon such termination the council may, in its discretion, provide termination
pay. (1981 Charter)
Section 7.2. Powers And Duties Of Manager:
The manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city placed
in his charge, and to that end he shall have the power and duties and be required to:
(a) Be responsible for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the city not reserved within this
charter for the police chief, and or department of police;
(b) Hire, suspend, transfer and remove any city employees with the exception of the police chief,
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 9/313
employees of the department of police, city clerk, and treasurer;
(c) Make appointments on the basis of executive and administrative ability and of the training and
experience of such appointees in the work which they are to perform;
(d) Cause a proposed budget to be prepared annually and submitted to the council, and be responsible
for the administration of the budget after its adoption;
(e) Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on finances and
administrative activities of the city for the preceding year and, upon request of the council, make written or
verbal reports at any time concerning the affairs of the city under his supervision;
(f) Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such
recommendations to the council for adoption as he may deem necessary or expedient;
(g) Exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative departments, and recommend
to the council any proposal he thinks advisable to establish, consolidate or abolish administrative
departments;
(h) Be responsible for the enforcement of all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city in any
contract or public utility franchise, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, report the same to council
for such action and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same;
(i) Attend council meetings and participate in discussions with the council in an advisory capacity;
(j) Establish a system of accounting and auditing for the city which shall reflect, in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, the financial condition and financial operation of the city;
(k) Provide for engineering, architectural, maintenance and construction services required by the city;
(l) Perform other such duties as may be prescribed by this charter or by ordinance or by other applicable
law or required of him by council which are not inconsistent with this charter. (Ord. 1-1992 §B, 1992: 1981
Charter)
Section 7.3. Relationship Of Council To Administrative Service:
Neither the council, its members, the mayor, nor any council committee shall dictate the appointment to or
removal of any person from office by the city manager except as otherwise provided in this charter, or in any
way interfere with the city manager or other city officer to prevent him from exercising his judgment in the
appointment, employment or discharge of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for
the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members, the mayor, and any council committee, shall deal with
the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council, its members, the mayor,
nor any council committee thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager. (1981
Charter)
Section 7.4. City Clerk:
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall be custodian of the city seal and who shall keep a journal
of council proceedings and record in full all ordinances, motions and resolutions. The city clerk shall have
power to administer oaths and take acknowledgments under seal of the city, and shall perform such other
duties as required by this charter or by the city manager. The city clerk may be dismissed by majority vote
by the entire council. (Ord. 1-1992 §C, 1992: 1981 Charter)
Section 7.5. City Treasurer:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 10/313
City council shall appoint the city treasurer who also may serve as city clerk. City treasurer, under the
direction of the city manager, shall have charge of the financial records of the city and shall collect, receive
and disburse all monies belonging to the city, and shall have all other duties required to administer properly
the financial affairs of the city. The city treasurer may be dismissed by majority vote by the entire council.
(Ord. 1-1992 §D, 1992: 1981 Charter)
Section 7.6. Departments Created:
The administrative functions of the city shall be performed by the department existing at the time this charter
is adopted, and such other departments as may be hereafter established. The council may consolidate or
abolish any of the said departments, whether set forth by this charter or created. (1981 Charter)
Section 7.7. Bonding Of Employees:
All city officials and employees dealing directly with municipal funds shall post bond in an amount and under
such conditions as required by the council, and at the expense of the city. (1981 Charter)
Section 7.8. Department Of Police:
There shall be a Yuma department of police which shall be separate and distinct from all other departments
of the city, however, the department of police shall be included in the general budgetary process as would
any other department within the city of Yuma pursuant to this charter.
(a) The chief of police shall be appointed by majority vote of the entire council and will serve at the
pleasure of the council and may be dismissed by majority vote of the entire council. If for any reason the
position of the chief of police should become vacant the council shall appoint an existing police officer to
serve as temporary chief of police until a successor is appointed. It shall be the duty of the police
committee within the council to make recommendations to the entire council in its selection of the chief of
police.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to be in direct command of the department of police
and shall be responsible for the selection or dismissal of employees of said department of police. The
chief of police shall assign all members of the department to their respective posts, shifts, details or
duties. The chief of police shall make rules and regulations affecting the department and shall be in
conformity with the ordinances and resolutions of the city where such ordinances and resolutions concern
the department of police. The chief of police shall be charged with the care and custody of all property
used by the department and shall report any deficiencies of the same to the city manager and city council
when necessary.
(c) The department of police shall be responsible for the apprehension of criminals, the prevention of
crime, the investigation of suspected or ascertained criminal activity, for the preservation of the public
peace, for the protection of the rights and property of persons, for the enforcement of ordinances of the
city which are directed toward the protection of public peace, morals, and welfare, for the control of
animals within the city, and the regulation of vehicles and traffic on all roadways and alleys within the city
and for the service of municipal summonses, and complaints within the city and for the performance of all
functions directed at the preservation of the public's safety that the city council may prescribe by
ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 1-1992 §E, 1992: 1981 Charter)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 11/313
ARTICLE VIII
LEGAL AND JUDICIARY
Section 8.1. City Attorney:
The council shall appoint a city attorney(s) to serve at the pleasure of the council. He shall be an attorneyat-
law admitted to practice in Colorado. The city attorney shall be the legal representative of the city and he
shall advise the council and city officials in matters relating to their official powers and duties and perform
such other duties as the council may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. The council may provide the city
attorney such assistants as the council may deem necessary, and may upon its own motion or upon request
of the city attorney in special cases employ special counsel to serve under the direction of the city council.
Council shall establish compensation for the city attorney, his assistants, and special counsel. (1981
Charter)
Section 8.2. Judiciary:
(a) Presiding Municipal Judge. There shall be a municipal court vested with exclusive original jurisdiction of
all cases arising under the ordinances of the city and as may be conferred by law. The municipal court shall
be presided over and its functions exercised by a judge, appointed by the council for a specified term of two
(2) years. The council may, when his appointment for term of office expires, reappoint the municipal judge.
Any vacancy in the office of municipal judge shall be filled by appointment by the council for the remainder
of the unexpired term.
(b) Deputy Judges. Council may appoint one or more deputy judges as it deems necessary. The deputy
municipal judges shall all have the powers of the municipal judge when called upon to act by the municipal
judge or council. In the event that more than one municipal judge is appointed, the council shall designate a
presiding municipal judge, who shall serve in his capacity during the term for which he was appointed. The
deputy municipal judges shall serve at the pleasure of the council.
(c) Compensation. The municipal judge shall receive a fixed salary or compensation set by the council,
which shall not be increased or decreased during his term of office. The deputy municipal judges may
receive such compensation for services rendered as council may determine.
(d) Removal. Any municipal judge may be removed during his term of office only for cause. A judge may be
removed by a majority vote of the council for cause if:
1) He is found guilty of a felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude; or
2) He has wilfully or persistently failed to perform his duties; or
3) He has a disability which interferes with the performance of his duties which is, or is likely to become,
of permanent character. (1981 Charter)
Section 8.3. Court Of Record:
The municipal court shall meet all the requirements as a court of record and the city clerk shall be
responsible for the maintenance and preservation of the records of the municipal court. (Ord. 1-1992 §F,
1992: 1981 Charter)
ARTICLE IX
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 12/313
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 9.1. Existing Boards And Commissions:
All existing boards and commissions shall continue as established by ordinance or resolution, except as
otherwise provided in this charter. (1981 Charter)
Section 9.2. Vacancy:
Whenever a vacancy occurs on any board or commission, the council shall cause public notice of such
vacancy to be made and encourage qualified volunteers to seek appointment to such board or commission.
The council shall then make the appointment to fill such vacancy. (1981 Charter)
Section 9.3. Right To Establish:
In addition to those boards and commissions heretofore created by ordinance or this charter, council shall
have the power and authority to create boards and commissions, including advisory and appeal boards. All
permanent boards and commissions, including advisory and appeal boards, shall be created by ordinance,
which shall set forth the number of members, and the powers and duties delegated to such boards and
commissions. Members shall be residents and electors of the city. Initial appointments by the council to any
board or commission shall specify the term of office of its members in order to achieve overlapping tenure.
All members shall be subject to removal by the council. Each board and commission shall elect its own
chairman and vice chairman from among its members. Each board and commission shall operate in
accordance with its own rules of procedure and its meetings shall be open to the public. Any board or
commission created under this article which is not required by statute or this charter may be abolished by
the council. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE X
CITY FINANCES
Section 10.1. Fiscal Year:
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on January 1, or on such date each year as shall be fixed by the
council. (1981 Charter)
Section 10.2. Provision For Tax System:
The council may, by ordinance, provide a system for the assessment, levy and collection of all city taxes,
not inconsistent with this charter. (1981 Charter)
Section 10.3. Budget:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 13/313
The city manager shall annually prepare and submit to the council a budget and accompanying message.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year
and, except as required by law or this charter, shall be in such form as the manager deems desirable or the
council may require. In organizing the budget, the manager shall utilize the most feasible combination of
expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or activity, and object.
It shall begin with a clear, general summary of its contents and shall be so arranged as to show comparative
figures for income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. (1981 Charter)
Section 10.4. Capital Program:
The manager, with such assistance as he may desire or the council may direct, shall prepare and submit to
the council a long-range capital program with the submission of his recommended budget. (1981 Charter)
Section 10.5. Budget Hearing:
A public hearing on the proposed budget and proposed capital program shall be held by council before the
final adoption of the same. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be posted, and such notice
shall be published at least one (1) time, at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing, and the notice shall
state that the proposed budget and capital program are on file in the office of the city clerk. (1981 Charter)
Section 10.6. Council Amendments:
After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the
budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or
amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit. (1981
Charter)
Section 10.7. Budget Adoption:
The council shall adopt the budget by ordinance on or before the final day established by law for the
certification of the ensuing year's tax levy to the county. If it fails to adopt the budget by the first day of the
year, the amounts appropriated for the current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted
for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such
time as the council adopts the budget for the ensuing year. (1981 Charter)
Section 10.8. Appropriations:
Adoption of the budget by council shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein for
expenditures from the funds indicated; however, funds may be transferred at any time during the year by
ordinance of the council pursuant to 10.12(d) of this charter. The proceeds of any municipal borrowing
authorized by article XI of this charter shall not be subject to any requirement of prior budgeting or
appropriation as a condition to their expenditure. The amount necessary to repay any such municipal
borrowing (including interest thereon) need not be budgeted or appropriated in full in the year in which the
borrowing occurs; however, the amounts necessary to pay debt service shall (except to the extent they may
be payable from legally available funds in the first year) be budgeted and appropriated on an annual basis,
provided that no failure to budget and appropriate such annual debt service amounts shall affect the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 14/313
enforceability of any covenant of the city to make such payments. (Ord. 1-1992 §G, 1992: 1981 Charter)
Section 10.9. Property Tax Levy:
Council shall cause the property tax to be certified to the county for collection as required by law. (1981
Charter)
Section 10.10. Public Records:
Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public records and shall be made
available to the public in the municipal building. (1981 Charter)
Section 10.11. Contingencies:
The budget may include an item for contingencies. Except in those cases where there is no logical account
to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to contingencies; but
instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for contingencies shall be transferred to the proper account,
and the expenditure charged to such account. No such transfer shall be made without the express approval
of the council, and then only for expenditures which could not readily be foreseen at the time the budget
was adopted. (1981 Charter)
Section 10.12. Amendments After Adoption:
(a) Supplemental Appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, the manager certifies that there are available for
appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the council by ordinance may make
supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess.
(b) Emergency Appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public
peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency
ordinance in accordance with the provisions of section 5.11. To the extent that there are no available
unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the council may by emergency ordinance authorize
the issuance of emergency notes as provided in article XI of this charter.
(c) Reduction Of Appropriations. If, at any time during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the manager
that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the
council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action taken by him, and his
recommendation as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take such further action as it
deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by resolution reduce one or
more appropriations. (1981 Charter)
(d) Transfer Of Appropriations. Anytime during the fiscal year, the manager may transfer part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office, agency, and upon
request of the manager or by council's own initiative the council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, agency, or object to another.
(e) Limitation - Effective Date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred. No
appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the
amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental appropriations, emergency appropriations,
and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately
upon adoption. (Ord. 1-1992 §H, 1992: 1981 Charter)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 15/313
Section 10.13. Independent Audit:
An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts at least annually and more frequently if deemed
necessary by the council. Such audit shall be made by certified public accountants selected by the council
who shall complete the audit within six (6) months' time of the close of the fiscal year. Copies of such audit
shall be made available for public inspection at the municipal building. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE XI
MUNICIPAL BORROWING
Section 11.1. Forms Of Borrowing:
The city may borrow money and issue the following securities to evidence such borrowing:
(a) Short-term notes;
(b) Emergency notes;
(c) General obligation bonds;
(d) Revenue bonds;
(e) Industrial development revenue bonds;
(f) Special assessment bonds;
(g) Refunding bonds;
(h) Lease-purchase or installment-purchase agreements;
(i) Other obligations authorized to cities by Colorado statute.
Each type of obligation shall be issued by council in the name of the city pursuant to an ordinance or
resolution, and may be issued without an election except as otherwise provided in this article XI. The council
may in its discretion adopt an ordinance or resolution not inconsistent with the provisions of this article XI
specifying the terms, conditions, and other details upon which any such type of obligation may be issued.
(1981 Charter)
Section 11.2. Short Term Notes:
Short term notes may be secured in any manner determined by council, including by a pledge of the full
faith and credit and the general taxing power of the city. Short term notes shall mature and become payable
within twelve (12) months of their date of issue. (1981 Charter)
Section 11.3. Emergency Notes:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 16/313
Emergency notes may be issued upon the circumstances specified in subsection 10.12(b) of this charter
and may be secured in any manner determined by council, including a pledge of the full faith and credit and
the general taxing power of the city. Emergency notes may be renewed from time to time as the needs of
the city require; however, emergency notes and any renewed notes shall mature and be paid no later than
the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding the year in which the emergency appropriation was made.
(1981 Charter)
Section 11.4. General Obligation Bonds:
Except for obligations authorized in sections 11.2, 11.3, and 11.9 of this charter, or as provided in this
section below, no bonds or other obligations to which the full faith and credit of the city is pledged or which
are payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of general property taxes shall be issued until the question
of their issuance shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the city at a regular or special
election and approved by a majority of those voting thereon. Such election shall be called pursuant to a
resolution or ordinance, which shall include:
1. The bond question to be submitted;
2. The amount of the total valuation for assessment of the taxable property within the city as shown by the
last assessment thereof.
3. The amount of the city's total general obligation bonded indebtedness outstanding and unrefunded as
of the date of the resolution or ordinance and the amount thereof, assuming the issuance of the proposed
bonds. (1981 Charter)
Section 11.5. Revenue Bonds:
Revenue bonds issued for the purpose of purchasing, equipping, constructing, condemning, or otherwise
acquiring, extending, or improving any municipal utility system or other income producing project may be
made payable solely from the net revenues derived from the operation of such system or project. Any two or
more of such systems or projects may be combined, operated and maintained jointly, in which case such
revenue bonds shall be made payable out of the net revenue derived from the operation of the joint
enterprise. Neither a failure of the city historically to have maintained a special fund for any such existing
municipal utility system or other income producing project nor a previous commingling of revenues derived
from the operation thereof with the general fund of the city shall prevent a pledge of such revenues from the
payment of revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section, provided that such a special fund is created prior
to or contemporaneously with the issuance of such revenue bonds and thereafter maintained separate and
apart from the general fund.
Revenue bonds issued for any public purpose of the city (including those specified in the preceding
paragraph) may be made payable solely from the proceeds of any tax, other than a general ad valorem tax,
imposed by the city or the state of Colorado or any agency thereof. Neither a failure of the city historically to
have maintained special funds into which the proceeds of such existing taxes are deposited nor a previous
commingling of such tax proceeds with the general fund of the city shall prevent a pledge of such revenues
for the payment of revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section, provided that such special funds are
created prior to or contemporaneously with the issuance of such revenue bonds and thereafter maintained
separate and apart from the general fund.
Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent the issuance of revenue bonds pursuant to this section
for any of the purposes specified in the first paragraph of this section which are payable from both system or
project revenues and the proceeds of the taxes herein specified. Revenue bonds issued pursuant to this
section may also be secured by a pledge of the full faith and credit of the city or of general property taxes;
no such bonds shall be issued until the question of their issuance shall be approved at an election held as
required by section 11.4 of this charter. Revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section may also be secured
by a pledge of governmental grants received or to be received from the United States of America or any
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 17/313
agency thereof, or from the state of Colorado or any agency thereof, or by a pledge of such grant receipts,
together with any other revenues or taxes as herein provided. (1981 Charter)
Section 11.6. Industrial Development Revenue Bonds:
Industrial development revenue bonds may be issued as provided by Colorado statute. (1981 Charter)
Section 11.7. Power To Create Special Or Local Improvement Districts:
The city shall have the power to create special or local improvement districts within designated areas in the
city, to contract for, construct or install special or local improvements of every character within such districts,
to assess the cost thereof, wholly or in part upon the property benefited in such districts, and to issue
special improvement securities therefor.
(a) The council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the method and manner of creating such improvements, of
letting contracts therefor, issuing and paying securities for construction or installation of such
improvements, including the cost incidental thereto, for assessing the costs thereof and for all things in
relation to the authority herein created.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by charter or by ordinance, the statutes of the state of Colorado shall
govern the creation and organization of special or local improvement districts, the assessment of costs,
the issuance of securities therefor, and all things in relation thereto. (1981 Charter)
Section 11.8. Creation Of Special Or Local Improvement Districts:
Special or local improvement districts created pursuant to this article may be created by:
(a) Ordinance, subject however to protest by the owners of a majority of all property benefited and
constituting a basis of assessment as the council may determine; or
(b) On a petition by the owners of not less than fifty percent (50%) of the area to be assessed in the
proposed district, provided that such majority shall include not less than fifty percent (50%) of the
assessed valuation of the real property in the proposed district.
In either event, a public hearing shall be held at which all interested parties may appear and be heard. Right
to protest and notice of public hearing shall be given as provided by council by ordinance. Such
improvements shall confer special benefits to the real property within said district and general benefits of the
city at large. The council shall have the power by ordinance without an election to prescribe the method of
making such improvements including the costs incidental thereto.
Where all outstanding bonds of a local improvement district have been paid and any monies remain to the
credit of the district, they shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever there is a
deficiency in any local improvement district fund to meet the payment of outstanding bonds and interest due
thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of said surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever a local improvement
district has paid and cancelled three-fourths (3/4) of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining
assessments are not paid in time to pay the remaining bonds of the district and the interest due thereon,
and there are not sufficient monies in the special surplus and deficiency fund, then the city shall pay said
bonds when due and the interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments
due said district.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 18/313
In consideration of general benefits conferred on the city at large from the construction or installation of
improvements in local improvement districts, the council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property
within the city at a rate to be determined by council, to be disbursed as determined by the payment of any
assessment levied against the city itself in connection with bonds issued for local improvement districts, or
for the purpose of advancing monies to maintain current payments of interest and principal of bonds issued
for any local improvement district hereinafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a
special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided that in lieu of such tax
levies, the council may annually transfer to such special fund any available monies of the city, but in no
event shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount which would result from a tax levied
in such year as herein limited. No assessment by the city of its own property pursuant to this section shall
be considered or held to create an indebtedness of the city or to require an election; however, if the council
elects to issue limited tax bonds secured by a pledge of the tax levy authorized in this section for the
purpose of providing funds to pay any such assessment or the costs of any improvement conferring general
benefits on the city at large, it shall do so only after the question of the issuance of such limited tax bonds
has been approved at an election held in accordance with section 11.4 of this charter. (1981 Charter)
Section 11.9. Refunding Bonds:
General obligation refunding bonds and refunding revenue bonds may be issued as provided by Colorado
statute. (1981 Charter)
Section 11.10. Lease - Purchase And Installment - Purchase Agreements:
The council may enter into lease-purchase and installment-purchase agreements as a means of acquiring
any real or personal property for public purposes. The council may pledge the full faith and credit and the
general taxing power of the city to the payment of its obligations under any such agreement, and may enter
into such covenants regarding the rights of the lessor-vendor in the property upon default as the council
may deem necessary or appropriate. Each such agreement and the terms thereof shall be authorized and
adopted by an affirmative vote of five (5) members of the council. (1981 Charter)
Section 11.11. Limitations:
Taking into consideration the provisions of section 11.4 of this charter, which require an election and
disclosure of the current assessed valuation and outstanding general obligation bonded indebtedness of the
city prior to the issuance of general obligation bonds, there shall be no limitation on the amount of bonds or
other securities the city may issue except as may be stated in the documents pertaining thereto. All bonds
or other securities issued pursuant to the provisions of this charter shall be sold at public or private sale to
the best advantage of the city at, above, or below par. Bonds may contain provisions for redemption prior to
maturity with or without the payment of a premium. The maximum premium payable on prior redemption of
any general obligation bonds may, but need not, be specified in the bond question approved by the qualified
electors. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE XII
TAXATION
Section 12.1. Authority To Levy Taxes:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 19/313
The council may by ordinance levy and collect taxes for municipal purposes which may include but shall not
be limited to: general ad valorem property taxes, and excise taxes (such as sales taxes, use taxes, bed
taxes, occupation taxes, and real estate transfer taxes).
No sales tax, use tax, bed tax or income tax shall be levied after the adoption of this charter until such tax
shall have been approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting at a regular or special election.
For purposes of this charter, the term "sales tax" shall mean a tax on the sale of tangible personal property
at retail or the furnishing of services. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE XIII
PUBLIC UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES
Section 13.1. General Powers:
The city shall have and exercise with regard to all utilities and franchises all municipal powers including,
without limitation, all powers now existing and which may be hereafter provided by the constitution and
statutes. The right of the city to construct, acquire, purchase or condemn any public utility, work or way, is
expressly reserved. Except as otherwise provided by constitution or this charter, all powers concerning the
granting, amending, revoking, or otherwise dealing in franchises shall be exercised by the council. (1981
Charter)
Section 13.2. Water Rights:
The city shall have the power to buy, exchange, lease, own, and control water rights. (1981 Charter)
Section 13.3. Utility Rates And Service Areas:
The council shall by ordinance establish rates for services provided by municipality owned utilities. If the
council desires to extend the municipal utilities beyond city boundaries it shall do so by ordinance. (Ord. 1-
1992 §I, 1992: 1981 Charter)
Section 13.4. Franchise Review:
Each franchise granted under the provisions of this charter shall include a section specifying a period review
of said franchise. (1981 Charter)
Section 13.5. Franchise Records:
The council shall cause to be kept in the office of the city clerk an indexed franchise record in which shall be
transcribed copies of all franchises heretofore and hereafter granted. The index shall give the name of the
grantee and any assignees. The record, a complete history of all such franchises, shall include a
comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same and copies of all annual
reports and such other matters of information and public interest as the council may from time to time
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 20/313
require. (1981 Charter)
Section 13.6. Existing Franchises:
All franchise ordinances of the city in effect at the time that this charter is adopted shall remain in full force
and effect according to their provisions and terms until the expiration date provided in such ordinance or
until modified by another franchise. (1981 Charter)
Section 13.7. Common Use Of Facilities:
The council shall have the power to require any holder of a franchise from the city, or other public utility, to
allow the use of its rights of way, poles, wires and trenches by any franchise holder, or the city itself, upon
payment of a reasonable rental therefor; and the city may, under the terms prescribed by the council, allow
such franchise holders to use rights of way, poles, wires, and trenches of the city owned utilities. (1981
Charter)
ARTICLE XIV
TRANSITION PERIOD
Section 14.1. Effective Date Of Charter:
This charter shall become effective immediately upon voter approval, except that those provisions of article
X relating to the preparation and submission of the budget and capital program shall become effective for
the 1982 annual budget, and those provisions in article IV relating to the election of councilmen shall
become effective at the first regular election scheduled under this charter to be held in April, 1982. (1981
Charter)
Section 14.2. Prior Town Legislation:
All bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the city which are not inconsistent with this
charter and which are in force and effect at the effective date of this charter shall continue in full force and
effect until repealed or amended. Those provisions of any effective bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation which are inconsistent with this charter are hereby repealed. (1981 Charter)
Section 14.3. Present Elected Officials To Continue In Office:
The present city council and mayor in office at the time of the adoption of this charter shall continue at their
present salaries, to serve and carry out the functions, powers and duties of their offices until their
successors assume the duties of their offices. (1981 Charter)
Section 14.4. Continuation Of Present Boards And Commissions:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 21/313
All boards and commission in existence at the time of adoption of this charter shall continue to function
under the provisions of this charter. (1981 Charter)
Section 14.5. Continuation Of Appointed Officers And Employees:
Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this charter, all appointed officers and all
employees of the town shall continue in that city office or employment which they held prior to the effective
date of this charter, as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this charter,
and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this charter, except that any officer or employee
who holds a position which this charter provides be held at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body,
shall hold such position only at such pleasure, regardless of the term for which originally appointed. (1981
Charter)
Section 14.6. Saving Clause:
This charter shall not affect any suit pending in any court or any document heretofore executed in
connection therewith. Nothing in this charter shall invalidate any existing contracts between the city of Yuma
and individuals, corporations or public agencies. (1981 Charter)
ARTICLE XV
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 15.1. Reservation Of Power:
The power to supersede any law of this state now or hereafter in force, insofar as it applies to local or
municipal affairs, shall be reserved to the city, acting by charter or ordinance, subject only to restrictions of
article XX of the state constitution, judicial decisions, and subsequent amendments to the charter and by
ordinance. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.2. Liability Of City:
No action for recovery of compensation for personal injury, death, or property damage against the city on
account of its negligence or other tort shall be maintained unless written notice of the alleged time, place
and cause of injury, death or property damage is given to the city clerk by the person injured, his agent or
attorney, within one hundred eighty (180) days of the occurrence causing the injury, death, or property
damage. The notice given under the provisions of this section shall not be deemed invalid or insufficient
solely by reason of an inaccuracy in stating the time, place, or cause of injury, if it is shown that there was
no intent to mislead and that the city in fact was not misled thereby. This provision shall not be construed as
a waiver of any governmental immunity the city may have now or in the future. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.3. Sale Or Encumbrance Of Property:
Council may not sell, exchange, or dispose of public utilities or permanent buildings or real property except
by ordinance and said sale, exchange, or disposal shall be for no value less than that value set by an
independent appraisal of the subject property. Council may not mortgage or encumber public utilities or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 22/313
permanent public buildings or real or personal property except by ordinance or majority vote of the electors
at the option of the council. (Ord. 1-1992 §J, 1992: 1981 Charter)
Section 15.4. Lease On Property:
The council may lease, for such time as council shall determine, any real or personal property to or from any
person, firm or corporation, public or private, governmental or otherwise. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.5. Cooperative Contracts:
The council may by resolution enter into contracts or agreements with other governmental units, special
districts, or persons for those purposes as provided in articles XI and XIV of the constitution. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.6. Bequests, Gifts And Donations:
Council, on behalf of the city, may receive or refuse bequests, gifts, and donations of all kinds of property in
fee simple, whether encumbered or not, or in leasehold, or in trust for public, charitable, or other purposes,
and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purpose of such gifts, bequests, and donations with
power to manage, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the gift,
bequest, or trust. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.7. Emergency Powers:
In case of riot, insurrection, or extraordinary emergency, the mayor, or in his absence, the city manager,
shall assume the authority to execute any action necessary for the protection of life and property. Such
authority may include but not be limited to establishing regulations governing conduct and activities related
to the cause of the emergency, and if the emergency situation continues, the mayor, or in his absence, the
city manager, shall convene the council, who may take such action as it deems necessary. In the event it
becomes necessary, the line of succession provided in section 15.8 shall be followed. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.8. Continuity Of Government:
The council shall have the power to provide for continuity of government of the city of Yuma in the event of
natural or enemy caused disaster. Such power shall be employed in a manner which will preserve
representative government in the city of Yuma and which will provide an orderly line of succession of
officers, notwithstanding the provisions of this charter. Such succession shall commence with the mayor and
the mayor pro tem, and shall then revert to the councilmen by order of seniority, and thereafter through an
orderly line of succession of the administrative department heads, commencing with the city manager. (1981
Charter)
Section 15.9. Severability Of Charter Provisions:
If any provision, section, article or clause of this charter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 23/313
application of the charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such
remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end, this
charter is declared to be severable. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.10. Charter Amendments:
This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the constitution. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed as preventing the submission to the people of more than one charter
amendment at any one election. If provisions of two (2) or more proposed amendments adopted or
approved at the same election conflict, the amendment receiving the highest affirmative vote shall become
effective. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.11. Interpretations:
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the contents hereof, all words used in this charter
indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to
and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. The
singular number shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall
extend to and include the feminine gender and neuter, and the word "person" may extend and be applied to
bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as to individuals. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.12. Right Of Eminent Domain:
The city shall have the right of eminent domain for all municipal purposes whatever either within or without
the limits of the city as may be permitted to towns or cities by the constitution and the statutes of the state of
Colorado. (1981 Charter)
Section 15.13. Definitions:
As used in this charter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning:
(a) Appropriation. The authorized amount of monies set aside for expenditures during a specified time for
a specific purpose.
(b) Constitution. The constitution of the state of Colorado.
(c) Council. The city council of the city of Yuma, including the mayor, unless provided otherwise.
(d) Elector. A person qualified to vote under the constitution and statutes of the state of Colorado.
(e) Employee. A person employed by the city of Yuma.
(f) Franchise. A privilege or immunity of a public nature, granted by the city council, permitting a specified
use of public property for a specified time.
(g) Manager. The city manager of the city of Yuma, appointed pursuant to section 7.1.
(h) Municipal Utility System. Any heat, power, or light systems, communication system, water, sewer or
scheduled transportation systems, and serving or supplying the public under a franchise granted by the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 24/313
city.
(i) Officer. Any person elected to office or appointed by council, including appointees to boards and
commissions.
(j) Ordinance. A permanent regulation adopted by legislative action of the city council pursuant to the
procedures set forth in section 5.10 of this charter.
(k) Permanent Board Or Commission. A board or commission intended by council to be a part of the
permanent governmental structure of the city of Yuma, as established by ordinance.
(l) Post. Posting in at least two (2) public places within the city as designated by the council.
(m) Publication. Publishing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(n) Public Utility. Any person, firm, or corporation operating heat, power, or light systems, communication
system, water, sewer or scheduled transportation systems, and serving or supplying the public under a
franchise granted by the city.
(o) Regular Municipal Election. A municipal election held every two (2) years at which candidates for
elective offices of the city are voted upon in accordance with this charter.
(p) Resolution. Expression of administrative or ministerial acts of council without any required form or
procedure, as distinguished from legislative acts embodied in city ordinances.
(q) Statutes. The applicable laws of the state of Colorado as they now exist or as they may be amended.
(r) City. City of Yuma, Colorado, a municipal corporation. (1981 Charter)
* * * *
CITY OF YUMA, COLORADO
CHARTER COMMISSION
CERTIFICATE OF FINAL ADOPTION
We, the undersigned, present members of the Yuma Home Rule Charter Commission, duly elected by the
people of Yuma, Colorado, at a special election held on July 14, 1981, under the authorization of Article XX,
the Constitution of the State of Colorado, to frame a Home Rule Charter for the Town of Yuma, and providing
for the designation of the municipality to be hereafter known as the City of Yuma, do hereby certify that the
foregoing is the Proposed Charter as finally approved and adopted by the members of the Commission on the
16th day of September, 1981, for submission to the people of Yuma at a regular municipal election to be held
November 17, 1981.
Done in triplicate at Yuma, Colorado, this 16th day of September, 1981.
Earl L. Mustain, ChairmanDonald Starnes,
Vice-Chairman
Robert Wilson, SecretaryMike Bennett
Vern BoughmanDavid Frank
John GardnerSid H. Gimeson
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 25/313
Wayne GleasonWalter A. Josh
Douglas LasaterJohn Magee
D. Paul MetcalfKenneth Mitchell
Howard R. OlsenRussell L. Parrish
Paul RichardsBill D. Robertson
Alan SeedorfRalph Spellman
Orlan VaughnHarold E. Bennett (Deceased)
STAFF
Oliver P. Ozman and Steven E. Shinn, Town Attorneys
D. Paul Metcalf, Town Manager
Marge Gerry, Recording Secretary
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to the provisions of sections 31-16-102 through 31-16-208 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended,
there is adopted the Yuma municipal code as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 1-
1983 §1, 1983)
1.01.020: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This code shall be known as the "Yuma municipal code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to this code as the "Yuma
municipal code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It
shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any portion thereof
as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Yuma municipal code. Further reference may be had to
the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Yuma municipal code and such references shall apply to that
numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 1-1983 §2, 1983)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 26/313
1.01.030: ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE:
The last ordinance included in the original code is ordinance 17 of 1982, passed November 16, 1982. (Ord. 1-1983
§3, 1983)
1.01.040: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city
of Yuma, Colorado, codified pursuant to the provisions of sections 31-16-201 through 31-16-208 of the Colorado
Revised Statutes. (Ord. 1-1983 §4, 1983)
1.01.050: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Yuma municipal code or to any portion thereof, or to any
ordinance of the city of Yuma, Colorado, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions
heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 1-1983 §5, 1983)
1.01.060: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner
affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 1-1983 §6, 1983)
1.01.070: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise
connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included
within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within the
code. (Ord. 1-1983 §7, 1983)
1.01.080: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance
of the city of Yuma shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were
committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said
effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any
violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or
deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full
force and effect. (Ord. 1-1983 §8, 1983)
1.01.090: RESERVED:
1.01.100: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the Yuma municipal code shall
become effective. (Ord. 1-1983 §10, 1983)
1.01.110: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 27/313
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council hereby
declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been
declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord.
1-1983 §11, 1983)
1.01.120: ENACTMENT AUTHORITY:
The city council for the city of Yuma finds, determines and declares that the ordinance codified herein is necessary
for the general health, safety and welfare of the community. (Ord. 1-1983 §12, 1983)
Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
The following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed in interpreting this Code:
CITY: The City of Yuma, a municipal corporation in the County of Yuma and State of Colorado.
CITY COUNCIL AND COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Yuma.
CODE: The Municipal Code of the City of Yuma as published and subsequently amended, unless the context
requires otherwise.
GENDER: When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the masculine,
such words shall be deemed to include females as well as males.
NUMBER: When any subject matter, party or person is described or referred to by words importing the singular
number, the plural shall be deemed to be included.
PERSON: Means and includes a firm, partnership, corporation, association or other organization acting as a group
or unit as well as an individual. (Prior Code §1.5)
1.04.020: AMENDMENTS:
A. Any additions or amendments to this Code shall be adopted as ordinances under applicable provisions of the
State law, and when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part hereof, shall be
deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to it as the Municipal Code of the City of Yuma shall be
understood as including such additions or amendments.
B. Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, all ordinances shall take effect five (5) days after publication
following final adoption. (Ord. 16-2018, 2018)
1.04.030: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this Code are declared to be severable, and if any section, provision, or part thereof is held
unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this Code shall continue in full force and effect, it being the legislative
intent that this Code would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional or invalid matter had not been included
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 28/313
therein. It is further declared that if any provision or part of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application thereof to other persons shall not be
affected thereby. (Prior Code §1.7)
1.04.040: REPEAL:
All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the City before the effective
date of this Code are repealed; provided, however, that any ordinances establishing any contract right, authorizing
the issuance of any bonds or evidence of indebtedness of the City, relating to the annual appropriation or the annual
tax levy, granting any franchise, annexing territory to the City, naming streets, dedicating or vacating streets or
alleys, creating or assessing any local improvement district or authorizing the sale, purchase or lease of property by
the City, shall not be considered to be ordinances of a general and permanent nature and the same are not
repealed. (Prior Code §1.8)
1.04.050: SAVING CLAUSE:
The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof by the adoption of this Code shall not affect, deny, abridge, or impair
any right, action or cause of action accruing or arising under the ordinance or section so repealed, and such right,
action or cause of action may be prosecuted to a final determination notwithstanding such repeal. No offense
committed, and no fine, forfeiture or penalty incurred before any ordinance or part thereof is repealed by this Code,
shall be affected, released or in any way discharged by such repeal, but the trial, conviction and punishment for any
such offense, and the recovery of fines, forfeitures and penalties, shall be had in all respects as if the repealed
provisions had maintained in force. (Prior Code §1.9)
1.04.060: OFFICERS CONTINUE:
If any ordinance which creates an office or employment in the City is repealed by the adoption of this Code, and the
same office or employment is also provided for in this Code, then the present incumbent of the office or employment
shall continue to hold such office or employment and to perform the duties and functions thereof until removed
therefrom in accordance with this Code or until his successor is elected or appointed and qualified. (Prior Code
§1.10)
Chapter 1.06
ELECTION PROVISIONS
1.06.010: WRITE-IN CANDIDATES REQUIRE AFFIDAVIT OF INTENT:
No write-in vote for any City office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by
the person whose name is written in not later than sixty four (64) days before the day of election indicating that such
person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. (Ord. 2-2018, 2018)
1.06.020: UNIFORM ELECTION CODE ADOPTED:
In accordance with the provisions of Colorado Revised Statutes section 31-10-102.7, the City hereby adopts the
Uniform Election Code of 1992, in lieu of the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965, for the purpose of
participating in any coordinated election in Yuma County which is conducted by the County Clerk and Recorder.
The City Clerk is hereby directed to work with the Yuma County Clerk and Recorder and other designated election
officials and to take all necessary actions to implement Yuma's portion of the coordinated election in accordance
with article 20 of title X of the Colorado Constitution, the Uniform Election Code of 1992, and all other appropriate
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 29/313
statutes.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from conducting a regular Municipal election which is not a part of a
coordinated election or a special Municipal election on a ballot question. Such elections shall be conducted in
accordance with the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965. (Ord. 3-1996 §§1_3, 1996)
1.06.040: CONDITIONS OF CANCELLATION OF ELECTION:
If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the sixty
third (63rd) day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including
write-in candidates filing affidavits of intent pursuant to section 1.06.010 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall cancel
the election and by resolution declare the candidates elected and upon such declaration the candidates shall be
deemed elected. Notice of such cancellation shall be published by the City Clerk, if possible, in order to inform the
electors, and notice of cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in not less than one other public place.
(Ord. 2-2018, 2018)
1.06.050: LOCATION FOR SPECIAL AND REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION POLLING PLACE:
The location for the polling place regarding each special and regular Municipal election for the City of Yuma shall be
the Yuma City Hall, at the address of 910 South Main Street, Yuma, Colorado. The Yuma City Council, by
resolution, may alter the location for the polling place regarding a particular special or regular election by either
establishing a new address for the polling place for a particular election, or by providing for a mail ballot election for
a particular election. (Ord. 20-2007 §1, 2008)
Chapter 1.08
INCORPORATION
1.08.010: INCORPORATION OF CITY:
The city of Yuma was incorporated in 1887. It is located in township 2 north, range 48 west of the 6th principal
meridian, in Yuma County, Colorado. (Prior code §2.1)
1.08.020: CORPORATE LIMITS:
The present corporate limits of the city are described as follows:
Beginning at the Southeast Corner of Section 22, Township 2 North, Range 48 West of the 6th P.M., in Yuma
County, Colorado; thence North along the East line of said Section 22 and the East line of Section 15 in the same
Township and Range to a point 398 feet North of the Southeast Corner of said Section 15; thence West 1321 feet;
thence South 368 feet to the North line of said Section 22; thence West 102.3 feet; thence North 358.95 feet; thence
West 386 feet; thence South 397.04 feet; thence West to the Southwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of Section
15; thence South to the Northwest Corner of Section 27 in the same Township and Range; thence East along the
North line of said Section 27 to a point which is 294 feet West of the Northwest Corner of the Northeast Quarter of
said Section 27; thence South 668.9 feet; thence East along the South line of West Tenth Avenue a distance of 395
feet more or less; thence South a distance of 340 feet more or less to the South side of West Eleventh Avenue;
thence East along the South line of West Eleventh Avenue a distance of 745 feet more or less to the West line of
South Ash Street; thence South along the West side of South Ash Street a distance of 660 feet more or less; thence
West 831.4 feet to the West line of the Northeast Quarter, Section 27, thence South in said West line 60 feet; thence
East 830.7 feet to the West line of South Ash Street; thence South 796.8 feet to the South line of the Northeast
Quarter, Section 22; thence East 860 feet more or less to the East side of South Albany Street; thence North 1006.4
feet more or less; thence East 904.5 feet more or less to the East line of the Northeast Quarter, Section 27; thence
North 60 feet; thence West 904.5 feet to the East side of South Albany Street projected South; thence North 375
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 30/313
feet to the South line of East Eleventh Avenue; thence East along the South line of Eleventh Avenue 676 feet more
or less; thenceNorth 720 feet; thence East 276 feet more or less to the East line of said Section 27; thence North
along the East line of said Section 27 to the point of beginning.
(Prior code §2.2)
1.08.030: CORPORATE SEAL:
The corporate seal shall consist of a circular plate and disc bearing the following description: "City of Yuma, Yuma
County" in circular form, and the words "Incorporated Seal 1887" across the center of the plate and within the
circular inscription. (Prior code §2.3)
Chapter 1.10
CITY COUNCIL AND PLANNING COMMISSION SPECIAL RULES
OF PROCEDURE
(Rep. by Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
Chapter 1.12
NORTHEASTERN COLORADO COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
1.12.010: PLAN AND ORGANIZATION RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTION:
The city hereby adopts a plan to cooperate with other political subdivisions in the creation of the northwestern
Colorado council of governments, as provided for in article XIV, section 18(2) of the Colorado constitution and
chapter 88, article 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1963, as amended, and further adopts the recommended rules,
regulations plan of organization and operation of the northwestern Colorado council of governments as set forth in
the articles of association adopted by the official representatives of the several counties and municipalities
cooperating in the organization of the council. (Ord. 1-1973 §1, 1973)
1.12.020: FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES:
The northwestern Colorado council of governments shall have the functions, powers and duties which are
prescribed by law, and set forth in the council's articles of association. (Ord. 1-1973 §2, 1973)
1.12.030: CITY'S REPRESENTATION ON COUNCIL:
The representation of the city on the northeastern Colorado council of governments shall consist of one voting
representative, who shall represent all incorporated municipalities in the county which are affiliated with the council.
The representative shall similarly be selected by majority vote of all incorporated municipalities in the county which
are affiliated with the council. (Ord. 1-1973 §3, 1973)
Chapter 1.16
MUNICIPAL COURT
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 31/313
1.16.010: CREATED:
A municipal court in and for the city is hereby created and established, pursuant to and to be governed by the
provisions of chapter 22, article 37, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1963, as amended. (Prior code §12.1)
1.16.020: JURISDICTION, POWERS AND PROCEDURES:
A. The municipal court shall have original jurisdiction of all cases arising under this code and other ordinances of the
city with full power to punish violators thereof by the imposition of such fines and penalties as are prescribed by
ordinance or court rule.
B. The procedures of the court in regard to any civil action filed in municipal court shall be in accordance with the
Colorado rules of civil procedure as promulgated by the Colorado supreme court. For any other matter filed in
municipal court, the procedures of the court shall be in accordance with the municipal court rules of procedure
as promulgated by the Colorado supreme court.
C. Persons appearing before the municipal court shall have no right to a jury trial nor shall one be granted by the
municipal court judge upon motion by any person unless said violation is punishable by imprisonment of six (6)
months or more. (Ord. 9-2006 §1, 2006: Ord. 12-1990, 1990: prior code §12.2)
1.16.030: SESSIONS OF COURT:
A. There shall be regular sessions of the court for the trial of cases. The municipal judge may hold a special session
of court at any time.
B. All sessions shall be open to the public. Where the nature of the case is such that it would be in the best interest
of justice to exclude persons not directly connected with the proceeding, the municipal judge may order that the
courtroom be cleared. (Prior code §12.3)
1.16.040: JUDGES; APPOINTMENT, OATH, SALARY AND POWERS:
A. The court shall be presided over by a municipal judge appointed for a term of two (2) years by resolution of the
city council. Additional judges may be appointed as may be needed to transact the business of the court for a
term of two (2) years.
B. The compensation of the judge shall be an annual salary in an amount set by the city council and shall be
payable as other salaries to municipal employees.
C. Before entering upon the duties of his office, a municipal judge shall make an oath or affirmation that he will
support the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state of Colorado and the charter and the
laws of the city and will faithfully perform the duties of his office.
D. In addition to other powers, a municipal judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and
regulations for conducting the business of the municipal court, consistent with the municipal rules of procedure
promulgated by the Colorado supreme court. (Prior code §12.4)
1.16.050: COURT CLERK; DUTIES AND REPORTS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 32/313
A. The presiding judge may appoint a person to serve as clerk of the court whose duties shall be those assigned by
the presiding judge.
B. The compensation of the court clerk shall be an annual salary in an amount set by the city council and shall be
payable as other salaries to municipal employees.
C. The clerk shall file monthly reports with the city clerk of all monies collected by him. On the last day of each
month he shall pay to the city treasurer all monies in his hands. (Prior code §12.5)
1.16.060: OPERATION APPROPRIATIONS:
The city council shall, on an annual basis, budget and appropriate such monies as may be necessary for the proper
operation of the municipal court. (Prior code §12.6)
1.16.070: AUTHORIZATION FOR COURT TO ASSESS COSTS:
A. The municipal court judge shall have the authority to assess court costs in cases involving any defendant who
pleads guilty or nolo contendere or who enters into a plea agreement or who, after trial, is found guilty of an
ordinance violation. The municipal court judge shall have the authority and discretion to set the amount of cost
assessed, provided it is reasonable, proper, and in compliance with Colorado law.
B. The municipal court judge shall have the authority to assess additional court costs in matters requiring the
employment of an interpreter to translate language for witnesses and defendants who are appearing in court.
These costs may only be assessed against any defendant who pleads guilty or nolo contendere or who enters
into a plea agreement or who, after trial, is found guilty of an ordinance violation. The municipal court judge shall
have the discretion to assess this cost, provided the amount does not exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per pretrial
conference, and ten dollars ($10.00) per hour during any trial. (Ord. 3-2004 §1, 2004)
1.16.080: ASSIGNMENT FOR COLLECTION OF UNPAID FINES, FEES, COSTS AND
SURCHARGES ASSESSED BY THE MUNICIPAL COURT:
A. The municipal court clerk is authorized to assign for collection to any agency or agencies authorized to do
business in the state of Colorado, any fines, fees, costs and surcharges which may have been assessed by the
municipal court and which are unpaid to the city and are delinquent.
B. The agency or agencies authorized, pursuant to this section, to collect on behalf of the city said fines, fees, costs
and surcharges shall add to the amounts assigned any amounts charged for services rendered in collecting such
fines, fees, costs and surcharges, not to exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the amount assigned for collection.
(Ord. 9-2010, 2010)
Chapter 1.19
YUMA K-9 PROGRAM FUND
1.19.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a special fund to be known as the "Yuma K-9 program fund". (Ord. 1-2007 §1, 2007)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 33/313
1.19.020: FUNDING:
The Yuma K-9 program fund shall be funded solely by the contributions set forth in section 1.19.040 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1-2007 §1, 2007)
1.19.030: FUND CEILING:
The Yuma K-9 program fund shall have a maximum ceiling of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). All sums in excess
of said amount deposited into the Yuma K-9 program fund from the sources set out in section 1.19.040 of this
chapter shall be maintained in the general revenue fund of the city. (Ord. 1-2007 §1, 2007)
1.19.040: CONTRIBUTIONS TO FUND:
Contributions to the Yuma K-9 program fund may come from any source not prohibited by city ordinance, state or
federal law, including, but not limited to, the following: donations from private individuals and/or organizations; court
ordered restitution in criminal cases at the municipal, county, and district court level; court ordered forfeitures in
criminal cases at the county and district court level; budgeting and appropriation from the Yuma city council; and
any federal or state funds available for such operations not inconsistent with the purposes of the Yuma K-9 program
fund. (Ord. 1-2007 §1, 2007)
1.19.050: PURPOSE OF FUND:
The Yuma K-9 program fund will be used for the purpose of enhancing the ability of the Yuma police department to
purchase,maintain, train, operate, and provide effective law enforcement K-9 services for the community. The intent
of this mandated program is to provide future funding related directly or indirectly with K-9 services. (Ord. 1-2007
§1, 2007)
1.19.060: COURT AUTHORIZATION FOR SURCHARGES AND FINES:
The Yuma municipal court is hereby authorized to establish a surcharge and fine for all Yuma municipal summons
and/or complaints as follows:
A. An amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per complaint;
B. An amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per complaint for all Yuma municipal drug related
summons and/or complaints.
Pursuant to section 13-10-115, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, and as may be further defined in this
chapter, all surcharges and fines collected or received by the municipal court shall be reported and paid monthly,
or at such other interval as provided by ordinance, to the Yuma city treasurer and deposited in the general fund
of the municipality. (Ord. 1-2007 §1, 2007)
1.19.070: USE OF FUNDS:
The money in the Yuma K-9 program fund when used for the purposes set out in section 1.19.050 of this chapter
may be spent on the following types of items and any other similar necessary items:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 34/313
A. Purchases of K-9 dog, food, lodging, vet expenses, certifications, memberships, and travel expenses of law
enforcement personnel, K-9 dog(s), and any other person necessary for implementation of K-9 services.
B. Training related to drug interdiction.
C. Purchases of K-9 vehicle, equipment, and maintenance supplies.
D. Purchases of equipment necessary for carrying out the purposes set out in section 1.19.050 of this chapter,
including expenses related to the Yuma K-9 program. (Ord. 1-2007 §1, 2007)
1.19.080: OPERATING GUIDELINES:
The following shall constitute the general operating guidelines of the Yuma K-9 program fund:
A. Responsibility for the fund's integrity shall rest with the chief of police. All expenses above one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) will be reviewed by the police committee. Expenses above five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) will be
approved by city council.
B. The chief of police shall submit to the city council at its regular first of the month meeting a report showing the
fund's balance, a total of all contributions made to the fund since the last report, and a total amount expended
from the fund since the last monthly report.
C. The city of Yuma will implement and follow accounting guidelines as currently used by the office of Yuma city
treasurer.
D. At the conclusion of the criminal or municipal cases all funds will be totaled as a part of the entire penalty
assessment. The decision as to when the criminal case is concluded will be made by the city attorney or in
appropriate instances the district attorney for the 13th judicial district. All fees will be paid in full upon conviction
or assumption of guilt, unless otherwise ordered by the court.
E. The Yuma K-9 program fund will be administered by the city treasurer. All fines and costs collected or received by
the municipal court shall be reported and paid monthly to the treasurer of the municipality and deposited in the
general fund. The treasurer shall deposit funds to the Yuma K-9 fund as regulated by city policy. (Ord. 1-2007
§1, 2007)
Chapter 1.20
SUMMONS AND ARREST PROCEDURE
1.20.010: ACTIONS; HOW COMMENCED:
All actions brought to recover any fine or to enforce any penalty under this code or any ordinances of the city shall
be commenced by summons; provided, that a warrant for the arrest of the offender may be issued at the first
instance upon the sworn complaint of any person that any such ordinance or code provision, specifying the section,
title and date of passage of the code or ordinance violated, has been violated and that the person making the
complaint has reasonable grounds to believe the party charged is guilty thereof1. (Prior code §12.7)
1.20.020: PROCEDURE AFTER ARREST:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 35/313
Any person arrested upon a warrant issued by the police magistrate or for an offense committed in the presence of
the arresting officer shall be kept in custody and taken before the police magistrate to be tried for the alleged
offense without unnecessary delay; provided, however, that where the arrest is for an offense committed within the
presence of the arresting officer, and where it is for a violation of title 10 of this code relating to traffic, other than a
violation for drunken driving, or where it appears to the arresting officer that the violator will appear pursuant to a
written notice, the arresting officer may issue a citation or notice on a form provided for that purpose notifying the
alleged violator to appear and answer charges at a place and time specified. The person arrested, in order to
secure release as provided in this section, must give his written promise to appear in court by signing the notice.
(Prior code §12.8)
Chapter 1.24
GENERAL PENALTY
1.24.010: VIOLATION DESIGNATED:
A. No person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Code or the ordinances of the City.
B. Every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution of the City or any rule or regulation
promulgated under the provisions of this Code shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it is also unlawful to cause, allow, permit, aid, abet
or suffer such unlawful act or omission. Concealing or in any manner aiding in the concealing of any unlawful act
or omission is similarly unlawful. (Ord. 5-2017, 2017)
1.24.020: FINES AND PENALTIES:
A. Whenever in this Code, or any other ordinance or resolution of the City, or any rule or regulation promulgated
under the provisions of this Code, any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor
or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or
misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person who shall be convicted of the violation
of such provisions of this Code or other ordinance or resolution of this City hereafter enacted, or of such rules or
regulations, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by
imprisonment in jail not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, except as otherwise
provided for in this Code.
B. Every person who, at the time of commission of the offense, was at least ten (10) but not yet eighteen (18) years
of age, and who is subsequently convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of
this Code, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or count.
Any voluntary pleas of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall
subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit incarceration in an appropriate facility at the time of charging of a juvenile
violating any section of this Code.
C. In all cases where the same offense may be punishable or be created by different clauses or sections of the
ordinances of the City, the Prosecuting Officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be against the same person for the same offense. (Ord. 5-2017, 2017)
Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 36/313
Chapter 2.04
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010: COMPENSATION:
For any term of office beginning on or after Tuesday, April 6, 2010, the mayor shall be paid a salary of forty dollars
($40.00) per month and all other members of city council shall be paid a salary of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month.
(Ord. 2-2009 §1, 2009)
Chapter 2.06
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR CITY OFFICIALS
2.06.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings, except where
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBER: Any person duly appointed by the mayor or council to any board or
commission of the city as authorized and established in this title.
CITY OFFICIAL: A council member, an employee or a board and commission member.
COUNCIL MEMBER: A member of the city council.
EMPLOYEE: Each compensated person in the service of the city who is designated as an employee in the city's
personnel rules and regulations, but shall not include any person providing services for the city who is considered
for federal income tax purposes to be an independent contractor.
MEETING: Any kind of gathering of council members, board members or commission members, convened to
discuss public business, in person, by telephone, electronically, or by other means of communication. "Meeting"
shall also include any definition as set forth in section 24-6-402, Colorado Revised Statutes. (Ord. 7-2008 §1, 2008)
2.06.020: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. Organizational Meetings: The first regularly scheduled council meeting subsequent to each election shall be
known as the "organizational meeting". The purpose of the organizational meeting is as follows:
1. Subsequent to completing the old business on the council agenda, the new members of city council, and
mayor, if applicable, shall be installed into their respective office, and shall be administered oaths of office.
2. Subsequent to installation, the mayor shall establish the seating assignments for members of council.
3. The newly installed city council shall by majority vote, elect the mayor pro tem.
4. The mayor may choose, at his or her option, to seek input into appointments required to the various
committees of the city, which said appointments shall be initially executed no later than the first meeting in
May subsequent to each election.
5. The council shall use "Robert's Rules Of Order" as guidelines for council and board meetings, unless
otherwise decided by a majority vote of council during the organizational meeting.
B. Time And Place Of Meetings:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 37/313
1. The city council shall meet the first and third Tuesday of each month, unless otherwise provided by council by
majority vote, and properly posted by the city clerk.
2. The city council shall meet in the council chambers of city hall, unless otherwise provided by council by
majority vote, and properly posted by the city clerk.
3. The council meetings shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. unless otherwise provided by council by majority
vote, and properly posted by the city clerk.
C. Special Meetings: Council may hold special meetings as provided in article V of the Yuma home rule charter.
D. Work Sessions: Subsequent to proper notification pursuant to the Yuma home rule charter and section 24-6-402,
Colorado Revised Statutes, known as the "Colorado open meetings law", council may hold a work session. The
work sessions shall be open to the public and council may discuss city business, but no formal actions may be
taken. Council may not convene in executive session during any work session.
E. Public Comments: Every regularly scheduled meeting shall contain an agenda item entitled "citizens recognition
and introduction/public comment". During this period, members of the public may be allowed public comment
before the city council. If necessary, the mayor, or in his absence, mayor pro tem, may establish time limits for
each individual requesting to be recognized during the public comment period. Members of the public who act in
a disruptive manner may be removed and shall be subject to the provisions of title 9, chapter 9.35 of this code.
F. Executive Sessions: Executive sessions may be convened upon motion and the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of the quorum present. An executive session may only be held at a regular or special meeting and in accordance
with section 24-6-402, Colorado Revised Statutes. The topic for discussion in executive session shall be
announced to the public, including a specific citation to the provisions of section 24-6-402(4), Colorado Revised
Statutes authorizing the council to meet in executive session and identification of the particular matter to be
discussed in as much detail as possible without compromising the purpose for which the executive session is
authorized. Except for determining positions in matters subject to negotiations, developing strategy for negations
and instructing negotiators, no formal action shall be taken in an executive session to adopt a proposed policy,
position, resolution, rule, regulation, or ordinance. Executive sessions shall not be open to the public. The
confidentiality of the matters discussed in executive session shall be preserved by all persons present. A council
member shall not participate in an executive session if that council member has a conflict of interest with the
topic to be discussed in executive session.
G. Voting: Unless otherwise provided by city charter or state law, the following rules shall pertain to city officials
during the conduct of meetings:
1. The council shall act only by ordinance, resolution, or motion. All legislative enactments shall be in the form of
an ordinance.
2. An affirmative vote of the majority of the council members present shall be required for the passage of the first
reading of an ordinance, as well as passage of the second reading of an ordinance. Ordinances may be
amended upon first reading or second reading.
3. No less than five (5) affirmative votes of the council members shall be required for the passage of an
emergency ordinance.
4. An affirmative vote of the majority of the council members present shall be required for the passage of a
resolution.
5. A roll call vote of "yes" or "no" shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions.
6. In the case of a tie vote on any matter, the motion, resolution or ordinance shall be considered lost.
7. Unless a conflict of interest exists, all members shall vote when his or her name is called.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 38/313
H. Attendance: A council seat or mayor's office shall become vacant upon failure to attend three (3) consecutive
regular council meetings unless council for good cause votes to retain him or her. If a city official is unable to
attend a meeting, he or she must inform the office of the city clerk prior to the meeting and explain the nature of
their absence. (Ord. 7-2008 §1, 2008)
2.06.030: CITY OFFICIAL CODE OF CONDUCT:
The proper operation of a democratic government requires that city officials be independent, impartial and
responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made within the proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office is not used for personal gains; and that the public has confidence in the
integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, the following rules of conduct are required to be met by all
city officials:
A. Conflicts Of Interest; Substantial Personal Or Financial Interest: Unless otherwise provided by law, no council
member shall vote on any question on which he or she has a conflict of interest, a substantial personal or
financial interest, or on any question concerning his or her own conduct. If there is a question whether or not a
council member has a conflict of interest, or a substantial personal or financial interest, the unaffected members
of council shall: discuss this matter amongst themselves and solicit questions, if needed, from the affected
council member; and decide by motion whether the affected council member has a conflict of interest.
1. A substantial interest shall be deemed to exist if:
a. He or she or a member of the immediate family, a business associate or an employer other than the city is
the other party in the matter;
b. He or she, a spouse, a domestic partner or minor children solely or aggregated together, a business
associate or an employer owns or own one percent (1%) or more, or a member of the immediate family
other than a spouse, domestic partner or minor children owns or own five percent (5%) or more, of another
party in the matter;
c. He or she, a member of the immediate family, a business associate or an employer is an officer in another
party in the matter;
d. He or she, a member of the immediate family, a business associate or an employer is directly involved in
obtaining the city's business for another party in the matter;
e. He or she, a member of the immediate family, a business associate or an employer is directly involved in
negotiating the contract or preparing the bid, proposal, response to a request for qualifications, or similar
document for another party in the matter, other than a purely clerical capacity; or
f. A member of his or her immediate family performs more than a nominal portion of the work in the matter, or
supervises or manages more than a nominal portion of the work.
2. For the purposes of this section, "business associate" means a person or entity with whom a city official or a
member of his or her immediate family is a partner or a co-owner of a business in which the business
associate and the city official or a member of his or her immediate family each own at least one percent (1%)
of the business.
3. A city official may represent himself or herself before a board in accord with such board's procedures,
provided that the city official does not also participate in the board's decision in his or her official capacity.
4. A city official may acquire an interest in bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city, a board,
or enterprise so long as they are acquired on the same terms available to the general public.
5. It shall not be a violation of this chapter if a city official takes direct official action on the following matters,
even if the person or his or her relatives would benefit:
a. The city's annual budget or an amendment to the annual budget; or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 39/313
b. Establishing the pay or fringe benefit plans of city officials or employees.
6. City officials shall work for the common good of the people of the city of Yuma and not for any private or
personal interest, and they will assure fair and equal treatment of all persons, claims and transactions coming
before the city council, boards, committees or commissions. In accordance with the law, city officials shall
disclose investments, interests in real property, sources of income, employment and gifts and they shall
abstain from participating in deliberations and decision making where a conflict of interest may exist.
B. City Official Services, Profits, Or Advantages: City officials shall not receive any service or derive any profit or
advantage, directly or indirectly, from the city, by reason of his connection therewith, on terms more favorable
than those granted to the public generally, and no city officer shall derive any benefit, profit or advantage, directly
or indirectly, from or by reason of any purchase made or work ordered by authority of the city, unless such
purchase or work be ordered by the council without requiring, in order to secure a majority of council, the vote of
the officer so benefited.
1. Exemption: The city of Yuma electric rate discount for city employees as set forth in the employee discounts
section of the city of Yuma "Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" shall be exempted from the
prohibitions set forth in this subsection B.
C. City Official Special Privileges: A city official shall not use his or her official position to secure a special privilege,
exemption or service for himself or herself or for others, nor shall any city official seek or grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to or for any citizen beyond that which is generally available to every
other citizen. This provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit or hinder a city official from presenting citizen
concerns to the council, committee, board, or commission, or to city administration and requesting a response to
the citizen concern.
1. Exemption: The city of Yuma electric rate discount for city employees as set forth in the employee discounts
section of the city of Yuma "Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual" shall be exempted from the
prohibition set forth in this subsection C.
D. City Official Use Of City Resources: A city official shall not use public resources not available to the public in
general, such as city staff time, equipment, supplies or facilities, for private gain or personal purposes, except for
privileges generally available or granted to employees of the city.
E. City Official's Private Business With City: A city official who, in the course of his or her private business, desires
to enter into a contract with the city, or who has such a contract at the time he or she takes office, shall disclose
such contract to the other members of the council and shall require that such contract receive the approval of the
council at a regular meeting. If the city official's interest is disclosed, if the city's procurement policy has been
followed, and if the contract is in the best interest of the city, the council may approve the contract for the city.
The city official shall not vote on any contract in which he or she has a financial interest and shall not attempt to
influence the other members of the council or the city staff in the process of awarding the contract. A city official
shall not take any special advantage of services or opportunities for personal gain, by virtue of his or her public
office, that are not available to the public in general. City officials shall refrain from accepting any benefit or
promises of future benefits which compromises their independence of judgment or action or gives the
appearance of being compromised.
F. Quasi-Judicial Role: City officials serving in a quasi-judicial role shall refrain from discussing an item with any
proponent, which is to be presented before them during a public hearing. If a city official has discussed a
particular item with a proponent which is to be presented in a public hearing in which they serve in a quasijudicial
role, and the city official has become biased as a result of said discussion, then the city official shall
inform the remainder of the council, board, committee, or commission of the incident, and shall abstain from
discussion and voting on the matter.
G. Council Interaction With City Staff: The council, its members, and mayor, and council committees shall not:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 40/313
1. Dictate the appointment or removal of any person from office by the city manager, city clerk, city treasurer, or
chief of police, except as otherwise provided by the Yuma home rule charter or this code.
2. Interfere with the city manager, city clerk, city treasurer, or chief of police to prevent him or her from exercising
his or her judgment in the appointment, employment or discharge of officers and employees in the
administrative service.
3. Except for the purpose of inquiry, deal with administrative staff or give orders to subordinate of the city
manager, city clerk, city treasurer, or chief of police.
H. General Code Of Conduct:
1. All city officials shall conduct themselves in civil and businesslike manner.
2. A city official shall not violate chapter 2.10 of this title regarding prohibited gifts to city officials.
3. City officials shall treat all members of their council, board, committee, or commission with equal respect.
4. City officials shall prepare in advance and be familiar with issues on the agenda in order to participate in
meetings.
5. City officials shall make no promises or commitments on behalf of the council, any board, committee,
commission, or the city, either overtly or implicitly.
6. City officials shall support the formal actions of the council, their board, committee, or commission and the
official position of the city, even if the city official voted in the minority.
7. When expressing their personal point of view in their individual correspondence, city officials shall make no
reference therein to their official position as a mayor, council member, board member, or commission member.
8. City officials shall serve as a model of leadership and civility to the community.
9. City officials shall inspire confidence in the Yuma city government by demonstrating honesty and integrity in
every action and statement.
10. City officials shall refrain from language during public meetings clearly intended to serve as defamatory,
intended as an assault, intended as threatening, or intended as obscene.
11. Unless directed to do so by the city council or compelled to do so by operation of law, a city official shall not
knowingly disclose information which he or she knows or reasonably should know is confidential information,
regardless of the source of the information.
12. City officials shall not knowingly use or disclose any confidential information gained in the course of or by
reason of his or her official position and which has not been made public in order to advance his or her
financial interests or to further the financial interest of any family member.
13. City officials shall not attend public meetings while clearly inebriated to the point of impairing his or her ability
to make decisions in the best interest of the citizens of Yuma.
14. City officials shall not attend public meetings while under the influence of illegal substances. (Ord. 2-2012,
2012: Ord. 7-2008 §1, 2008)
2.06.040: COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT:
If a violation of this chapter is alleged to have occurred, it shall be reported privately to the mayor, or to the mayor
pro tem if the city official alleged to be in violation is the mayor. If deemed necessary by the mayor or mayor pro
tem, the chief of police may be directed to investigate the allegation(s) and shall make a written report of his or her
findings to the council and to the city attorney. The city attorney shall make a recommendation to council concerning
the alleged violation. The city official shall have the opportunity to respond to the allegation during a public meeting
or in writing to members of the council. Thereafter, if there is a reasonable basis to believe a violation has occurred,
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 41/313
the matter may be placed on the agenda for discussion at a regular meeting.
At the regular meeting, the council shall review the investigative report and the findings of the chief of police and the
recommendation of the city attorney concerning the alleged violation(s). A city official shall have the opportunity to
rebut the allegation(s) through his or her own statement, the testimony of other witnesses and by the presentation of
documentary evidence. A city official may be represented by legal counsel at his or her own choice and at his or her
own expense. Upon motion made, seconded and passed by a majority vote of the impartial members of the council,
that clear and convincing evidence exists that a violation of this chapter has occurred, a city official may be subject
to the following actions:
A. Sanctions, including:
1. A reprimand; or
2. A public censure.
B. Other remedies or actions available under law.
If the motion fails or a motion is passed stating there has been no violation of this chapter, then the city official
shall be deemed not to have been in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 7-2008 §1, 2008)
Chapter 2.08
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
2.08.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for continuity and efficient operation of local government in times of
emergency.
B. This chapter provides the necessary organization, powers and authority to enable a timely and effective use of all
available resources to prepare for, respond to and recover from civil emergencies, emergencies or disasters that
are likely to affect the health, security, safety or property of City residents.
C. The City Manager, or in the Council's discretion, the Mayor, shall declare, manage and end an officially declared
state of civil emergency, emergency or disaster.
D. All the provisions of this chapter are to be interpreted and enforced in a manner that is consistent with the
Constitution of the United States, with the Constitution of the State of Colorado, and with Colorado Law on
Emergency Management, Colorado Revised Statutes section 24-33.5-701, et seq., as amended. (Ord. 6-2017,
2017)
2.08.020: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, local emergency shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or
of extreme peril to the safety of persons or property within the City, including, without limitation, fire, flood, wind,
storm, earthquake, epidemic, infestation, explosion, aircraft crash, air pollution, hazardous substance incident, oil
spill or other contamination of air or water requiring immediate action to avert danger or damage, water or power
shortage, drought, civil disturbance, condition of riot or insurrection, hostile military or paramilitary action, or any
other declared disaster that requires the aid and assistance of outside, local, State or Federal agencies. (Ord. 6-
2017, 2017)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 42/313
2.08.030: DECLARATION AND TERM OF LOCAL EMERGENCY:
A. The City Manager may declare a local emergency pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 24-33.5-709
and section 15.7 of the City Charter, when the City Manager determines that there is reasonable cause to
believe that the City, or any part of the City, is suffering from, or is in imminent danger of suffering from, an
emergency, and that a declaration of emergency is required to avoid or mitigate serious injuries to members of
the public or the loss of life or property. However, the power to declare a local emergency is subject to the power
of the City Council to determine, by appropriate motion and vote, that the Mayor, instead of the City Manager,
shall declare the local emergency or exercise the powers enumerated in section 2.08.040 of this chapter to
administer the emergency.
B. Any declaration of a local emergency shall be promptly filed with the City Clerk, delivered to the Yuma County
Sheriff, and forwarded to the State Office of Emergency Management. As soon as possible thereafter, the City
Manager shall notify the City Council and the County Clerk. The public shall also be notified promptly through
general dissemination to the news media, posting on the City website and by the use of other means of
communication appropriate for informing the general public.
C. No declaration of local emergency may exceed forty eight (48) hours from the time of declaration or the
conclusion of the local emergency, whichever occurs first. Upon declaration of a second or further emergency,
the emergency powers set forth herein may be exercised during such further emergency period, but never for
more than forty eight (48) hours in one declared emergency period. No declared local emergency shall extend
beyond the next regular or special meeting of the City Council unless, at such meeting, the declaration of
emergency is specifically approved for a longer duration by resolution of the City Council.
D. Upon declaration of a local emergency, the City Council shall assemble as soon as possible after the declaration
of local emergency to review or continue the local emergency declaration. Such meeting may be held with less
than twenty four (24) hours' notice but in all other respects, shall be held in compliance with the Colorado Open
Meetings Law. However, the City Council shall meet, in any event, no later than seven (7) days following the
initial declaration of local emergency unless the nature of the local emergency makes such a meeting
impossible, in which case the City Council shall meet as soon as is feasible thereafter.
E. Any official act or meeting that must ordinarily be performed at regular or specified locations shall be valid when
performed at a temporary location pursuant to this section. (Ord. 6-2017, 2017)
2.08.040: POWERS:
Upon the issuance of a declaration of local emergency, the City Manager shall, upon a finding of need, issue such
orders as may be required to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property within the City or to
otherwise preserve the public peace or abate, clean up, or mitigate the effects of any local emergency. Such orders,
once issued, may be changed from time to time during the period of the declared local emergency based upon the
discretion of the City Manager and may include, without limitation, orders to accomplish the following objectives:
A. To call upon regular and auxiliary enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the City to assist in
preserving and keeping the peace and the preservation of life and property of the citizenry of the City.
B. To close streets, sidewalks and parks and to delineate areas within the City wherein an emergency exists.
C. To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the City, thereby requiring all persons in such designated curfew
areas to immediately remove themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places; provided,
however, that professionals providing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services,
firefighters, police and such other enforcement officers and personnel authorized or requested by the City may
be exempted from such curfew.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 43/313
D. To order the closing of any business establishments within the City for the period of the emergency.
E. To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, authorize the acquisition of property, equipment, services,
supplies, and materials on the open market at not more than commercial prices without the strict compliance
with normal City procurement procedures. The purchasing and contracting procedures set forth by administrative
procedure or regulation, including the limits on the authority of the City Manager to enter into contracts, if any,
shall be automatically suspended in the event of an official declaration of a local emergency. Such suspension
shall occur without the need for any formal action by the City Council.
1. The City Manager's authority to approve contracts during a local emergency shall be limited to contracts that
are reasonably related to the local emergency and in an aggregate amount not to exceed one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The temporary suspension shall remain in effect for the duration of the
declared local emergency unless earlier terminated by action of the City Council.
2. If such powers are exercised during a local emergency, the City Manager shall provide to the City Council a
summary of all contracts approved, including the name of the contractor, amount of the contract and purpose
of the contract, on a daily basis.
F. To hire or contract for construction, snow removal, engineering, architectural, building, electrical, plumbing, or
other professional or construction services essential to continue the activities of the City without the advertising
of bids or strict compliance with other formal procurement requirements.
G. To close or cancel the use of any City-owned or operated building or other public facility.
H. To control, restrict, allocate, or regulate the use, sale, production, or distribution of food, water, clothing, and other
commodities, materials, goods, services, and resources.
I. To issue administrative regulations and procedures necessary and consistent with this chapter.
J. To suspend or modify provisions of any ordinance if strict compliance with such ordinance would prevent, hinder,
or delay action that is necessary to cope with the local emergency.
K. To do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property within the City. (Ord.
6-2017, 2017)
2.08.050: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS SUSPENDED:
Any orders, rules and regulations promulgated during a proclaimed state of local emergency shall take precedence
over existing ordinances, rules and regulations if a conflict arises. (Ord. 6-2017, 2017)
Chapter 2.10
PROHIBITED GIFTS TO CITY OFFICIALS
2.10.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings, except where
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBER: Any person duly appointed by the council to any board or commission of
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 44/313
the city as authorized and established in this title.
CITY OFFICIAL: A council member, an employee or a board and commission member.
COUNCIL MEMBER: A member of the council.
DEPENDENT CHILD: An individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, and who is: a) a son or daughter by
blood or adoption of a city official; b) in the legal guardianship of a city official; or c) a stepson or stepdaughter of a
city official.
EMPLOYEE: Each compensated person in the service of the city who is designated as an employee in the city's
personnel rules and regulations, but shall not include any person providing services for the city who is considered
for federal income tax purposes to be an independent contractor.
GIFT: The transfer of a thing of value by one person to another person without the person transferring the thing of
value receiving in return lawful compensation or consideration of equal or greater value from the person receiving
the thing of value. However, a "gift" shall not mean any thing of value given to a person by a local, state or the
federal government as authorized by law.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, limited liability company, partnership, labor
organization, association, political party, committee or other legal entity.
THING OF VALUE: Any tangible or intangible thing having a market value, including, without limitation, money, real
property, personal property, services, loans of money or property, favors,gratuities, rewards, awards, grants,
scholarships, discounts, promises of future employment, honoraria, event tickets, travel, lodging, meals, and the
forbearance and forgiveness of debt. (Ord. 2-2007 §1, 2007)
2.10.020: PROHIBITED GIFTS:
Unless permitted under section 2.10.030 of this chapter, a city official shall not solicit or accept any gift from any
person either directly or indirectly through the city official's spouse or dependent child which gift the city official
knows or which a reasonable person in the city official's position should know under the circumstances, is either:
A. A gift that would tend to improperly influence that city official to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of
his or her public duties; or
B. A gift being solicited or given for the primary purpose of rewarding the city official for an official action he or she
has taken. (Ord. 2-2007 §1, 2007)
2.10.030: PERMITTED GIFTS:
The gift prohibitions of section 2.10.020 of this chapter shall not apply to city officials with respect to the following
permitted gifts:
A. Campaign contributions as authorized by law;
B. A nonmonetary award, publicly presented, in recognition of public service;
C. Gifts similarly available to the general public;
D. Educational scholarships and grants available to members of the general public similarly situated;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 45/313
E. Grants and services provided for medical, respite or hospice care or other social welfare needs available to
members of the general public similarly situated;
F. An occasional, unsolicited gift having a fair market value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less;
G. Unsolicited informational material, publications, or subscriptions related to the city official's performance of his or
her official duties;
H. An unsolicited token or award of appreciation in the form of a plaque, trophy, desk item, wall memento or similar
item;
I. Payment of or reimbursement for actual and necessary expenditures for registration, travel, lodging and meals
forattendance at a convention, training seminar, or other meeting at which the city official is scheduled to
participate as a representative of the city or to attend as part of his or her official duties;
J. An occasional, unsolicited opportunity to participate in a business meeting or social function where a meal is
served and/or entertainment is provided if the city official's attendance would not be considered extraordinary
when viewed in light of the position held by the city official;
K. Payment received by a council member for a speech, appearance or publication required to be reported by the
council member pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 24-6-203;
L. Gifts received by a council member or a board and commission member arising from his or her employment and
that is unrelated to his or her official city duties; and
M. Gifts received by an employee from the city as authorized in the city's personnel rules and regulations, and any
gifts received by an employee arising from his or her noncity employment and that is unrelated to his or her
official city duties. (Ord. 2-2007 §1, 2007)
2.10.040: RESTRICTIONS ON REPRESENTATION AFTER LEAVING OFFICE:
No city official shall personally represent another person or entity for compensation before any other city official for
a period of six (6) months following vacation of office. (Ord. 2-2007 §1, 2007)
2.10.050: VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any city official to violate any provision of this chapter. Proof of a violation shall be
established by a preponderance of the evidence presented at trial.
B. Any city official determined by the municipal court to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
to have committed a civil infraction and shall be punished by a civil fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). In addition to any civil fine imposed, a judgment in the amount of twice the fair market value of the
prohibited gift received shall also be entered by the municipal court against the city official. If the city official fails
to pay the total judgment amount entered for the civil fine and for twice the fair market value of the prohibited gift
within thirty (30) days of the entry of the final judgment, the city may pursue any legal means available to it for
the collection of the judgment. (Ord. 2-2007 §1, 2007)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 46/313
Chapter 2.12
FIRE DEPARTMENT
2.12.010: VOLUNTEER; PAYMENT OF EXPENSES:
The city shall have a volunteer fire department and the city council may enter into a cooperative agreement with a
fire protection district. The council may pay all or a proportionate share of the necessary expenses for providing and
housing firefighting equipment and other expenses incidental to fire protection. (Prior code §3.7)
Chapter 2.16
PLANNING COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 25-2018, 2018)
Chapter 2.20
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
2.20.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. City Council shall constitute the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 2-2016,
2016)
2.20.020: POWERS; DUTIES:
A. The Board shall have the power and duty to hear and decide the appeals as provided for in this chapter.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers and duty to hear and decide variances as provided for in title 17,
chapter 17.05 of this Code. (Ord. 2-2016, 2016)
2.20.030: APPEALS; DECISION:
A. Appeals: Appeals to the Board of Adjustment concerning any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by the individual charged with the interpretation and enforcement of title 17 of this Code, may be taken by any
person aggrieved by the decision.
B. Appeal Filing Fee: The person taking the appeal shall file a notice with the City Clerk specifying the grounds for
the appeal within ten (10) days of the decision being appealed. Any person pursuing an appeal pursuant to this
subsection B shall be responsible for the payment of all fees, per the published fee schedule, and for the
completion of all forms which may be prescribed by the City. Failure to pay any required fee or to properly
complete any required form shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.
C. Documentation: Upon receipt of the appeal, all documentation regarding the decision by the individual charged
with enforcement and interpretation of any zoning ordinance shall be provided to the Board of Adjustment. The
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 47/313
Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time to consider the appeal and provide notice of such time to the
appealing party. The Board of Adjustment shall determine an appeal within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of
the hearing.
D. Written Notice: In the written notice, the appellant must substantiate the following:
1. Identify the explicit Code provisions which are in dispute; and
2. Explanation of why the administrative decision is incorrect because of one (1) or more of the criteria in
subsection E of this section.
E. Criteria For Review Of An Appeal: In reviewing an appeal, the Board shall determine if:
1. The Code was interpreted or applied erroneously; and
2. Granting the appeal is not a detriment to public health, safety or welfare.
F. Affirmation Or Reversal: The Board may affirm, reverse, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision or
determination appealed and shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination. Any decision shall
be made in writing by resolution.
G. Reversal: A concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any administrative
decision.
H. Decisions Final: Any decision by the Board of Adjustment under this chapter shall be final, subject to judicial
review pursuant to Colorado law. (Ord. 2-2016, 2016)
2.20.040: STAYS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
A perfected appeal shall operate as a stay of the administrative decision unless determined otherwise by the Board
of Adjustment. (Ord. 2-2016, 2016)
Chapter 2.24
SOCIAL SECURITY
2.24.010: COVERAGE:
The city council has adopted a resolution extending the benefits of old age and survivor's insurance to its
employees and officers. The proper officers of the city are authorized to continue making payroll deductions from
salaries and to make the required payment by the city and to do all other things necessary to continue the coverage
of the officers and employees of the city in the old age and survivor's insurance system. (Prior code §3.9)
Chapter 2.28
RETIREMENT
2.28.010: EXTENSION OF BENEFITS:
The city council has adopted a resolution extending the benefits of the Public Employment Retirement Association
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 48/313
to its employees and officers. (Prior code §3.12)
Chapter 2.32
AIRPORT
2.32.010: PURPOSE:
There is a need to generate revenue from those using the Yuma Municipal Airport so that the revenue may be used
for capital improvements and the expense of operating the airport. (Ord. 1-1982 §1, 1982)
2.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions as used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, shall have the following meanings:
AIRPORT: The Municipal airport at Yuma, Colorado.
CITY: The City of Yuma, Colorado.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Colorado.
COMMERCIAL: Engaging in the sale or trade of products or services.
FIXED BASE: Any person using the Municipal airport as its main operations point.
MANAGER: The City Manager of the City of Yuma, Colorado.
PERSON: Every individual, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or syndicate using the services
provided at the airport.
PRIVATE: Any aircraft where more than fifty percent (50%) of the use thereof is for a personal, not a commercial,
purpose. (Ord. 1-1982 §2, 1982)
2.32.030: USE; FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 4-1997 §2, 1997)
2.32.040: TIE DOWN FACILITIES USE; FEES:
The City shall charge a fee to any person using the tie down facilities at the Municipal airport, should the use extend
for a period of more than seven (7) days. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
2.32.050: FEES; PAYMENT:
All fees shall be due and payable to the City Clerk in advance by January 10 of each year. Any person becoming
obligated to pay the fees set forth hereunder at any time during the course of any calendar year shall pay the fee(s)
to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date the person became obligated to pay under the terms and
conditions hereof. Any such fee payment accruing during the calendar year shall be prorated to the end of that
calendar year. (Ord. 1-1982 §5, 1982)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 49/313
2.32.060: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who in any way violates any of the provisions of this chapter for which no penalty is expressly provided
is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. In addition to the foregoing penalties, the City Manager may suspend the privilege of any person
from further use of the Yuma Municipal Airport facilities until such time as the violator(s) has complied with the terms
and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 1-1982 §6, 1982)
2.32.070: AIRPORT HANGARS:
The City Manager shall be authorized to lease airport hangars based upon the following criteria:
A. Lease Terms:
1. Lease Maximum: The City Manager shall be authorized to execute a lease containing a term not to exceed
twenty (20) years in length, for lessees who are in need of long term financing from a third party for the
purpose of purchasing and constructing a new hangar, or purchasing an existing hangar. Said lease shall be
drafted so that the lease term shall end on December 31.
2. Lease Minimum: All other leases shall be for a term of five (5) years, and shall end on December 31.
3. Cancellation Of Lease: All lease agreements shall contain a clause allowing the lessee to cancel the lease
after at least sixty (60) days' written notice given to the City Manager. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 5-2012, 2012)
Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04
FISCAL PROCEDURES
3.04.010: PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
The city council shall, within twenty (20) days after the adjournment of each regular or special meeting, publish such
of its proceedings as relate to the payment of bills, stating for what the same are allowed, the name of the person to
whom allowed and to whom paid. It shall also publish a statement concerning all contracts awarded and rebates
allowed. (Prior code §14.5)
3.04.020: DEPOSITS; INVESTMENTS:
The city treasurer shall deposit all of the funds and monies which come into his possession by virtue of his office as
city treasurer in one or more responsible banks located in the state which have been designated by written
resolution of the city council. The city council may also authorize the city treasurer, by written resolution, to invest all
or part of such funds in securities which are authorized for such investment by state law. (Prior code §14.6)
3.04.030: WARRANT ISSUANCE:
All warrants drawn by the treasurer must be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk, stating the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 50/313
particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable. No money shall
be drawn except as provided in this chapter. (Prior code §14.7)
3.04.040: TREASURER'S ANNUAL REPORT:
By March 1, after the close of the prior fiscal year, the city treasurer shall make out and file with the clerk a full and
detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the city, and all of his transactions as such treasurer during the
preceding fiscal year, and shall show in such account the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year. The city
clerk shall immediately cause such account to be published in a newspaper published in the city. (Ord. 16-1982,
1982: prior code §14.8)
Chapter 3.08
OCCUPATIONAL TAX ON LIQUOR DISPENSERS
3.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings as provided under State law. (Ord. 18-2018,
2018)
3.08.020: PURPOSE:
The City Council finds, determines and declares that, considering the nature of the business of selling at retail 3.2
percent beer, malt, vinous or spirituous liquors for beverage purposes and the relation of such business to the
Municipal welfare, as well as the relation thereof to the expenditures required by the City and a proper, just and
equitable distribution of tax burdens within the City, and all other matters proper to be considered in relation thereto,
that the classification of the business as a separate occupation is reasonable, proper, uniform and nondiscriminatory
and that the amount of tax imposed by this section is reasonable, proper, uniform and nondiscriminatory and
necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax burdens within the City. (Prior Code §8.8-3)
3.08.030: CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES:
The business of selling at retail any 3.2 percent beer, malt, vinous or spirituous liquor, other than medicinal liquors,
for beverage purposes is defined and separately classified as such occupation for the purpose of this chapter as
follows:
A. Class A Operators: All operators who are licensed to sell beer, wine and spirituous liquors for consumption on the
premises either as hotels or restaurants shall be Class A operators.
B. Class B Operators: All operators licensed to sell malt or vinous liquors only by the drink for consumption on the
premises shall be Class B operators.
C. Class C Operators: All operators licensed as retail stores to sell in original containers malt, vinous or spirituous
liquors for consumption off the premises shall be Class C operators.
D. Class D Operators: All operators licensed as drugstores to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors in original
containers for consumption off the premises shall be Class D operators.
E. Class E Operators: All operators licensed to sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors as clubs are Class E operators.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 51/313
F. Class F Operators: All operators licensed to sell only 3.2 percent beer either by the drink for consumption on the
premises or in the original containers shall be Class F operators. (Prior Code §8.8-2)
3.08.040: LEVIED; AMOUNT:
There is hereby levied and assessed for the year 1973 and for each year thereafter an annual Occupation Tax upon
the business of selling 3.2 percent beer, malt, vinous or spirituous liquors, except medicinal liquors, in the City, as
the occupation has been herein classified as follows:
A. For all Class A operators: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00);
B. For all Class B operators: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00);
C. For all Class C operators: Five hundred dollars ($500.00);
D. For all Class D operators: Five hundred dollars ($500.00);
E. For all Class E operators: One hundred dollars ($100.00);
F. For all Class F operators: Two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Prior Code §8.8-4)
3.08.050: PAYMENT; RECEIPT; PRORATING:
A. Such tax shall be due and payable to the Treasurer of the City on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent
on February 1 of the same year. Prepayment of the tax may be made in the month of December preceding the
due date.
B. Upon the receipt of such tax, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to execute and deliver to the operator paying
the tax, a revenue receipt showing the name of the operator paying the tax, the date of payment, the annual
period for which the tax is paid, and the place at which the operator conducts business.
C. The operator shall at all times during the year keep the receipt posted in a conspicuous place in his place of
business.
D. If any operator begins business subsequent to January 1 of any year, the tax shall be prorated on a monthly
basis for the remaining portion of the year; but no refund shall be made to any person who discontinues the
business during the year. All prorated taxes provided for herein shall be due and payable upon the beginning of
the business and shall be delinquent ten (10) days thereafter. Interest shall accrue on all delinquent taxes herein
provided for from the day of delinquency until paid or collected, at the rate of one percent (1%) per month. (Prior
Code §8.8-5)
3.08.060: DELINQUENCY NOT GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
No delinquency in payment of the tax herein provided for shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any
license granted to any such operator by any licensing authority pursuant to the statutes enacted by the General
Assembly of Colorado, and in the performance of any duties imposed upon the City Council as a licensing authority
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 52/313
by the statutes, the City Council shall exclude from consideration any delinquency in payment of the tax herein
provided for. (Prior Code §8.8-6)
3.08.070: RECOVERY OF TAX BY SUIT:
The City shall have the right to recover all sums due by the terms of this chapter by judgment and execution thereon
in a civil action, in any court of competent jurisdiction; such remedy shall be cumulative with all other remedies
provided herein for the enforcement of this chapter. (Prior Code §8.8-7)
3.08.080: NONCOMPLIANCE DEEMED OFFENSE; CONVICTION NOT TO CONSTITUTE
REVOCATION:
Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter by payment of taxes, securing and posting a receipt therefor and to
otherwise comply with the terms of this chapter shall constitute an offense and violation of this chapter. Delinquency
for each calendar month shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, but no conviction for such violation shall
work as a revocation of the licenses of the defendant issued under the laws of the State of Colorado. (Prior Code
§8.8-8)
Chapter 3.12
OCCUPATIONAL TAX ON UTILITY COMPANY
3.12.010: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied against every telephone utility which is engaged in the business of furnishing local exchange
telephone service within the city, a tax on the privilege of engaging in such business. The amount of such tax for the
portion of 1976 remaining after the effective date hereof shall be eight cents ($0.08) for each telephone account for
which local exchange telephone service is provided within the city on December 21, 1976, and for years subsequent
to 1976, three dollars ($3.00) annually for each such account, as provided in section 3.12.020 of this chapter. (Ord.
8-1976 §1, 1976)
3.12.020: PAYMENT:
A. The tax levied by this chapter shall be due on January 1 of each year, except the year 1976. The tax shall be
payable for years subsequent to 1976 in twelve (12) equal monthly installments, each installment to be payable
on the last business day of each calendar month. The tax for the portion of 1976 remaining after the effective
date hereof shall be due on December 31, 1976, and shall be payable in three (3) equal monthly installments,
each installment to be payable on the last business day of each calendar month.
B. Within fifteen (15) days after the effective date hereof, each telephone utility subject to the tax imposed herein
shall file with the city clerk, in such form as the city clerk may require, a statement showing the total number of
telephone accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the city on January 1, 1977.
Such statement shall be filed in each subsequent year within fifteen (15) days after January 1, 1977, showing
the total number of such accounts on January 1 of each subsequent year thereafter. (Ord. 8-1976 §2, 1976)
3.12.030: RECORDS INSPECTION:
The city, its officers, agents or representatives, shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to examine the books
and recordsof any telephone utility which is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter and to make copies of the
entries or contents thereof. (Ord. 8-1976 §3, 1976)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 53/313
3.12.040: APPLICABILITY:
The tax provided herein is upon the affected occupations and businesses in their performance of local functions and
is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. (Ord. 8-1976 §4, 1976)
3.12.050: FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE:
A. If any telephone utility subject to this chapter fails to pay the taxes as provided herein, the full amount thereof
shall be due and collected from such company, and the same, together with an addition of ten percent (10%) of
the amount of taxes due, shall be and is hereby declared to be a debt due and owing from such utility of the city.
B. If any officer, agent or manager of a telephone utility which is subject to the provisions of this chapter fails,
neglects or refuses to file any statement required by this chapter within the time herein prescribed, such officer,
agent or manager shall be punished, on conviction thereof, by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00),
nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00); provided, that each day after such statement becomes
delinquent during which the officer, agent or manager fails, neglects or refuses to file such statement, shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ord. 8-1976 §5, 1976)
3.12.060: CERTAIN OFFENSES AND LIABILITY TO CONTINUE:
All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective date hereof shall be treated as though all prior
applicable ordinances and amendments thereto were in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any proper
suit, action or prosecution with respect to such offenses and liabilities. All taxes, the liability for which has been
accrued under the terms and provisions of ordinance 2-71 on or before the effective date hereof, shall be and
remain unconditionally due and payable, and shall constitute a debt to the city, payable in conformity with the terms
and provisions of ordinance 2-71 prior to the adoption of this chapter. All of the terms and provisions of ordinance 2-
71 shall be and remain in full force and effect for the purpose of the collection and payment of any and all such
taxes due and payable thereunder, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 8-1976 §6, 1976)
3.12.070: TAX IN LIEU OF OTHER OCCUPATION TAXES:
The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other occupationtaxes, or taxes on the privilege of doing business
within the city, on any telephone utility subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 8-1976 §7, 1976)
Chapter 3.16
SALES TAX
3.16.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a sales tax on the sale of tangible personal property at retail, and the
furnishing of services as provided in paragraph (d), subsection (1) of section 105, article 2, title 29, Colorado
Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended, upon all taxable transactions in the city. (Ord. 4-1977 §1, 1977)
3.16.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the words herein contained shall have the meanings as provided in section 102,
part 1, article 26, title 39, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended, and said definitions are incorporated
herein by this specific reference. (Ord. 4-1977 §2, 1977)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 54/313
3.16.030: RETENTION OF AMOUNT TO COVER VENDOR EXPENSES:
The vendor (retailer) shall be entitled as collection agent for the city to withhold an amount equal to three and onethird
percent (31/3%) of the total amount to be remitted by vendor to the executive director of the department of
revenue for the town each month to cover vendor's expense in the collection and remittance of the town sales tax. If
any vendor is delinquent in remitting the tax, other than in unusual circumstances shown to the satisfaction of the
executive director, the vendor shall not be allowed to retain any amounts to cover his expense in collecting and
remitting the tax, and an amount equivalent to the full three and one-third percent (31/3%) shall be remitted to
theexecutive director by any such delinquent vendor. (Ord. 4-1977 §3, 1977)
3.16.040: INCORPORATION OF STATE STATUTES:
For the purpose of applicability, exemptions, collection, administration and enforcement of this chapter and tax by
the executive director of the department of revenue, the provisions of Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, 39-26-114,
as amended, shall be deemed applicable and incorporated into this chapter as if fully set forth. (Ord. 4-1977 §4.1,
1977)
3.16.050: STATE SALES AND USE TAX TO BE EXEMPT:
The amount subject to tax under this chapter shall not include the state sales and use tax imposed by article 26, title
39, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended. (Ord. 4-1977 §4.2, 1977)
3.16.060: SALES DEEMED CONSUMMATED AT RETAILER'S PLACE OF BUSINESS:
For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales shall be considered consummated at the place of business of the
retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to a destination outside
the city or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the city. (Ord. 4-1977 §4.3, 1977)
3.16.070: GROSS RECEIPTS FROM SALES INCLUDE DELIVERY CHARGE:
The gross receipts from sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and
use tax imposed by article 26 of title 39, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended, regardless of the places to
which delivery is made. (Ord. 4-1977 §4.4, 1977)
3.16.080: DETERMINATION OF PLACE OF BUSINESS WHEN IMPERMANENT OR MORE
THAN ONE:
In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the city, or has more than one place of business, the
place or places at which the retail sales are consummated for the purpose of this sales tax shall be determined by
the provisions of article 26 of title 39, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended, and by the rules and
regulations promulgated by the department of revenue. (Ord. 4-1977 §4.5, 1977)
3.16.090: EXEMPTION FOR SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ON WHICH SPECIFIC
OWNERSHIP TAX HAS BEEN PAID:
All sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable shall be exempt from
the city sales tax when such sales meet both of the following conditions:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 55/313
A. The purchaser is a nonresident of, or has its principal place of business outside the city; and
B. Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the city under laws of the
state. (Ord. 4-1977 §4.6, 1977)
3.16.100: SCHEDULE:
There is imposed on all sales of tangible personal property at retail and the furnishing of services as provided in
section 39-26-104, Colorado Revised Statutes, a tax equal to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts. The tangible
personal property and services taxable by this chapter shall be the same as the tangible personal property and
services taxable pursuant to section 39-26-104, Colorado Revised Statutes. The imposition of the tax on individual
sales shall be in accordance with schedules set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the department of
revenue or by separate ordinance of the city. If any vendor, during any reporting period, shall collect as a tax an
amount in excess of three percent (3%) of his total taxable sales, he shall remit to the executive director of the
department of revenue the full amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess. (Ord. 9-2004 §2, 2004: Ord.
4-1984 §1, 1984: Ord. 4-1977 §5.1, 1977)
3.16.110: SUBMISSION FOR ELECTORAL APPROVAL:
Before the sales tax ordinance set out in this chapter shall become effective, it shall be submitted to and receive the
approval of a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting at special election to be held on August 30, 1977.
(Ord. 4-1977 §6.1, 1977)
3.16.120: AMENDMENT AUTHORITY:
Except as to the one percent (1%) rate of tax herein imposed, and except as to the termination of the tax as set
forth and provided in section 9 of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the board of trustees may amend, alter or
change this chapter, subsequent to adoption by a majority vote of the board of trustees. Such amendment,
alteration, or change need not be submitted to the electors of the city for their approval. (Ord. 4-1977 §6.2, 19771)
3.16.130: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 4-1977 §6.3, 1977)
Chapter 3.20
USE TAX
3.20.010: IMPOSITION:
There is imposed and there shall be paid and collected a use tax (the "use tax") upon the privilege of storing, using,
or consuming within the city any construction and building materials and motor and other vehicles on which
registration is required, purchased at retail, equal to three percent (3%) of the retail cost thereof. Such tax shall be
collected in accordance with the schedules set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the department of
revenue. (Ord. 9-2004 §3, 2004: Ord. 6-1985 §1, 1985)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 56/313
3.20.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of sections 3.20.010 through 3.20.050, inclusive, of this chapter, the words therein contained shall
have the meanings provided in section 39-26-201, Colorado Revised Statutes, as it currently exists or may hereafter
be amended, and said definitions are incorporated herein by specific reference. (Ord. 6-1985 §2, 1985)
3.20.030: EXEMPTIONS:
In no event shall the use tax imposed by this chapter apply:
A. To the storage, use, or consumption of any tangible property the sale of which is subject to a retail sales tax
imposed by the city;
B. To the storage, use, or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the city, either in its
original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of a business;
C. To the storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the city by a nonresident thereof
for his own storage, use, or consumption while temporarily within the city; however, this exemption does not
apply to the storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the state by a nonresident to
be used in the conduct of a business inthis state;
D. To the storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government or the state,
or its institutions or political subdivisions, in their governmental capacities only or by religious or charitable
corporations in the conduct of their religious or charitable functions;
E. To the storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of
manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit, or use any article, substance, or commodity, which tangible
personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or
service which is manufactured, compounded, or furnished and the container, label, or the furnished shipping
case thereof;
F. To the storage, use, or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has
already been subjected to a sales or use tax of another town, city, or county equal to or in excess of that
imposed by this chapter. A credit shall be granted against the use tax imposed by this chapter with respect to a
person's storage, use, or consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased by him elsewhere. The
amount of the credit shall be equal to the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of
another town, city, or county on his purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed
the use tax imposed by this chapter;
G. To the storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property and household effects acquired outside of the
city and brought into it by a nonresident acquiring residency;
H. To the storage or use of a motor vehicle if the owner is or was, at the time of purchase, a nonresident of the city
and he purchased the vehicle outside of the city for use outside of the city and actually so used it for a
substantial and primary purpose for which it was acquired and he registered, titled, and licensed said motor
vehicle outside of the city;
I. To the storage, use, or consumption of any construction and building materials and motor and other vehicles on
which registration is required if a written contract for the purchase thereof was entered into prior to the effective
date hereof;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 57/313
J. To the storage, use, or consumption of any construction and building materials required or made necessary in the
performance of any construction contract bid, let, or entered into at any time prior to the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 6-1985 §3, 1985)
3.20.040: MOTOR AND OTHER VEHICLE TAX COLLECTION:
A. The three percent (3%) use tax provided for herein shall be applicable for every motor or other vehicle for which
registration is required by the laws of the state. Noregistration shall be made of any motor or other vehicle for
which registration is required, and no certificate of title shall be issued for such vehicle by the department of
revenue of the state of Colorado or its authorized agents until any tax due upon the use, storage, or
consumption thereof pursuant to this chapter has been paid.
B. The use tax on motor or other vehicles shall be collected by the authorized agent of the department of revenue of
the state of Colorado in Yuma County, pursuant to agreement between the city and the executive director of the
department of revenue.
C. The proceeds of the use tax on motor or other vehicles shall be paid to the city periodically in accordance with
the agreement authorized by subsection B of this section. (Ord. 9-2004, 2004: Ord. 6-1985 §4, 1985)
3.20.050: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION AUTHORITY:
The tax imposed in this chapter on the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the city any construction and
building materials purchased at retail shall be collected as follows:
A. Such use tax shall be paid to the director of finance and shall be collected at the time building permits are issued
for building and construction by the department of public works. The payment of such tax shall be the
responsibility of the person applying for the building permit. For the purposes of this section the value of the
construction and building materials to be stored, used or consumed as part of any project shall be deemed to be
an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the total valuation of the construction project, or, as the case may be,
fifty two percent (52%) of the total valuation of manufactured homes, as stated on the building permit issued. If
the tax is paid in this way, no further sales or use tax information will be required for final building inspection of
the project.
B. As an alternative to the estimation procedure set forth in subsection A of this section, the taxpayer may make
arrangements with the director of finance to pay the tax monthly or on a mutually agreed upon basis, on the
basis of returns to be filed with the director of finance. Under this option a final project cost report must be filed
and approved before final building inspection is allowed and a certificate of occupancy is issued. Unless the
taxpayer pays the tax as set forth in subsection A of this section, failure to file the return required under this
subsection shall be a violation of this chapter.
C. The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to draw up and make available forms on which the
returns and reports described in subsection B of this section may be filed and to promulgate such additional
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this section. (Ord.
9-1995 §2, 1995)
3.20.060: SUBMISSION FOR ELECTORAL APPROVAL:
Before the ordinance codified herein shall become effective, it shall be submitted to and receive the approval of a
majority of the registered electors of the city voting thereon at a special election to be held on May 14, 1985. (Ord.
6-1985 §6, 1985)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 58/313
Chapter 3.24
COLLECTION OF SALES AND USE TAXES
3.24.010: SALES TAX; NONAPPLICABILITY:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of
construction and building materials, as the term is used in section 29-2-109, Colorado Revised Statutes, if such
materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building
permit or other documentation acceptable to the city evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to
be paid. (Ord. 19-1985 §1, 1985)
3.24.020: USE TAX; NONAPPLICABILITY:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall not apply to the storage of
construction and building materials. (Ord. 19-1985 §2, 1985)
3.24.030: SALES TAX; CREDIT FOR SALES OR USE TAXES PREVIOUSLY PAID TO ANOTHER
MUNICIPALITY:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible
personal property at retail or the furnishing of the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of
services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user
by another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of three percent (3%). A credit shall be granted
against the city's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or
use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of
the credit shall not exceed three percent (3%). (Ord. 10-2012, 2012)
3.24.040: USE TAX; CREDIT FOR SALES OR USE TAXES PREVIOUSLY PAID TO ANOTHER
MUNICIPALITY:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall not apply to the storage, use, or
consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a
sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality legally imposed on the purchaser or user equal to or
in excess of the percent established in section 3.24.060 of this chapter. A credit shall be granted against the city's
use tax with respect to the person's storage, use, or consumption in the city of tangible personal property, the
amount of the credit to equal the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of the previous
statutory or home rule municipality on his purchase or use of the property. (Ord. 6-2008, 2008: Ord. 19-1985 §4,
1985)
3.24.050: USE TAX; NONAPPLICABILITY TO USE OR CONSUMPTION OCCURRING MORE
THAN THREE YEARS AFTER MOST RECENT SALE:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall not be imposed with respect to
the use or consumption of tangible personal property within the city which occurs more than three (3) years after the
most recent sale of the property if, within the three (3) years following such sale, the property has been significantly
used within the state for the principal purpose for which it was purchased. (Ord. 19-1985 §5, 1985)
3.24.060: USE TAX; PRORATION AS APPLIED TO CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 59/313
A. Construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of the city for a period of more than thirty (30)
consecutive days shall be subjected to the full applicable use tax of the city.
B. With respect to transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, construction equipment which is located
within the boundaries of the city for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less shall be subjected to the city's
use tax in an amount calculated as follows: The purchase price of the equipment shall be multiplied by a fraction,
the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is twelve (12), and the result shall be multiplied by
three percent (3%).
C. Where the provisions of subsection B of this section are utilized, the credit provisions of section 3.24.040 of this
chapter shall apply at such time as the aggregate sales and use taxes legally imposed by and paid to other
statutory and home rule municipalities on any such equipment equal to three percent (3%).
D. In order to avail himself of the provisions of subsection B of this section, the taxpayer shall comply with the
following procedure:
1. Prior to or on the date the equipment is located within the boundaries of the city, the taxpayer shall file with the
clerk of the city an equipment declaration on a form provided by the city. Such declaration shall state the dates
on which the taxpayer anticipates the equipment will be located within and removed from the boundaries of
the city, shall include a description of each such anticipated piece of equipment, shall state the actual or
anticipated purchase price of each such anticipated piece of equipment, and shall include such other
information as reasonably deemed necessary by the city.
2. The taxpayer shall file with the city an amended equipment declaration reflecting any changes in the
information contained in any previous equipment declaration no less than once every ninety (90) days after
the equipment is brought into the boundaries of the city or, for equipment which is brought into the boundaries
of the city for a project of less than ninety (90) days' duration, no later than ten (10) days after substantial
completion of the project.
3. The taxpayer need not report on any equipment declaration any equipment for which the purchase price was
under two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
E. If the equipment declaration is given as provided in subsection D of this section, then as to any item of
construction equipment for which the customary purchase price is under two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) which was brought into the boundaries of the city temporarily for use on a construction project, it
shall be presumed that the item was purchased in a jurisdiction having a local sales or use tax as high as three
percent (3%) and that such local sales or use tax was previously paid. In such case the burden of proof in any
proceeding before the city, the executive director of the department of revenue, or the district court, shall be on
the city to prove such local sales or use tax was not paid.
F. If the taxpayer fails to comply with the provisions of subsection D of this section, the taxpayer may not avail
himself of the provisions of subsection B of this section and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection A of
this section. However, substantial compliance with the provisions of subsection D of this section shall allow the
taxpayer to avail himself of the provisions of subsection B of this section. (Ord. 6-2008 §§1, 2, 3, 2008: Ord. 19-
1985 §6, 1985)
3.24.070: USE TAX; COLLECTION LIMITATION OF ACTIONS:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986:
A. No use tax, or interest thereon with respect thereto, shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or
distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be instituted, nor any other action to collect the same be
commenced, more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 60/313
continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with
respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which cases such lien shall continue only
for one year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax,
the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such
taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the clerk of
the city may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by
subsequent agreements in writing.
B. In the case of failure to file a return, the use tax may be assessed and collected at any time. (Ord. 19-1985 §7,
1985)
3.24.080: USE TAX; REFUNDS; LIMITATION OF ACTIONS:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986:
A. An application for refund of use tax paid under dispute by a purchaser or user who claims an exemption pursuant
to section 3.24.030 of this chapter shall be made within sixty (60) days after the storage, use, or consumption of
the goods or services whereon an exemption is claimed.
B. An application for refund of tax monies paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three (3) years after the
date of storage, use, or consumption of the goods for which the refund is claimed. (Ord. 19-1985 §8, 1985)
3.24.090: USE TAX; INTEREST ON UNDERPAYMENT, NONPAYMENT, OR EXTENSIONS OF
TIME FOR PAYMENT:
A. If any amount of use tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at
the rate imposed under section 3.24.130 of this chapter shall be paid for the period from such last date to the
date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for
payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of
jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a tax in which the last date
for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date the liability for
the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date notice and demand for the tax is made by the clerk
of the city.
B. Interest prescribed under this section through section 3.24.120 of this chapter shall be paid upon notice and
demand and shall be assessed, collected, and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable.
C. If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed under this
section on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made, interest
would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment.
D. Interest prescribed under this section through section 3.24.120 of this chapter on any use tax may be assessed
and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed
and collected. (Ord. 19-1985 §9, 1985)
3.24.100: USE TAX; DEFICIENCY DUE TO NEGLIGENCE:
If any part of the deficiency in payment of the use tax is due to negligence or intentional disregard of the ordinances
or of authorized rules and regulations of the city with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be
added ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the deficiency, and interest in such case shall be collected at the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 61/313
rate imposed under section 3.24.130 of this chapter, in addition to the interest provided by section 3.24.090 of this
chapter, on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to file the
return, which interest and addition shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand to
him by the clerk of the city. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there
shall be added one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency and in such case, the whole
amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice
and demand by the clerk of the city and an additional three percent (3%) per month on said amount shall be added
from the date the return was due until paid. (Ord. 19-1985 §10, 1985)
3.24.110: USE TAX; NEGLECT OR REFUSAL TO MAKE RETURN OR TO PAY:
If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the use tax or to pay any use tax as required, the
clerk of the city shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes
due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%)
thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under section 3.24.130 of this chapter, plus onehalf
(1/2) of one percent (1%) per month from the date when due. (Ord. 19-1985 §11, 1985)
3.24.120: PENALTY INTEREST ON UNPAID USE TAX:
Any use tax due and unpaid shall be a debt to the city, and shall draw interest at the rate imposed under section
3.24.130 of this chapter, in addition to the interest provided by section 3.24.090 of this chapter, from the time when
due until paid. (Ord. 19-1985 §12, 1985)
3.24.130: RATE OF INTEREST:
When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provisions of sections 3.24.090 through 3.24.120 of
this chapter, the annual rate of interest shall be that established by the state commissioner of banking pursuant to
section 39-21-110.5, Colorado Revised Statutes. (Ord. 19-1985 §13, 1985)
3.24.140: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in sections 3.24.090 through 3.24.130 of this chapter shall preclude the city from utilizing any other
applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of use tax. (Ord. 19-1985 §14, 1985)
3.24.150: USE TAX; APPEAL OF CITY DECISION; POSTING OF BONDS:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986:
A. Within fifteen (15) days after filing a notice of appeal as provided in section 3.24.170 of this chapter, the taxpayer
shall file with the district court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, interest, and other charges stated
in the final decision by the clerk of the city which are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at his option,
satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a
state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with the provisions of
section 11-35-101(1), Colorado Revised Statutes, equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest, and other
charges stated in the final decision by the clerk of the city.
B. The taxpayer may, at his option, deposit the disputed amount with the clerk of the city in lieu of posting a surety
bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the
pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal to the supreme court or the court of appeals
or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the court, either
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 62/313
retained by the clerk of the city and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part to the taxpayer
with interest at the rate imposed pursuant to section 3.24.130 of this chapter. No claim for refund of amounts
deposited with the clerk of the city need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amount to be repaid in
accordance with the direction of the court. (Ord. 19-1985 §15, 1985)
3.24.160: USE TAX; MAP OF MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES:
The city clerk shall make available to any requesting vendor a map showing the boundaries of the city. For
transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the requesting vendor may rely on such map and any
update thereof available to such vendor in determining whether to collect a use tax. No penalty shall be imposed or
action for deficiency maintained against such a vendor who in good faith complies with the most recent map
available to it. (Ord. 19-1985 §16, 1985)
3.24.170: USE TAX; ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURE; DEFICIENCY
NOTICE FOR CLAIM OF REFUND:
For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the taxpayer may elect a state hearing on the city
clerk's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section.
A. As used in this section, "state hearing" means a hearing before the executive director of the department of
revenue or delegate thereof as provided in section 29-2106.1(3), Colorado Revised Statutes.
B. When the city asserts that use taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the city
shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The deficiency notice shall state the additional use
taxes due. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has
the right to elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to section 29-2-106.1(3), Colorado Revised Statutes.
The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a state hearing on the city's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a
refund of use tax paid.
C. The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local
remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails
to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this subsection. For purposes of this subsection,
"exhaustion of local remedies" means:
1. The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and such city has held such hearing and
issued a final decision thereon. Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of
briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the city may submit a brief.
The city shall hold such hearing and issue the final decisions thereon within ninety (90) days after the city's
receipt of the taxpayer's written request therefor, except the city may extend such period if the delay in holding
the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer, but, in any such event, the city
shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within one hundred eighty (180) days of the taxpayer's
request in writing therefor; or
2. The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and the city has failed to hold such
hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed in subsection C1 of
this section.
D. If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in subsection C of this section, the taxpayer may
request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund, and such request shall be conducted in the
same manner as set forth in sections 29-2-106.1(3) through (7), Colorado Revised Statutes.
E. If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the city, in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer
may appeal such deficiency notice or denial of a claim for refund to the district court of the county of Yuma as
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 63/313
provided in section 29-2-106.1(8), Colorado Revised Statutes, provided the taxpayer complies with the
procedures set forth in subsection C of this section.
F. If the city reasonably finds that the collection of use tax will be jeopardized by delay, the city may utilize the
procedures set forth in section 39-21-111, Colorado Revised Statutes. (Ord. 19-1985 §17, 1985)
Chapter 3.30
FEES ON APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING CHANGES AND
PERMITS
(Rep. by Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
Chapter 3.40
LONG TERM LEASES OF CITY PROPERTY
3.40.010: MUSEUM LEASE:
For a one dollar ($1.00) consideration the city shall lease to the Yuma museum from January 1, 1990, to January 1,
2090, the following described property:
Lot 3 and the North half of Lot 4, Block 5, Campbell's Addition to the town of Yuma, Colorado.
(Ord. 2-1990, 1990)
3.40.020: LEASES IN EXCESS OF FIVE YEARS:
The city council shall not lease city owned real property for a term of greater than five (5) years in length. This
section shall not apply to the following circumstances:
A. Existing lease agreements;
B. Lease agreements for airport hangars which shall be determined pursuant to chapter 2.32 of this code;
C. Lease agreements which are approved by an ordinance that is adopted by no less than five (5) affirmative votes
of the members of council. (Ord. 6-1998 §1, 1998)
Chapter 3.42
CITY LEASE OF THIRD PARTY REAL AND/OR PERSONAL
PROPERTY
3.42.010: CITY LEASE OF PROPERTY:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 64/313
Any real and/or personal property acquired or occupied by the city of Yuma from a third party pursuant to a rental or
leasehold agreement shall not be for a period longer than the useful life of the property. Said real and/or personal
property shall only be used for authorized governmental or proprietary functions of the city of Yuma. Subject to the
relevant provisions of Colorado state law, this chapter is intended to exempt said real and/or personal property from
taxation. (Ord. 4-2002 §1, 2002)
Chapter 3.44
LATE PAYMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
Chapter 3.45
ELECTRONIC TRANSACTION FEES
3.45.010: TRANSACTION FEES:
A. All transaction fees charged by PSN or VANTIV, or any successor or subsequent company utilized for such
purposes, to enable the payment of monies to the city of Yuma through debit cards, credit cards or other
electronic transfers shall be paid by the customer at the time of the transaction. Such transactions shall include,
but are not limited to, the following: online/mobile, automated phone, live PSN representative for all eChecking
or eSavings payments and credit card payments through MasterCard, Visa or Discover, card swipes at a
terminal and any nonsufficient funds fees.
B. If any or all of such transaction fees are increased or decreased at any time, then such fees shall be applicable at
the time of the change.
C. All such transaction fees as currently charged shall be clearly posted at city hall and on any online website
utilized for such purpose. (Ord. 10-2013, 2013)
Chapter 3.50
PURCHASE/BID PROCEDURES
3.50.010: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe purchasing procedures that the city will follow in the purchase of
materials and/or services which are necessary for the operation of the city. (Ord. 2-1999 §1, 1999)
3.50.020: COMPETITIVE BIDDING; CONDITIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Public Works Contracts: The city manager shall call for competitive bids on any public works contract in an
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more unless:
1. The contract is awarded to a person who has been awarded a contract by another public agency through a
competitive bid process within the last year, if the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed the unit prices
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 65/313
in the public agency contract; or
2. The treasurer and city manager determine that it is not practical and advantageous to call for a competitive
bid. For purposes of this chapter, the term "public works contract" means a contract for construction work to be
done in a public improvement project, including, without limitation, streets, alleys, sidewalks, water or
wastewater facilities, flood control facilities, traffic control devices, street lighting, parks, public structures and
landscaping.
B. Tangible Property: The city manager shall call for competitive bids for the purchase of tangible property if the
contract amount is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, unless:
1. The contract is awarded to a person who has been awarded a contract by another public agency through a
competitive bid process within the last year, and the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed those in the
public agency contract; or
2. The treasurer and city manager determine that it is not practical and advantageous to call for a competitive
bid.
C. Insurance Policies: The city manager shall call for competitive bids for the purchase of insurance policies for
which annual premiums total five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, unless:
1. The contract is awarded to a person who has been awarded a contract by another public agency through a
competitive bid process within the last year, and the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed those in the
prior public agency contract; or
2. The treasurer and city manager determine that it is not practical and advantageous to do so.
D. Sale Of Abandoned, Scrap Or Salvage Material: The city manager shall call for competitive bids for the sale of
abandoned, scrap or salvage material owned by the city such as wire, batteries, pipe, iron, impound vehicles,
etc., unless:
1. The contract is awarded to a person who has been awarded a contract by another public agency through a
competitive bid process within the last year, and the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed those in the
prior public agency contract; or
2. The treasurer and city manager determine that it is not practical and advantageous to do so. (Ord. 6-2014,
2014: Ord. 2-1999 §1, 1999)
3.50.030: BID REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each bid submitted to the city shall meet the following conditions:
1. A bid is signed, enclosed in a sealed envelope, and filed as stated in the advertisement for the bid.
2. Each bid for a contract over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be accompanied by a check or bid bond
equal to five percent (5%) of the bid, to be forfeited to the city if a bid is accepted and the bidder fails to sign a
contract within fifteen (15) days of acceptance. For each bid for a contract under fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), it shall be at the discretion of the city manager as to whether or not a check or bid bond is
required, pursuant to this subsection A2.
B. The city manager may require that no bid be withdrawn for up to forty five (45) days after the date and time set
for opening of bids, but a bid may be withdrawn up to twenty four (24) hours prior to the expiration of the
deadline for submitted bids.
C. The city manager may waive technical irregularities in the bid requirements in this chapter or in the
advertisement for bids, if the city manager finds that such waiver does not compromise the integrity of the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 66/313
bidding process. (Ord. 2-1999 §1, 1999)
3.50.040: COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCEDURE:
A. The city manager shall publish a notice of call for bids at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city containing:
1. A description of the work to be performed or the product to be purchased.
2. The location where copies of plans, specifications, and other contract documents may be examined.
3. The time and place where bids will be received and time and place where bids will be opened.
4. A statement that the city reserves the right to reject any or all bids and to waive any informalities or
irregularities therein.
5. A statement that the city manager may require that no bidder may withdraw a bid for a period of up to forty
five (45) days after the date and hour set for opening bids, but that a bid may be withdrawn up to twenty four
(24) hours prior to expiration of the deadline for submitted bids.
6. A statement setting forth requirements for bid bonds and performance, labor, materials, bonds, product liability
coverage warranty, and workers' compensation.
B. Bids not submitted by the required deadline are ineligible for consideration and will not be opened, but the
finance director may waive the deadline.
C. Bids shall be opened by the city manager or treasurer and recorded at the time and place provided in the
advertisement for bids, in the presence of the bidders and others as authorized or requested by the city
manager.
D. Bidders may inspect the bids after they are opened in accordance with provisions of the Colorado public records
act.
E. Confidential data, if identified as such, will be held confidential upon request, if the request is made as part of the
bid and if the city attorney determines that the data meet the requirements of the Colorado public records act.
F. The city clerk shall preserve all bids, proposals, advertisements, circulars, and correspondence relating to the
purchase of supplies for at least three (3) years as a matter of public record.
G. The city manager is not required to maintain a bid list. The only formal notice of a call for bids is that published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city as prescribed by subsection A of this section. When the city
manager determines that it is necessary, additional publication may be made in such magazines, journals, or
newspapers which may be necessary to guarantee the broadest exposure to the providers of the goods and
services so desired. (Ord. 2-1999 §1, 1999)
3.50.050: SELECTION OF BIDS:
A. The city manager, after consultation with the treasurer, may reject any and all bids and need not accept the
lowest bid. For purposes of this chapter, the definition of "lowest bid" will include consideration of initial cost and,
when applicable, life cycle cost over the normal lifetime of the product and energy efficiency in consumption of
nonrenewable fuels.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 67/313
B. The city manager shall determine if a bidder satisfies the minimum bid requirements and the responsibility criteria
prescribed by subsection C of this section. If the city manager determines that the lowest bidder does not meet
the minimum bid requirements, the city manager may reject the bid. If the city manager determines that the
lowest bidder does not meet the responsibility criteria, the city manager shall refer the bid to the city council to
determine whether to accept other than the lowest bid.
C. In determining whether to accept a bid, the city council, after consultation with the city manager, shall consider
the following responsibility criteria: the bidder's financial responsibility, skill, expertise, and ability to complete the
contract promptly and satisfactorily; whether the bidder maintains a permanent place of business; whether the
bidder has adequate plant, equipment, and support services to perform the contract; whether the bidder has
previously performed similar work satisfactorily; whether the bidder is likely to be engaged in work that may
impair the ability to finance the work covered by the bid or provide equipment for its proper execution; and
whether there are any claims raising a substantial question about the bidder's ability to perform the contract.
D. After proposal opening, interviews may be conducted with the highest ranked responsible offeror or offerors for
the purpose of clarification and to assure full understanding of, and responsiveness to, solicitation requirements.
Offerors selected for interview shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for
discussion and revision of proposals. Revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award in order
to reflect clarifications in the proposal's scope of work or contract amount. In conducting interviews, there shall
be no disclosure by the city or any officer, employee or committee thereof, of any information derived from
proposals submitted by competing offerors, nor shall there be any disclosure of information discussed by the
evaluation committee in selecting the highest ranked offeror(s). After the contract has been awarded and a
written contract executed with the selected offeror(s), the total points of the evaluation committee will be retained
by the purchasing agent for a period of time consistent with the city's record retention policy. Individual rating
sheets and notes prepared or utilized by members of the evaluation committee shall not be made available for
public inspection. (Ord. 2-1999 §1, 1999)
3.50.060: SELECTION OF CONSULTANTS:
A. The city manager shall call for proposals for consulting services on any consulting contract in an amount of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, unless the city manager determines that it is not practical and
advantageous to do so.
B. The city manager shall publish notice of intent to seek consulting services and request for proposals at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. When the city manager determines that it is necessary,
additional publication may be made in such magazines, journals, or newspapers which may be necessary to
guarantee the most broad exposure to the providers of the goods and services so desired. Such notice shall
contain:
1. A description of the project to be performed;
2. The location where copies of plans, specifications, and other documents may be examined;
3. Time and budget limitations, if applicable;
4. The time and place where proposals will be received. (Ord. 2-1999 §1, 1999)
3.50.070: CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Execution: All contracts shall be executed pursuant to the city charter, for and on behalf of the city.
B. Approval: All contracts shall be approved by the city attorney before they are executed by the proper authority
pursuant to the city charter, unless the city attorney determines that it is not practical and advantageous to do so.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 68/313
C. Bond: The city manager shall require a performance bond and a labor and material bond or equal security on all
public works contracts over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and may require such bonds or security on public
works contracts under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
D. Payment: The last payment on a public works contract in an amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or
more will not be made until at least ten (10) days after a notice of intention to pay is published at least twice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city and after the city has received a release of liens. Claims against the
contract payment shall be filed as prescribed by state law.
E. Retainage Of Sums: The contract shall include provisions for retainage of contract sums as prescribed by state
law, and may include provisions for retainage in contracts not covered by state law.
F. Delay; Right Of Recovery: The city may, by contract, require the contractor to waive, release or extinguish its
rights to recover costs or damages, or obtain an equitable adjustment, for delays in performing such contract, if
such delay is caused, in whole or in part, by acts or omissions of the city or its agents, if the contract provides
that an extension of time for completion of the work is the contractor's remedy for such delay. Such a clause is
valid and enforceable, and provision of state law to the contrary notwithstanding.
G. Multiyear Contracts:
1. No contract for services or professional services, including all renewals, shall be made by the city for a period
longer than five (5) years, unless authorized by ordinance, which ordinance shall not be passed as an
emergency ordinance.
2. Multiyear contracts shall be expressly contingent upon the annual budgeting and appropriation of sufficient
funds on an annual basis, or by nonlapsing appropriation.
3. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support the continuation of the city's
performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be canceled. (Ord. 2-1999 §1, 1999)
3.50.080: ADOPTION OF RULES BY CITY MANAGER FOR INTERPRETATION AND
ENFORCEMENT:
A. The city manager may adopt rules to interpret and enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2-1999 §1, 1999)
Title 4
RESERVED
Title 5
BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04
AMBULANCE SERVICE
5.04.010: TERRITORY; OPERATION ASSUMED BY CITY:
All functions and responsibilities with respect to the operation of an ambulance service for the west half of Yuma
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 69/313
County shall be assumed by the city in accordance with the rules and regulations set out in this chapter. (Prior code
§8.13-1)
5.04.020: CONTRACT BETWEEN CITY AND COUNTY:
A contract between the city and the county of Yuma shall be signed and executed by both parties for a period of no
more than one year. Each year the city council of the city and their representatives shall negotiate with the county of
Yuma and their representatives to ensure a fair and equitable financial responsibility by both parties. (Prior code
§8.13-2)
5.04.030: MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS KEPT IN AMBULANCE; REQUESTS FOR SUPPLIES:
Credit cards will be placed in the ambulance. All credit slips are to be turned in with the trip tickets. A card bearing
the phone numbers of all county coroners will be placed in the ambulance. Any needs other than gas or general
supplies that are stocked will be made through the city manager's office. Any requests are also to be directed to
him. Each individual is encouraged to present a professional demeanor and attend any and all beneficial classes
that are offered in the area to further improve the service. (Prior code §8.13-4)
5.04.040: PERSONNEL; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. One man will be hired to generally oversee the ambulance. In addition to making daytime calls, it will be his duty
to daily check the ambulance to see that the outward appearance is good and that the inside is in order and
ready to service a call. He will also keep the garage neat and tidy.
B. Each driver will be responsible for turning in his individual trip tickets. Drivers will be paid from trip tickets. It is
imperative that trip tickets be filled out completely. Eachdriver on returning from a trip is to change the dirty linen
and do such work as is necessary to ensure that the vehicle is ready to go out on call again.
C. Each and every individual associated with the service is reminded to be polite and considerate to the customers.
He is also instructed that all calls are of a sensitive nature and consequently not suitable material for coffee
talks. Only authorized personnel are to go on ambulance calls. Wives, friends or other traveling companions are
strictly prohibited. Violation of these policies will result in dismissal. (Prior code §8.13-5)
Chapter 5.10
FRANCHISES
5.10.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the term "franchise" shall mean a special right or privilege granted by the city council
as hereinafter provided to any person to erect, construct, operate, carry on, or maintain an electric power plant,
telephone system, communication system, cable system, gas plant or system, rail or mass transit system, or any
other business activity affective of the public interest which permanently occupies and obstructs the public streets,
rights of way, alleys or properties, together with such other uses as are determined by ordinance to be such a public
concern that want of regulation and control will injuriously affect the public in its general interest; and the term
"license" shall mean a temporary or revocable permission granted to all other activities not a franchise. (Ord. 11-
1993, 1993)
5.10.020: CITY POWERS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 70/313
The city shall have and exercise with regard to all utilities and franchises all municipal powers, function, and
authority now existing and which may be hereafter provided by the state constitution and statutes and its home rule
charter. The city shall have the power and authority within or without the territorial limits of the city, to construct,
condemn, purchase, acquire, and lease public utilities and assets, equipment and everything in relation to or in
connection therewith, in whole or in part, for use of the city and its inhabitants. Except as otherwise provided by the
state constitution, statutes or the city's home rule charter, all powers concerning granting, amending, revoking or
otherwise dealing in franchises shall be exercised by the city council. (Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
5.10.030: GRANT OF PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES:
A. Grants of public utility franchises and all extensions and amendments shall be granted only by ordinance. The
granting of franchises by the city shall be limited only by the provisions of the state constitution and statutes
applicable to statutory home rule cities and towns as now in effect or as hereafter amended and shall be
submitted to the vote of the people when required by the state constitution.
B. No franchise election shall be held until the applicant deposits the cost thereof with the city treasurer in an
amount determined by the city treasurer and approved by the city manager.
C. No exclusive franchises shall be granted. (Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
5.10.040: NO FRANCHISE; EXCEPTION:
No franchise granted by the city shall ever be leased, assigned or otherwise alienated without express consent of
the city, and no dealing with the lessee or assignee on the part of the city to require the performance of any act or
payment of any compensation by the lessee or assignee shall be deemed to operate as such consent. (Ord. 11-
1993, 1993)
5.10.050: WATER RIGHTS:
The city shall have the power to buy, exchange, lease, sell, own, control, and otherwise deal in water rights. (Ord.
11-1993, 1993)
5.10.060: UTILITY RATES:
The city council shall, by ordinance, establish rates, rules and regulations for services provided by municipally
owned utilities. If the city council desires to extend the municipal utilities beyond city boundaries, it shall do so by
ordinance. (Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
5.10.070: TERM, COMPENSATION, AND RESTRICTION:
No franchise, lease, or right to use the streets, or the public places or property of the city shall be granted which
exceeds fifteen (15) years. Every grant of a franchise shall fix the amount and manner of payment of compensation
to be paid by the grantee for the use of the same. Such compensation shall be paid as provided and be subject to
mutual periodic renegotiation, and failure to pay shall result in forfeiture of the franchise at the option of city council
and the city may purchase the property of the holder in whole or in part at its then current market value without a
franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall have additional right to license or tax the equipment ofany
franchise. The license shall be exclusive of and in addition to all other lawful taxes upon the property of the holder
thereof. (Ord. 5-2005 §1, 2005: Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 71/313
5.10.080: FRANCHISE REVIEW:
Each franchise granted under the provisions of this chapter shall include a section specifying a periodic review of
said franchise. (Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
5.10.090: CITY MAY PURCHASE:
Every grant of franchise shall provide that the city may purchase and take over the property of the holder in whole or
in part. (Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
5.10.100: COMMON USE OF FACILITIES:
The city council shall have the power to require any holder of a franchise from the city, or other public utility, to allow
the use of its rights of way, poles, wires, and trenches by any franchise holder, or the city itself, upon payment of a
reasonable rental therefor; and the city may, under the terms prescribed by the city council, allow such franchise
holders to use rights of way, poles, wires, and trenches of the city owned utilities. (Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
5.10.110: FRANCHISE RECORDS:
The city council shall cause to be kept in the office of the city clerk and open to the public for view, an indexed
franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises heretofore and hereafter granted. The index
shall give the name of the grantee and any assignees. The record shall be a complete history of all franchises and
shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same, copies of all annual
reports and such other information and matters of public interest as the city council may from time to time require.
(Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
5.10.120: EXISTING FRANCHISES:
All franchise ordinances of the city in effect at the time of adoption hereof shall remain in full force and effect
according to their provisions and terms until the expiration date provided in such ordinance or until modified by
another franchise. (Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
5.10.130: REVOCABLE PERMITS:
The city council may grant a permit at any time for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley, or city
owned place, provided such permit shall be revocable by the city council at its pleasure, regardless of whether or
not such right to revoke be expressly reserved in such permit. (Ord. 11-1993, 1993)
Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
6.04.010: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 72/313
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to fail to confine it or cause it to be confined to the
premises of the said owner or custodian, unless the animal is under effective and immediate control of the owner
or custodian by a leash, cord, chain or other restraining device.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to fail to have the animal under effective and
immediate control of the owner or custodian by a leash, cord, chain, or other restraining device at all times that
such animal is within the City.
C. Any animal which is not properly restrained as provided in this section shall be considered to be running at large.
Any animal running at large shall be subject to impoundment and may be apprehended by any person
authorized by the City to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
D. It is the purpose of this section to impose strict liability upon the owner or custodian of any animal with respect to
an animal at large.
E. Upon the issuance of a third citation for a violation of this section to an owner or custodian within one year,
regardless of whether the charge involves the same animal, the third violation shall also constitute a violation of
section 6.04.210 of this chapter.
F. Nothing in this section shall apply to cats. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.020: BARKING:
It is unlawful for any owner or custodian of any dog to permit the dog to disturb any person or neighborhood by loud
and persistent or habitual barking or crying. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.030: VICIOUS DOGS:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian to keep or harbor any vicious dog within the City, unless said dog is
properly confined in accordance with the provisions herein.
B. A vicious dog is defined as any dog that, without provocation, bites or attacks persons or other animals;
approaches any person or other animal with vicious or terrorizing behavior or an apparent attitude of attack,
whether or not the attack is consummated or is capable of being consummated; or has acted in a manner that
causes or should cause its owner or custodian to know that the dog is potentially vicious.
C. It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this subsection that the actual or intended victim of any attack
has made an unlawful entry into the residential dwelling structure of the dog's owner or custodian, or has
threatened or attacked a person or animal lawfully within said dwelling structure, or has threatened or attacked
an owner or custodian of the dog. Dwelling structure for the purposes of this subsection, shall mean any
enclosed building, or portion thereof, which provides actual living facilities.
D. Any dog which is reasonably believed to be vicious and which is not properly confined in accordance with the
provisions herein may be impounded if it constitutes a danger to any person or animal. The dog shall remain
impounded until the completion of legal proceedings. The owner or custodian shall be responsible for costs of
impoundment and the dog may be destroyed if such costs are not paid. If any dangerous or vicious dog is at
large and cannot safely be impounded, it may be destroyed by the City.
E. Proper confinement for purposes of this section shall mean the following:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 73/313
1. While on the premises of the owner or custodian, the dog shall be confined within a dwelling structure, or
within a securely fenced enclosure. The enclosure must be permanently fastened at the bottom, and be of
such material and construction that the dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own. The owner or custodian of a
vicious dog shall post a warning of the presence of such a dog at the entrances to the building or enclosure
where the animal is kept.
2. While off the premises of the owner or custodian, the dog shall be leashed and muzzled and under the
physical control of the owner or custodian at all times, unless otherwise confined within a closed vehicle.
F. If the Municipal Court determines that the vicious dog poses a serious danger to the health and safety of other
persons or animals, it may order the dog to be removed from the Municipality or destroyed. Such determination
may be based upon, but is not necessarily limited to, the frequency of violations of the provisions of this chapter
by the owner or custodian of such dog, the severity of any attack or bite or terrorizing behavior by such dog, or
the inability or unwillingness of the owner or custodian to properly confine such dog. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.035: REMOVAL OF ANIMAL WASTE REQUIRED:
A. The owner or custodian of any animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any feces deposited by
such animal on any property, public or private, not owned or exclusively occupied by the owner or keeper.
B. The owner or keeper of any animal shall also be responsible for the periodic removal of feces deposited by such
animal on property owned or exclusively occupied by such owner or keeper. Failure to comply with this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such.
C. Nothing in this section shall apply to cats. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.040: POISONING DOGS AND/OR CATS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to poison any dog(s) and/or cat(s) or to distribute poison in any manner whatever with
the intent or for the purpose of poisoning any dog and/or cat. (Ord. 14-1991, 1991)
6.04.050: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING REQUIRED; FEES:
A. Every person owning or harboring any dog(s) three (3) months of age or older shall register and license the dog
with the City and shall supply all information requested by the City Clerk concerning the dog, along with payment
of the applicable license fee. No license shall be issued for a dog not inoculated in conformity with this Code.
B. Licenses shall be renewable annually from the date of issuance and failure to have a current license shall be
punishable to the owner of the dog by the fine for each dog as established by this chapter and said fine shall
include the license fee for a current license.
C. Any dog found to be unlicensed and unregistered may be confiscated by the City and impounded until such dog
is licensed and registered pursuant to this section. The owner shall be responsible for paying all impounded fees
and fines imposed by this chapter prior to the release of the dog. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.060: LICENSES AND TAGS:
A. The City Clerk shall provide for the issuance of a license to the owner or custodian of each dog licensed under
the provisions of this chapter, containing the following information:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 74/313
1. The name and address of the owner or custodian of an inoculated and licensed dog;
2. The year and series number of the dog tag;
3. The date of inoculation and date of the license;
4. The sex of the dog.
B. The tags shall be made of durable material suitable to be attached to the collar or harness of the inoculated dog.
The tag shall state the year for which it is issued and the series number of the license and tag. The tags shall be
prepared and distributed by the City Clerk and shall be of a different color or shape each year. (Ord. 8-2017,
2017)
6.04.070: INOCULATION AND LICENSING; REQUIRED:
Every person who owns or harbors any dog in the City shall have said dog inoculated by a licensed veterinarian or
provide a written waiver from a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.080: TAGS; INSPECTION:
A. Every owner or custodian of a dog shall attach the tag evidencing the inoculation with anti-rabies vaccine to the
collar or harness of the inoculated animal. The collar or harness shall be worn by the dog at all times.
B. The tag may be inspected by any member of the Police Department, animal control officer or Code Enforcement
Officer at any time. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.090: CAT REGULATIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section shall be to contribute to the public welfare and the preservation
and protection of the property and the inhabitants of said City by declaring and enforcing certain regulations and
restrictions on activities of cats and owners of cats within the City of Yuma.
B. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated.
ABANDONED: A cat of any age, which shall be left either without food, water, shelter or unattended for a period
of at least seventy two (72) hours.
CAREGIVERS: Any person who provides food, water and shelter to feral cats. A caregiver of a feral cat will be
deemed its owner unless such person is acting at the direction and under the supervision of a designed City staff
member administering the City's TNR program.
CAT: Any member of the domestic feline species.
FERAL CAT: A descendant of a domestic cat that has returned to the wild. It is distinguished from a stray cat,
which is a pet cat that has been lost or abandoned. Feral cats are born in the wild.
OWNER: Any person owning or having custody in a cat or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any
premises or vehicle owned or occupied by that person. If the owner of the cat is a minor, the owner of the said
property shall be deemed to be the parent or guardian of the minor for the purposes of this section.
STRAY CAT: A pet cat that has been lost or abandoned.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 75/313
TNR PROGRAM: A program through which free-roaming cats are trapped, sterilized, and returned to the
outdoor locations where they were found.
C. Registration And Licensing:
1. All cats should be registered and licensed with the City. All information required by the City Clerk, including
proof of inoculation, must be submitted with a fee of five dollars ($5.00).
2. Registered cats should be identified by tag which sets forth an official identification number. A microchip also
constitutes an identification tag. Feral cats that have gone through the TNR program will be identified by a
"notched" ear, tattoo or any such marking as designed by a duly designated enforcement officer and such
identification shall mean the feral cat has been registered.
D. Free Roaming And Feral Cats: Cats that are found to be free roaming or feral will be placed in the TNR program
and returned to the location where they were found or trapped.
E. Violations:
1. It shall be unlawful for a cat to be on property other than that of the owner or possessor, without the consent of
the owner or person in possession of such property or unless the cat is effectively restrained in the immediate
custody and control of its owner or possessor by a leash, chain or other restraining device capable of
reasonably restraining the animal.
2. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cat to permit such cat to defecate, urinate or commit a nuisance on
private property, other than the owner's property, or to defecate or commit a nuisance on public property
unless such feces are immediately removed by placing such feces in a plastic bag, which shall be sealed and
deposited in a covered garbage receptacle.
3. It shall be unlawful to abandon a cat.
4. All owners shall keep the quarters where cats are kept clean and sanitary such as to not create a health
hazard or nuisance.
5. No owner shall leave a cat unattended in a vehicle when the conditions in that vehicle would constitute a
health hazard.
6. It shall be unlawful for a caregiver to violate any provision of this section, unless they are acting at the
direction and under the supervision of a City staff member administering the City's TNR program. (Ord. 24-
2018, 2018)
6.04.100: INOCULATION AND LICENSING; UNLAWFUL POSSESSION; LOST TAGS:
A. Only those persons who own or harbor a dog duly vaccinated and licensed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter shall be permitted to possess the licenses and tags provided for in this chapter. No person may affix
a tag evidencing vaccination and licensing to the collar or harness of any dog except the tag issued for that dog
at the time of licensing. Lost tags may be provided upon payment of the applicable fee.
B. Any dog found without the proper inoculation tags may be confiscated by the City and impounded until the owner
supplies written proof of an appointment to have the dog inoculated. The owner shall be responsible for paying
all impounded fees and fines imposed by this chapter prior to the release of the dog. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord.
8-2017, 2017: Ord. 14-1991, 1991)
6.04.110: RABIES; QUARANTINE:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 76/313
A. Any dog which is known to have bitten or injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin, or a dog
which, in the opinion of a member of the Police Department or any licensed veterinarian of the State, appears to
be inflicted with rabies shall be closely confined by its owner in accordance with the directions of a member of
the Police Department for a period of not fewer than ten (10) days.
B. It is unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog has rabies to allow the dog to be taken off his premises
or beyond the limits of the City without the written permission of the animal control officer or the Police Chief.
Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining a dog is rabid, shall immediately notify the animal control officer
or the Police Chief who shall either remove the dog to the pound or summarily destroy it.
C. If the owner of the dog referred to in this section cannot be determined or located, then a member of the Police
Department or the animal control officer shall otherwise confine the dog for a period of not fewer than ten (10)
days. If the owner of the dog is not determined or located, or the dog claimed within ten (10) days, then the Chief
of Police may order the animal destroyed. All costs incurred for the confinement of a dog under this section shall
be paid by the owner or owners of the dog. If the dog is determined to be suffering from rabies, it shall be
destroyed forthwith. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.120: INOCULATION AND LICENSING; IMPORTED DOGS AND/OR CATS:
(Rep. by Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.130: IMPOUNDMENT:
Every police officer, animal control officer or Code Enforcement Officer, either with or without complaint, shall have
the authority to take into custody and impound, any animal in violation of this chapter and to confine and keep such
animal in the City pound or another suitable place. The City, upon receiving any dog, shall make a complete registry
of the breed, color and sex of the dog and whether it is licensed. If it is licensed, he shall enter the name and
address of the owner and the number of the license tags. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.140: IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORITY:
The City shall provide a place, or contract for impoundment services, where animals taken up under the provision of
this chapter may be confined and kept, as provided in this chapter. If the City provides the place, Council shall
appoint a person to have general charge of such animals. (Ord. 9-2018, 2018)
6.04.150: IMPOUNDMENT; NOTICE; REDEMPTION:
A. No later than one day after the impounding of the animal, the owner shall be notified, or if the owner of animal is
unknown, written notice of the impoundment of the animal shall be posted for four (4) days at City Hall, the
Police Department and the City's website describing the animal and the place and time of impoundment. Such
notice shall state that if the animal is not reclaimed within five (5) days from the initial date of such notice, the
City may relocate or destroy the animal.
B. Any animal impounded may not be reclaimed and released until the owner or custodian has paid all fees and
fines imposed by the City. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.160: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR INFECTED ANIMALS:
Except as provided for in section 6.04.170 of this chapter, the City shall keep all animals impounded pursuant to this
chapter for a period of the notice in section 6.04.150 of this chapter. If, at the expiration of five (5) days from the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 77/313
date of notice to the owner or the initial posting of such notice, the animal has not been redeemed, the City may
relocate or destroy the animal. Any animal which appears to be suffering from or affected with mange or other
infections or dangerous disease, as determined by a written certificate of a licensed veterinarian, shall be destroyed.
(Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.170: PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
The City animal control officer shall prevent cruelty to animals. Any officer or agent of the City may lawfully interfere
to prevent the perpetration of an act of cruelty upon any animal in his presence and take possession of any animal
cruelly treated. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.180: INJURED ANIMALS MAY BE KILLED:
The City may lawfully destroy or cause to be destroyed any animal in its charge when, in the judgment of police
officer, Code Enforcement or animal control officer and by the written certificate of a licensed veterinarian called to
view the same in his presence (one of whom may be selected by the owner of the said animal if he so requests),
such animal appears to be injured, disabled, diseased past recovery or unfit for any useful purpose. (Ord. 8-2017,
2017)
6.04.190: PROTECTION OF ANIMALS MISTREATED, NEGLECTED OR ABANDONED:
A. No person shall mistreat or neglect an animal to such degree, or abandon an animal in such circumstances, that
the life or health of the animal is endangered.
B. Animals kept for competition shall not be deemed to be mistreated or neglected if such treatment complies with
the association which dictates the rules of competition and training standards for that particular competition.
C. Upon receiving information from any source that an animal is being cruelly treated or appears to be neglected or
abandoned, the City animal control officer shall make prompt investigation of circumstances thereof. Such
investigation shall include a personal inspection of the animal involved by the officer, an inquiry into the facts of
the case to determine whether the circumstances are likely to continue and, if so, whether the animal being
mistreated, neglected or abandoned is in such serious physical condition that allowing it to remain in such
circumstances will endanger the life or health of such animal. The officer or agent may at any time provide such
food and water as may be necessary.
D. Upon the determination of the officer that such animal is being neglected or cruelly treated, the officer may
confiscate and impound the animal and cite the owner or custodian with a violation of this section.
E. The owner or custodian of the animal may request a hearing in writing to the City on the confinement of the
animal. Such hearing shall be held promptly before the Municipal Court.
F. At such hearing or any continuance thereof and upon satisfactory evidence that the animal will be adequately
cared for by the owner thereof or someone on his behalf, the custody of said animal will be returned to the
owner. In the absence of such evidence, the City may continue to hold the animal.
G. The owner or custodian shall be responsible for all costs and fees associated with the impoundment of the
animal even if the animal is not returned to the owner or custodian. Payment of all costs and fees associated
with the impoundment of the animal shall be paid prior to the release of the animal to the owner or custodian.
(Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 78/313
6.04.200: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, overwork, torture, torment, deprive
of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, significantly neglect, or otherwise
in a cruel or inhumane manner harm any animal or cause or procure it to be done or who, having the charge and
custody of any animal, unnecessarily fails to provide it with proper food, drink or protection from the weather or
cruelly abandon. For purposes of this section, "protection from the weather" shall mean shelter, whether indoors or
outdoors, that creates an ambient temperature, including but not limited to adequate shade from the sun and/or
protection from severe cold, that shall be compatible with the health of the animal, and that has adequate ventilation
and/or insulation to provide for the health of the animal. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.210: PENALTY:
A. Every person who allows a dog to run at large pursuant to section 6.04.010 of this chapter shall be punished as
follows:
1. First offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
2. Second offense: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
3. Third and subsequent offense: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) and the court may order removal and
disposition of the animal.
B. Every person who commits a violation of section 6.04.030 of this chapter shall be punished as follows:
1. First offense, mandatory court appearance and fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) minimum and five
hundred dollars ($500.00) maximum.
2. Second offense, mandatory court appearance and fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) minimum and
seven hundred dollars ($700.00) maximum.
3. Third offense and subsequent offense, mandatory court appearance and fine of four hundred dollars
($400.00) minimum and nine hundred dollars ($900.00) maximum.
4. All convictions under section 6.04.030 of this chapter are subject to an order of the Municipal Court under
subsection 6.04.030F of this chapter.
C. Every person who commits a violation of sections 6.04.035 and/or 6.04.050 of this chapter shall be punished as
follows:
1. First offense: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
2. Second offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
3. Third and subsequent offense: Minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
D. Every person who commits cruelty to animals or causes or procures it to be done shall be punished as follows:
1. First offense: Three hundred dollars ($300.00).
2. Second offense: Four hundred dollars ($400.00).
3. Third and any subsequent offense: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the court may order removal and
disposition of the animal.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 79/313
E. Every person who commits a violation of section 6.04.090 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and no more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord. 24-
2018, 2018: Ord. 8-2017, 2017)
6.04.220: LIVESTOCK:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter:
ANIMAL UNIT: A unit of measurement used to determine the animal capacity of animals grazing and/or confined
in the City of Yuma. The animal unit capacity is determined by multiplying the number of animals of each species
by the appropriate equivalency factor listed in this definition, and summing the resulting totals for all animal
species contained in the operation.
1. The animal unit equivalency factors are as follows:
Animal Species
Equivalency
Factor
All cattle, buffalo, cattalo, horses, mules and asses over the age of 9 months 1.0
All cattle, buffalo, cattalo, horses, mules, and asses under the age of 9 months 0.25
Swine, 55 pounds and over 0.4
Swine, under 55 pounds 0.1
Sheep, goats 0.4
Turkeys, chickens, ducks, and domestic fowl 0.1
Alternative livestock 1.0
LIVESTOCK: Any goat, sheep, swine, cattle, buffalo, cattalo, horse, mule, ass, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens,
domestic fowl, or alternative livestock as defined in section 35-41.5-102(1), Colorado Revised Statutes, as
amended.
B. Livestock Grazing And Confinement: No livestock shall be permitted to graze or be confined on any property
located in the City of Yuma, except as follows:
1. Property zoned as A-1.
2. Property registered for a nonconforming use to permit livestock to graze or be confined, pursuant to section
17.09.905 of this Code.
3. Livestock located at the Yuma County Fairgrounds, or any lawful business requiring the confinement of
livestock including, but not limited to, veterinary clinics; meat processing, pack and slaughterhouses; rodeo
and equine facilities; and livestock auction facilities.
C. Livestock Density: If livestock grazing or confinement is allowed by this Code, the animal density shall not be
greater than one animal unit per acre, except as follows:
1. Property registered for a nonconforming use to permit grazing or confinement at a rate greater than one
animal unit per acre pursuant to section 17.09.905 of this Code.
2. Livestock located at the Yuma County Fairgrounds, or any lawful business requiring the confinement of
livestock at a rate greater than one animal unit per acre, including, but not limited to, veterinary clinics; meat
processing, pack and slaughterhouses; rodeo and equine facilities; and livestock auction facilities.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 80/313
D. At Large: Every person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any livestock shall keep the animal
under the effective control of a person. Livestock shall be construed to be under the effective control of a person
as follows:
1. Confinement in a barn, corral, or within an adequate fence, on property lawfully under the control of said
person. For the purposes of this chapter, "adequate fence" shall mean a well constructed three (3) or more,
wire fence with substantial posts set at a distance of approximately twenty feet (20') apart, and sufficient to
turn the livestock intended to be contained, with all gates equally as good as the fence; or, any electric fence,
constructed in a manner to turn the livestock intended to be contained.
2. This subsection D shall not apply to the following:
a. Livestock originating from the Yuma County Fairgrounds.
b. Livestock used for participation in a parade.
c. Livestock used as a means of transportation.
d. Livestock originating from a veterinary clinic.
e. Livestock used in lawful recreation events.
f. It shall be a defense to this subsection D that the livestock are at large due to the actions of a third party who
does not own or have charge, care, custody or control of said livestock.
E. Violations: Violations of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be punished by a
fine up to, and including, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each violation, but no jail sentence or other form of
imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive punishment, however, failure to pay a fine may result
in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017:
Ord. 2-2003 §1, 2003)
Title 7
RESERVED
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04
GARBAGE
8.04.010: GARBAGE DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, "garbage" means and includes kitchen and table refuse, offal, swill, every
accumulation of animal, vegetable and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay, or dealing in
or storage of meats, fish, birds, fruits or vegetables (manure, dead animals and offal or slaughterhouse excluded).
(Prior code §8.11-2)
8.04.020: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED:
All "garbage", as defined in section 8.04.010 of this chapter, within the corporate limits of the city, shall be kept,
accumulated and disposed of in accordance with the provisions set out in this chapter. (Prior code §8.11-1)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 81/313
8.04.030: CONTAINERS; STANDARDS:
A. All garbage shall be placed in containers of not more than thirty two (32) gallon capacity, and the combined
weight of the garbage, refuse and container shall not exceed one hundred (100) pounds.
B. The container shall be a watertight receptacle of a solid and durable grade of metal, and shall be provided with a
suitable handle or handles on the outside and a tightly fitting metal cover equipped with a handle.
C. It must not have any inside structure such as inside bands and reinforcing angles to prevent free discharge of the
contents. Containers that have deteriorated so as to cause injury to garbage collectors, or so as to result in loose
fitting lids willbe condemned by the city manager. (Prior code §8.11-3)
8.04.040: CONTAINERS; REQUIRED:
Every occupant, whether owner or tenant, of any business establishment and of any house, dwelling or building
where housekeeping, cooking or eating is done, shall provide and keep at all times suitable and sufficient
receptacles for receiving and holding, without running over or leaking, garbage which may accumulate from such
house, dwelling or building. (Prior code §8.11-4)
8.04.050: CONTAINERS; PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION:
Every such person shall place all containers in the alleyway adjacent to his place of residence in such manner as to
be accessible to the garbage collector, not later than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of each day. If there is no alley, or if
the alley is closed or inaccessible, every such person shall place the container or containers in or near the curb line
in front of his place of residence. (Prior code §8.11-5)
8.04.060: DISPOSITION OF GARBAGE REQUIRED; COMPLAINTS AND DISPUTES:
A. Any tenant or occupant of any house, dwelling or building where housekeeping, cooking or eating is done, or
where any business is carried on in the city, shall dispose of and remove garbage and refuse which may
accumulate from such house, dwelling or building, as provided in this chapter.
B. In all cases of disputes or complaints concerning the place where garbage containers shall be placed while
waiting the removal of their contents, or how often any garbage shall be removed, when the same are not
specifically fixed by this chapter, the city manager of the city shall determine any disputed point above referred to
and his decision shall be final. (Prior code §8.11-6)
8.04.070: DISTURBING OTHER'S CONTAINERS:
No person or persons shall molest, remove, handle or otherwise disturb the garbage containers or contents which
have been placed for servicing by the garbage collector, except the occupant or tenant of the residence, dwelling or
building, or their employees and agents. (Prior code §8.11-7)
8.04.080: DEPOSITING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person having garbage in the city to throw or deposit the same, or cause the same to be thrown
or deposited,upon any street, alley, gutter, park, dump ground or other public place, or throw or deposit the same
upon any vacant lot or backyard, or to store or keep the same otherwise than in cans or receptacles as required by
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 82/313
this chapter, and it is unlawful to have, store, deposit or keep garbage where rats can have access thereto, or feed
thereon. Each day's violation of this section shall be considered and treated as a separate and distinct offense.
(Prior code §8.11-8)
8.04.090: DEPOSITING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful to keep, place or deposit garbage on any private grounds or premises whatsoever, except in cans or
receptacles required by the terms of this chapter. (Prior code §8.11-9)
8.04.100: CONTRACT FOR COLLECTION:
The city council may enter into an exclusive contract or agreement with any person, firm or corporation for the
collection and removal of garbage throughout the city, or it may, at its discretion, make provision for the collection
and removal of garbage through the city by its own employees or agents. (Prior code §8.11-11)
8.04.110: PERSONS NOT SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS; PLACING DEAD ANIMALS AND
CERTAIN OTHER WASTE IN DUMP GROUND PROHIBITED:
For the purpose of this chapter, owners, occupants or tenants of residences or business properties shall not be
subject to the terms of this chapter, providing they have installed upon their premises electrically powered garbage
disposal units connected with the city sewer system which makes full disposal of garbage accumulated upon the
premises; provided further, that all persons whether residents of the city or persons outside of the city are prohibited
from placing dead animals, garbage or waste matter of any nature which may serve to attract or furnish sustenance
for rats within the limits of the dump ground maintained by the city. (Prior code §8.11-12)
8.04.120: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, owner, tenant or occupant violating any section or sections of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) or more than fifty dollars
($50.00), and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior code §8.11-13)
Chapter 8.08
REFUSE AND GARBAGE REMOVAL
8.08.010: REFUSE AND GARBAGE DEFINED:
GARBAGE: In this chapter shall mean all trash; animal or vegetable waste resulting from the preparation, cooking
and serving of food; wastepaper; glass; cloth material; and plastic, tin and aluminum containers.
REFUSE: In this chapter means all waste matter, except garbage, and includes debris, ashes, cinder, cardboard,
tree limbs, grass, yard clippings, leaves, scrap lumber, scrap metals and materials, batteries, discarded furniture,
discarded fixtures, discarded appliances, animal bedding, dead animals, toxic or inflammable substances, solid
market and industrial wastes, worn vehicle parts and tires not in current use, partially dismantled, unlicensed,
junked or inoperable trailers or other goods that are so worn or deteriorated as to make them unusable in their
condition, partially dismantled, wrecked, discarded, junked or unlicensed vehicles, as defined by chapter 8.12 of this
title, or a combination of any two (2) or more of the foregoing types of material. This term shall not include either
industrial waste or waste matter resulting from the construction, demolition or repair of a building or other structure
on the premises. (Ord. 2-2008 §1, 2008)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 83/313
8.08.015: ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE AND GARBAGE PROHIBITED:
The accumulation of refuse and garbage on public or private property is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous
to the public health, safety and welfare. No person shall deposit any refuse or garbage on any public property nor
shall any person accumulate refuse or garbage or permit refuse or garbage to be accumulated upon private
property except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation receiving official notice of
accumulation of refuse or garbage by certified mail or hand delivered by the city manager or his designee (law
enforcement officer) shall have five (5) days to correct same before being subjected to summons and complaint into
Yuma municipal court for violation of this section. (Ord. 1-2012, 2012)
8.08.020: BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
A. Business And Commercial Establishments: The burning of refuse, garbage or other combustible matter, whether
in ash pits or other receptacles, or on the ground or in any other manner whatsoever, by any business or
commercial establishment within the city, is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The establishments are
hereinafter referred to as comprising the "restricted area".
B. Residential Structures: The Yuma chief of police is authorized to permit a temporary suspension of the ban on
burning of tumbleweeds only, within the city limits, in circumstances wherein he or she has been presented with
competent evidence that accumulation of tumbleweeds endanger the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare. This temporary suspension of the ban on burning shall be allowed for individual residential lots
only, and shall comply with the following restrictions:
1. Any burning shall be permitted only during the hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M.;
2. Any burning shall be permitted only within an incinerator or metal container which will prevent the spread of
flames;
3. No burning shall be allowed without a sufficient water hose or other fire extinguishing device which is
adequate to prevent the spread of fire or damage which may be caused by the fire;
4. This suspension shall be valid only for the burning of tumbleweeds, and no other combustible matter shall be
allowed to burn;
5. No burning shall be allowed in such a manner as to endanger life, physical structures, gas lines, electric lines,
accumulations of material, or other property;
6. This temporary suspension of the ban on burning of tumbleweeds shall not apply to any business or
commercial establishment;
7. Burning shall be conducted only in the absence of wind;
8. The number of tumbleweeds to be burned at one time shall be an amount which is manageable by those
conducting the burning;
9. Before conducting a burn, the parties shall first inform the W-Y Communications Center and inform them of
the location and time the burn will be conducted;
10. No burning shall be conducted by an individual under the age of eighteen (18) years;
11. No burning shall be allowed in which smoke causes a nuisance or endangers person or property;
12. All burning shall be conducted only pursuant to this section and the city of Yuma, as well as the Yuma city
council, accepts no liability or responsibility for the burning conducted. (Ord. 14-2006 §1, 2006: prior code
§8.12-2)
8.08.030: REFUSE TO BE KEPT SEPARATE FROM GARBAGE:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 84/313
Refuse shall be kept separate from and not commingled with garbage, and shall be placed in containers sufficient to
hold the same without spilling or scattering until removed. In all areas, combustible matter in containers shall not be
burned. Refuse containers shall be receptacles of such type and size as can be readily lifted and dumped into a
truck and refuse shall not be deposited in ash pits or receptacles of such nature that it will require shoveling to
remove the same therefrom. (Prior code §8.12-3(a))
8.08.040: CONTAINERS; SIZE AND PLACEMENT:
Refuse containers, not to exceed thirty (30) gallon capacity, shall be placed in the rear of lots and buildings, as close
to alleys as is feasible. Any person whose residence is located on a street where there is no alleyway accessible, or
where the alleyway is closed or inaccessible, shall place the container at ground level on the property and not more
than twenty feet (20') from the side of the street or driveway from which collection is made. (Prior code §8.12-3(b))
8.08.050: COLLECTION:
Refuse shall be collected and removed from each and every property and premises in the city at such regular
intervals as the city council by resolution, from time to time, may prescribe, and the number of collections per period
of time may be varied in accordance with the character of the property or business involved and the amount of
refuse accumulating on the premises. Owners or occupants of property in the city shall be duly notified, in such
manner as the city council may direct, of any schedule of collections or any revision thereof, and such schedule
shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and be open to public inspection at all times. (Prior code §8.12-4(c))
8.08.060: GENERAL COLLECTION AND CLEANUP:
At least twice a year and at such times as the city council by resolution may fix and determine, and in accordance
with such rules and regulations as the city council may establish, the city, acting by and through its employees or
persons under contract with the city, shall make a general collection and cleanup of tree branches and cuttings, and
other types of trash and waste matter not included in the definition of the term "refuse" as the same appears in
section 8.08.010 of this chapter. There shall be no additional charge for this service. (Prior code §8.12-4(d))
8.08.070: PERSONS EXCLUDED FROM GENERAL COLLECTION AND CLEANUP:
The collection and removal of refuse herein provided for in any event shall not include the collection and removal of
refuse or waste material arising out of or developed from new construction or the remodeling of any premises, or
from tree trimmers or commercial lawn caretakers, and the removal and disposal of such refuse and waste material
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises or of the contractor engaged in such new construction,
remodeling or lawn, tree or yard care. (Prior code §8.12-4(e))
8.08.080: CHARGES AND RATES:
The charges for the collection and removal of refuse by employees of the city, or by persons under contract with the
city, shall be fixed by resolution of the city council, and the city council shall set up a schedule of monthly rates to be
charged and paid by each type of property and business in the city. Such schedule shall be graduated according to
the character of the property or business involved and the amount of refuse to be disposed of from the premises,
and such schedule of rates may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city council. Owners or occupants
of property shall be notified, in such manner as the city council may direct, of any schedule of rates adopted by the
city council or any revision thereof, and such schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and be open
to public inspection at all times. Charges for the collection and removal of refuse shall be payable, billed and
collected in the same manner and upon the same terms as and together with charges for light and water collected
by the city. Such charges and assessments shall constitute a lien upon the property benefited by such service in the
event such charges and assessments are not paid when due. (Prior code §8.12-5)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 85/313
8.08.090: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
From and after the effective date hereof, it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the city:
A. To fail, refuse or neglect to provide for the collection, removal and disposal of refuse which may accumulate upon
any property owned, occupied or controlled by any such person, firm or corporation, in the manner herein
provided;
B. To burn refuse or any other combustible matter in the restricted area as prohibited in section 8.08.020 of this
chapter;
C. To deposit any garbage in the city dump. (Prior code §8.12-6)
8.08.100: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The following penalties, set out in this section, shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other entity to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in
this chapter;
B. Every person, firm, corporation, or other entity who violates any provision stated or adopted in this chapter shall
be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. Where any violation is a continuing offense, each day that the violation continues shall be considered
and held to be a separate and distinct offense. However, no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be
imposed, a fine being the exclusive punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under this chapter. (Ord.
13-2000 §2, 2000: prior code §8.12-7)
Chapter 8.10
WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT
8.10.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BRUSH: Volunteer growth of bushes, shrubs and trees such as are growing wild and without care and includes all
cuttings from trees, shrubs and bushes and high and rank shrubbery growth which may conceal filthy deposits.
DANDELIONS: The weed Taraxacum officinale Weber.
REFUSE: All wastes, including garbage, ashes, rubbish, toxic or inflammable substances, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles, solid market and industrial wastes and shrubbery, trees and lawn trimmings.
RUBBISH: Solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
WEEDS: A. Those plant species that are designated as noxious and which fall within three (3) categories (list A, list
B and list C), as determined by the Colorado noxious weed act, section 35-5.5-101 et seq., Colorado Revised
Statutes, as amended, and further defined by rules set forth by the Colorado department of agriculture pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of the Colorado noxious weed act.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 86/313
B. In addition to the foregoing, "weeds" includes brush, whether noxious or not, which is in excess of ten inches
(10") in height and which meets the definition of "brush" stated in this section.
C. The foregoing is not intended to be exclusive, but rather is intended to be indicative of those types of plants
which are considered a detriment to the public health, safety, and welfare, and does not include flower
gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens and small grain plots(wheat, barley, oats and rye). (Ord. 6-
2004 §1, 2004: Ord. 1-1988, 1988)
8.10.020: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any unauthorized accumulation of weeds, brush, refuse or rubbish on any premises is declared to be a nuisance
and a health hazard and is prohibited. (Ord. 1-1988, 1988)
8.10.030: PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS DESIGNATED:
A. It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, agent, occupant or person in possession or control of any occupied or
unoccupied lot or tract of land or any part thereof in the city to permit or maintain on any such lot or tract of land,
or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same, any growth of weeds to a height greater than
ten inches (10"), or any accumulation of weeds, brush, refuse or rubbish.
B. It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, agent, occupant or person in possession or control of any occupied or
unoccupied lot or tract of land or any part thereof in the city to permit or maintain on any such tract of land, or on
or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same, any growth of dandelions exceeding ten (10)
dandelions per any square yard of land area. (Ord. 1-1988, 1988)
8.10.040: NOTICE TO ABATE:
A. If weeds exist on any property to a height greater than six inches (6") or dandelions exist as described in this
chapter, the city manager, or his authorized representative, is authorized to cause the cutting and removal of
weeds and/or dandelions and the removal of accumulated refuse or rubbish and to assess the cost, plus an
additional amount up to fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover administrative costs and a penalty in an amount up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) against the lots or tracts of land from which said weeds and/or dandelions are
removed.
B. Before the city manager, or his authorized representative, shall cause the cutting and removal of weeds and/or
dandelions and the removal of accumulated refuse or rubbish, the city manager, or his authorized
representative, shall give notice to the owner, agent, lessee or occupant of the property. The notice shall advise
the addressee that unless he cuts and removes the weeds and/or dandelions and removes accumulated refuse
or rubbish within five (5) days of receipt of the notice, the city manager, or his authorized representative, shall cut
and remove the weeds and/or dandelions and remove the accumulated refuse or rubbish, pursuant to this
section. Proper notice may be delivered as follows:
1. Personal service whenever feasible on the owner, the agent forthe owner, or the occupant of the premises, or
2. When personal service is not feasible, either posted conspicuously at the premises in which case service shall
be deemed complete as of the date of posting, or mailed to the person by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner's, the owner's agent's or the occupant's last known address. (Ord. 13-2007 §1, 2007:
Ord. 11-2000 §1, 2000: Ord. 2-1995, 1995: Ord. 1-1988, 1988)
8.10.050: ABATEMENT BY CITY; RECOVERY OF COSTS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 87/313
A. In the event the weeds on any lot, block or parcel of ground, or along the sidewalk adjoining the same or the alley
behind the same, are cut by order of the city manager, or his authorized representative, the whole cost of cutting
such weeds shall be paid to the city clerk within thirty (30) days after mailing by the city clerk to the owner of
such lot, block or parcel of ground, by registered or certified mail, notice of the assessment of such costs.
B. Failure to pay such assessment within such period of thirty (30) days shall cause such assessment to be a lien
against the lot, block or parcel of ground, and shall have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior
special assessments, and the same may be certified at any time after such failure to so pay the same, within
thirty (30) days, by the city clerk to the county treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to
be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent (10%) penalty to defray the cost
of collection.
C. If the owner of such lot, block or parcel of ground desires to object to the assessment made, he or she shall
within thirty (30) days after completion of the work on the property file a written objection thereto with the city
clerk who shall thereupon designate the next regular meeting of the city council as the date when said objector
may appear before the city council and have his or her objection heard. (Ord. 13-2007 §2, 2007: Ord. 1-1988,
1988)
8.10.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The following penalties, set out in this section, shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this chapter.
B. Every person who violates any provision stated or adopted in this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less
than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Where any violation is a
continuing offense, each day that the violation continues shall be considered and held tobe a separate and
distinct offense. However, no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the
exclusive punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under this chapter. (Ord. 11-2000 §2, 2000)
Chapter 8.12
ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES
8.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE: A. Any motor vehicles left unattended on private property for a period of twenty
four (24) hours or longer without the consent of the owner or lessee of such property or his legally authorized agent;
or
B. Any motor vehicle left unattended on public property, including any portion of a public right of way, within the
city for a period of seventy two (72) hours or longer, unless the owner of the vehicle has been granted
permission by the city manager to park it for an extended period;
C. Any motor vehicles stored in an impound lot at the request of its owner or the owner's agent or the police
department and not removed from the impound lot according to the agreement with the owner or agent or
within seventy two (72) hours of the time the police department notified the owner or agent that the vehicle is
available for release upon payment of any applicable charges or fees. If the police department requested the
storage, the provisions governing public tows as contained in section 8.12.040 of this chapter shall apply as of
the time of abandonment. Otherwise, the private tow provisions contained in section 8.12.060 of this chapter
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 88/313
shall apply as of the time of abandonment.
DISABLED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle which is stopped or parked, either tended or unattended, upon a
public right of way and which is, due to any mechanical failure or any inoperability because of collision, fire or other
such injury, temporarily inoperable under its own power.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE: A. Extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to, any of the
following: a broken window, windshield or both, missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission; and
B. Apparently inoperable.
OPERATOR: A person or a firm as a towing carrier.
PRIVATE TOW: Any tow of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle not requested by the police department.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real property having its title, ownership, use or possession held by the federal
government, the state, any county or municipality, or other governmental entity of this state.
PUBLIC TOW: Any tow of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle requested by the police department.
UNLICENSED VEHICLE: A motor vehicle which is not currently and validly registered pursuant to the laws of the
state of Colorado or any other governmental authority having lawful authority to license motor vehicles. (Ord. 12-
2000 §1, 2000: Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.020: ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly abandon any motor vehicle upon public property or upon private property other than his
own. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.030: UNLICENSED, DISMANTLED AND JUNKED VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall knowingly leave any partially dismantled, wrecked, discarded, junked or unlicensed vehicle on
any public property within the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner of any vehicle or any person who is in charge or control of any
property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to knowingly permit or allow a
wrecked, junked, unlicensed or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than thirty (30) days. This
subsection shall not apply with regard to:
1. A vehicle in an enclosed building.
2. A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, provided the
business enterprise is repairing said vehicle, stripping said vehicle for profit, or using said vehicle in any other
reasonably productive manner, within the past thirty (30) days.
3. A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained for impounded vehicles by the city.
4. With prior approval of the city manager, or his designee, the department of police may issue a one hundred
eighty (180) day permit for a dismantled, wrecked, discarded, junked or unlicensed vehicle, which is being
kept for the purpose of repair or restoration, but there shall be no extensions of the permit granted, and only
one permit may be granted per year; if, at the end of the one hundred eighty (180) day permit period, the
vehicle is still dismantled, wrecked, discarded, junked or unlicensed, such vehicle shall be deemed a nuisance
and refuse. Cost of said permit shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). Payment of the permit shall be made to
the Yuma municipal clerk, accompanied by one copy of the issued permit.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 89/313
There shall be no more than two (2) permits granted per property.
5. With prior written approval of the city manager, or his designee, a vehicle stored behind a lawfully constructed
privacy fence with a minimum height of six feet (6'), sufficient to prevent plain view of said vehicle.
6. A vehicle which is determined to be a motor vehicle collector's item as defined and regulated by Colorado
Revised Statutes 42-3-138, as amended, so long as the keeping and storing of such motor vehicle is in
compliance with said statute. (Ord. 12-2000 §2, 2000: Ord. 6-1997 §2, 1997: Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.040: ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES; PUBLIC TOW:
A. Any police officer who finds a motor vehicle which he has reasonable grounds to believe has been abandoned or
junked shall require such motor vehicle to be removed or cause the same to be removed and placed in storage
in any impound lot designed or maintained by the police department.
B. Upon having an abandoned or junked motor vehicle towed, the police department shall ascertain, if possible,
whether or not the motor vehicle has been reported stolen and, if so reported, the police department shall
recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner. The police department shall have the right to
recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the motor vehicle.
C. As soon as possible, but in no event later than three (3) working days after having an abandoned or junked motor
vehicle towed, the police department shall report the same to the department of motor vehicles by first class or
certified mail or by personal delivery, which report shall be on a form prescribed and supplied by the department
of motor vehicles.
D. The police department, upon receipt of an ownership report form from the department of motor vehicles, shall
determine, from all available information and after reasonable inquiries, whether or not the abandoned or junked
motor vehicle has been reported stolen and, if so reported, the police department shall recover and secure the
motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner. The police department shall have the right to recover from the owner
its reasonable costs to recover and secure the motor vehicle.
E. The police department, within five (5) working days of the receipt of the ownership report from the department of
motor vehicles, shall notify by certified mail the owner of record, if ascertained, and any lien holder, if
ascertained, of the fact of such report and the claim, if any, of a lien under Colorado Revised Statutes 42-4-1607,
as amended, and shall send a copy of such notice to the towing operator. The notice shall contain information
that the motor vehicle has been reported abandoned or junked to the department of motor vehicles, the location
of the motor vehicle, and the location from which it was towed, and that, unless claimed within thirty (30)
calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the motor
vehicle is subject to sale. Such notice shall also inform the owner of record of his opportunity to request a
hearing concerning the legality of the towing of his abandoned or junked motor vehicle, and that the police
department may be contacted for that purpose. A request for hearing shall be made in writing to the police
department within ten (10) days of the postmark date of sending such notice. The hearing, if requested shall be
conducted pursuant to section 8.12.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.050: POSTSTORAGE HEARING:
A. Upon request, a hearing shall be conducted before the municipal court within seventy two (72) hours after the
receipt of the owner's request, excluding weekends and holidays. The failure of the owner to request or to attend
a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the hearing requirement of this section. The sole issue before the municipal
judge shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. The burden of proof shall
be on the police department to establish probable cause for the impoundment.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 90/313
B. "Probable cause to impound" means such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence
to believe there was sufficient violation of the municipal code to grant legal authority for the removal of the
vehicle.
C. The municipal judge shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of
evidence. The person demanding the hearing shall have the burden of establishing that such person has the
right to the possession of the vehicle. At the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal judge shall prepare a
written decision. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the person demanding the hearing and the
registered owner of the vehicle. The municipal judge's decision shall in no way affect any criminal proceeding in
connection with the impound in question, and any criminal charges in such proceeding may only be challenged
in a court of competent jurisdiction. The decision of the municipal judge shall be final.
D. The municipal judge shall only determine that there was or was not probable cause to impound the vehicle. If the
judge finds that there was no probable cause, the motor vehicle shall be released to its owner and all towing and
storage fees shall be paid by the city. If the owner fails to present the decision of the municipal judge to the
operator having custody of the vehicle within twenty four (24) hours of its receipt, excluding such days when the
operator is not open for business, the owner shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. (Ord. 2-
1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.060: ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES; PRIVATE TOW:
A. Any owner or lessee, or his agent authorized in writing, may have an abandoned or junked motor vehicle
removed from his property by having it towed and impounded by an operator.
B. Any operator having in his possession an abandoned or junked motor vehicle from a private tow shall
immediately notify the police department as to the name of the operator and the location of the impound lot
where the vehicle is located and a description of the abandoned or junked motor vehicle, including the make,
model, color, and year, the number, issuing state, and expiration date of the license plate, and the vehicle
identification number. Upon such notification, the police department shall ascertain, if possible, whether or not
the vehicle has been reported stolen and, if so reported, the police department shall recover and secure the
motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner. The police department shall have the right to recover from the owner
its reasonable costs to recover and secure the vehicle.
C. Any operator shall, as soon as possible, but in no event later than seventy two (72) hours after receipt of the
determination that such motor vehicle has not been reported stolen, report the same to the department of motor
vehicles by first class or certified mail or by personal delivery, which report shall be on a form prescribed and
supplied by the department of motor vehicles. The report shall contain the information required in Colorado
Revised Statutes 42-4-1605(3)(b).
D. Within five (5) working days of the receipt of an ownership report from the department of motor vehicles, the
operator shall notify the owner of record and any lienholder by certified mail or by personal delivery. The
operator shall send a copy of the notice by certified mail or by personal delivery to the police department. Such
notice shall contain the following information:
1. That the identified motor vehicle has been reported abandoned or junked to the department of motor vehicles;
2. The claim, if any, of a lien under Colorado Revised Statutes 42-2-1607, as amended;
3. The location of the motor vehicle and the location from which it was towed; and
4. That, unless claimed within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the
postmark on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.070: IMPOUNDMENT FEES:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 91/313
No motor vehicle towed, stored or impounded at the request of the police department as provided in this chapter
shall be released until the charge for towing or otherwise removing such motor vehicle together with the charge for
storage for the same, as hereinafter set forth, shall have been paid. The charge of towing an abandoned or junked
motor vehicle shall be that amount set by the entity towing said vehicle, or any limit which may be set by state
statute. An additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle for the purpose of
compensating the police department for use of personnel, supplies and equipment necessary to coordinate and
monitor towing of the vehicle. The charge for storage of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle or vehicles stored
pursuant to section 8.12.110 of this chapter which weighs less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall not exceed
the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) a day and for every day after, for a maximum of sixty (60) days. Vehicles weighing
more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall not exceed more than twenty five dollars ($25.00) a day and for
every day after, for a maximum of sixty (60) days. (Ord. 4-2009 §1, 2009)
8.12.080: STORAGE OF REMOVED VEHICLES:
Motor vehicles removed from public or private property at the request of the police department shall be placed in
storage and shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Colorado Revised Statutes 42-4-1606, as
amended. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.090: ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The chief of police of the police department, any police officer, or any designee appointed by the chief of police for
the purpose of enforcing this chapter, is authorized to go on private property for the purpose of making an
investigation of any violation of this chapter and for the purpose of determining ownership and condition of any
motor vehicle reasonably appearing to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2-2002 §1, 2002:
Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.100: WAIVER OF LIABILITY:
Neither the chief of police, the city manager, any police officer, their designees, or any person acting under their
direction or control shall be liable or responsible in any manner to the owner of the vehicle, the person claiming to
be the owner of a motor vehicle, or any other person, for or on account of any damage to the motor vehicle or other
property, or the loss or damage of or to any property which may be contained within the motor vehicle as a result of
towing, storing or disposing of the motor vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.110: AUTHORITY FOR IMMEDIATE TOWING:
The chief of police of the city or any police officer is authorized to remove immediately, without prior notice to the
owner or occupant, any motor vehicle from any public or private property under any of the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated the city council finding and determining that such vehicles under such circumstances constitute
obstructions to traffic or public nuisances:
A. When a vehicle upon a public way is so disabled so as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or
persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable
to provide for its custody or removal; or
B. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street or parked illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or left unattended upon any public street with engine running or
with keys in the ignition switch or lock; or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 92/313
C. When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon any area or portion of a public street in violation of or contrary
to a parking limitation or prohibition established by the traffic engineer, provided such area or portion of said
public street has been posted with an official sign or signs giving notice both of the limitation and prohibition and
of the fact that such area or portion of such street is a tow away area; or
D. When a vehicle is parked in violation of any traffic ordinance and is an obstruction or hazard or potential
obstruction or hazard to any lawful function or limits the normal access to a use of any public or private property;
or
E. When a driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by a police officer and the vehicle would thereby be left
unattended upon a street, highway or restricted parking area or other public way; or
F. When the driver of a vehicle is reasonably suspected of using license plates or a license permit unlawfully,
misusing the license plates or license permit issued to him, or a vehicle is driven without proper license plates or
license permit, or with no license plates or license permit, or driven with an invalid or expired license permit; or
G. When the driver of a vehicle is driving without an operator's license or chauffeur's license which is current and
valid, or who does not have such license in his immediate possession, or who drives a vehicle contrary to
restrictions imposed upon his license, or who drives a vehicle while his operator's or chauffeur's license is
denied, suspended, canceled or revoked by the state; or
H. Where a vehicle is found parked on or near to any railroad tracks so as to block the same in any manner; or
I. When a driver of any vehicle or the vehicle which he is driving is reasonably suspected of having been in any hit
and run accident; or
J. When any vehicle is reasonably suspected of being stolen or parts thereof to be stolen; or
K. When the driver of any vehicle is taken into custody for a suspected felony or misdemeanor, or when the vehicle
is suspected of containing stolen goods or other contraband. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.120: IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever, as authorized in this chapter, an officer or employee of the city removes a vehicle from the place where it
was left, the officer or employee shall give a notice in writing of such impoundment, as required in subsection
8.12.040E of this chapter. Impoundment fees shall be as provided in section 8.12.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 2-1987
§1, 1987)
8.12.130: HEARING ON REQUEST:
Upon request, the owner of a motor vehicle removed pursuant to section 8.12.110 of this chapter shall be entitled to
a hearing as provided in section 8.12.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
8.12.140: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
Vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter shall be disposed of in a manner provided for in section 8.12.080 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 93/313
8.12.150: PERMIT REQUIRED; CONSIDERATIONS TO BE MADE BEFORE GRANTING
PERMIT:
The operation of an outdoor yard for use in the purchase, storage, sale, handling, reclaiming or processing of scrap
iron or other secondhand materials, or the purchase of motor vehicles for dismantling and the dismantling thereof,
and the storage of used motor vehicle parts, is declared to be a business which may be offensive or detrimental to
the public interest and which is likely to become a public nuisance unless the same is strictly regulated. No such
yard shall be established within the corporate limits of the city or within a distance of one mile from such corporate
limits without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city council. In granting or refusing such a permit the council
shall consider the proposed location of the business and its proximity to schools, churches, parks, public buildings
and other businesses and residences, as well as the planned method of operation, and shall not grant such permit if
it would be detrimental to the public interest or if it would endanger the public peace, health, comfort or safety. In
connection with new or existing businesses of this kind, the council may impose reasonable restrictions as to
enclosing the property by fences or restricting the method of operation so as to minimize the likelihood of
disturbance of the public peace, health, comfort or safety. (Ord. 2-1987 §1, 1987)
Chapter 8.16
FIREWORKS
8.16.010: SALE AND DISCHARGE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, exhibit, offer or expose for sale, or to have in his
possession, lend or give away, set fire to, discharge or explode, any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade,
cans, gun, revolver, pistol, cap, cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city; except that such
fireworks as are allowed by Colorado state statutes shall be allowed in the city. Said state statutes specifically
provide as follows:
1. Prohibited "fireworks" means any article, device, or substance prepared for the primary purpose of producing
a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including, without
limitation, the following articles and devices commonly known and used as fireworks: toy cannons or toy canes
in which explosives are used, blank cartridges, the type of balloon which requires fire underneath to propel the
same, fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, and torches, or other
fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any
tablets or other device containing any explosive substance.
2. Prohibited "fireworks" does not include:
a. Toy caps which do not contain more than twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a grain of explosive compound
per cap;
b. Sparklers, trick matches, cigarette loads, trick noisemakers, toy smoke devices, and novelty auto alarms;
c. Highway flares, railway fuses, ship distress signals, smoke candles, and other emergency signal devices.
(Ord. 8-1988 §1, 1988: prior code §8.6)
8.16.020: AUTHORITY TO BAN THE SALE AND USE OF ALL FORMS OF FIREWORKS:
A. The city council shall be authorized from time to time, based upon climatic conditions related to the danger of fire,
and upon the recommendation of the fire chief, to prohibit by resolution the sale and use of all forms of fireworks
as defined in section 12-28-101(3), Colorado Revised Statutes, including permissiblefireworks as defined in
section 12-28-101(8), Colorado Revised Statutes, and all other explosive materials for pyrotechnic displays
within the city, except for professional firework displays specifically approved by the fire chief in advance of any
such display, pursuant to section 12-28-103, Colorado Revised Statutes.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 94/313
B. Whenever a prohibition has been declared by the city council pursuant to this section, the police chief is
authorized and directed to enforce the ban on any sale of fireworks within the city and to seize, take and remove,
at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks, including permissible fireworks, offered or exposed for sale,
stored or held in violation of, and to seize, take and remove all such fireworks from a person using them in
violation of a prohibition declared by the city council.
C. Violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment; however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to section 13-10-113, Colorado
Revised Statutes. (Ord. 18-2006 §1, 2006)
Chapter 8.20
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS
8.20.010: PERMIT:
A. It is unlawful to install and thereafter operate and maintain any emergency alarm device or system of any kind
without having first obtained a permit therefor for each device or system installed and paid the applicable fee.
B. Any such permit shall provide that the particular device or system may be inspected at any time or tested at any
time prior to installation or subsequent thereto by the City Council or by their duly authorized appointee or
representative to determine the location, quality, sufficiency of workmanship and effectiveness of such device or
system. The City Council, at any time after installation, may request that any such device or system may be
tested to determine effectiveness of such alarm or system. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 6-1984 §1, 1984)
8.20.020: RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS:
Any and all costs and recurring charges attributable to the installation and maintenance of systems permitted by this
chapter which terminate directly in the Police Department or Fire Department of the City, shall be the responsibility
entirely by the licensee or permittee. If the location of either the Police Department or Fire Department shall be
changed at any time, necessitating changing the location of any alarm systems terminating at such department,
such systems shall be moved at the expense of the licensee or permittee, and except as the City Council may deem
appropriate, no part of such costs shall be the responsibility of the City. (Ord. 6-1984 §2, 1984)
8.20.030: RULES AND REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
The City Council may from time to time adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to
assure the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of any such emergency alarm devices. (Ord. 6-1984 §3, 1984)
8.20.040: FALSE ALARMS:
Except for alarms caused by an act of nature or through faulty telephone communications, a charge of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for each false burglar, holdup or police emergency alarm, or fire emergency alarm to which the
police or fire personnel and equipment respond in excess of six (6) in any three hundred sixty five (365) day period
shall be paid to the City through the City Clerk's Office. Repeated false alarms in excess of six (6) alarms in such
year for whatever reason shall be grounds for suspension or termination by decision of the City Council of the
permit for such system as a faulty system. The City Council shall at all times have the authority to suspend the
permit for any such system until such time as suitable personnel practices are instituted or satisfactory repairs or
replacement is made correcting such faulty system. The City Council shall have the authority at any and all times to
terminate the permit for any violation of this chapter or for any faulty system which cannot be made reliable against
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 95/313
false alarms in keeping with the provisions of this section. Any alarm system shall be deactivated or removed if the
permit therefor is terminated or suspended and shall remain deactivated or removed until the suspension is
terminated by reinstatement or a new permit therefor is issued. (Ord. 6-1984 §4, 1984)
8.20.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment; however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973,
13-10-113. (Ord. 6-1984 §5, 1984)
Chapter 8.24
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
8.24.010: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
Exposure to smoke emitted by tobacco and other vegetative substances in enclosed facilities by the nonsmoking
public is recognized by the citizens of the city of Yuma to result in objectionable and material annoyance and
discomfort, and constitutes a health hazard to all those exposed. In furtherance of the public health, safety and
welfare, it is deemed necessary to prohibit smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles. In order to achieve the
public health objectives set forth in this section, this chapter is to be liberally construed. (Ord. 18-2002 §1, 2002)
8.24.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the words and phrases set forth below are defined as follows:
MUNICIPAL BUILDING OR VEHICLE: Any building, structure, enclosed indoor area, or motorized vehicle owned,
leased or otherwise in the control or possession of the city of Yuma, Colorado.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The possession of a lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe containing tobacco or other organic
burning material regardless of its composition, or the lighting of such cigarette, cigar or pipe. (Ord. 18-2002 §1,
2002)
8.24.030: PROHIBITED SMOKING DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke within any municipal building or vehicle, unless otherwise designated by
the city of Yuma as a "permitted smoking area". (Ord. 18-2002 §1, 2002)
8.24.040: REQUIRED SIGNS:
To advise persons of the existence of no smoking areas, the city manager is hereby directed to place signs using
the words "NO SMOKING" in public entrances or in a position clearly visible on entering any municipal building.
(Ord. 18-2002 §1, 2002)
8.24.050: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 96/313
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under this chapter; however, failure to pay a fine may result in
imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 18-2002 §1, 2002)
Chapter 8.25
SLAUGHTERING AND RENDERING
8.25.010: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall maintain or conduct a slaughterhouse, abattoir or other place for slaughtering animals, or shall
slaughter any animals, or shall steam any lard or tallow, within the City of Yuma, without first having obtained a
permit therefor in conformity with the provisions of this chapter as well as any provisions of title 17 of this Code,
known as the zoning ordinance of Yuma. (Ord. 13-2002 §1, 2002)
8.25.020: PERMIT; APPLICATION; APPROVAL:
A. All applications for a permit to maintain and conduct a slaughterhouse, abattoir or other place for slaughtering
animals within the City, shall be made in writing to the City Council, and shall state the location where such
business is to be carried on. Pursuant to section 17.04.402 of this Code, said use may only be permitted in
property zoned as Industrial-1 or Industrial-2. No permit shall be granted until and unless the location of such
business has been approved by City Council subsequent to public hearing. The City Council shall consider one
or more of the following in making its determination:
1. Compatibility with surrounding areas.
2. Harmony with the character of the same area.
3. Its effect upon the immediate area and future development of the area.
4. The health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the area and of the City.
B. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners whose property adjoins the proposed slaughterhouse or
rendering project. Notice of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Yuma, at
least four (4) days prior to the hearing date. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 13-2002 §1, 2002)
8.25.030: PERMIT; INVESTIGATION; DECISION:
The City Council shall cause an investigation to be made of all facts set forth in the application for a permit, and an
opportunity shall be given any person to be heard for or against the granting of such permit. After such investigation,
which shall be concluded within a reasonable time following the filing of any applications, the City Council shall, in
its discretion, grant or refuse any such application. (Ord. 13-2002 §1, 2002)
8.25.040: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER AND STATE LAW:
All establishments or places for which a permit is granted under this chapter shall meet the sanitary requirements
set out in this chapter and comply in all respects with the laws of the State of Colorado governing the sanitary
standards of slaughtering establishments. (Ord. 13-2002 §1, 2002)
8.25.050: DISPOSAL OF OFFAL AND TRIMMINGS; RENDERING OFFAL PROHIBITED:
All slaughtering establishments and persons slaughtering for individual use shall dispose of offal and trimmings daily
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 97/313
by means of a method approved by the State Board of Health. Any rendering of inedible offal is expressly
prohibited. Trimmings and offal shall be held in waterproof metal cans with tightfitting metal lids, which shall be
cleaned daily. (Ord. 13-2002 §1, 2002)
8.25.060: INSPECTION:
Any slaughterhouse, abattoir or other place for slaughtering animals for which a permit is granted under this chapter
shall be open to inspection by any police or health officer, or other properly designated officer or employee of the
city, at all times during which the establishment is open to the public for business. (Ord. 13-2002 §1, 2002)
8.25.070: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT; GROUNDS; INVESTIGATION AND
PUBLIC HEARING:
In addition to any other penalty prescribed, the city council shall have power upon its own motion or on complaint,
after investigation and public hearing, at which the permittee shall have any opportunity to be heard, to suspend or
revoke any permit issued under this chapter, or of Colorado statutes governing meat slaughtering establishments in
the state. (Ord. 13-2002 §1, 2002)
8.25.080: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment; however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes
section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 13-2002 §1, 2002)
Chapter 8.26
NUISANCES
8.26.010: DECLARATION OF NUISANCES:
A. The following are hereby declared to be a nuisance:
1. Any thing or activity which unreasonably annoys or interferes with the use or enjoyment of public or private
property or which constitutes a health or safety hazard.
2. Anything declared to be a nuisance by City ordinance or by the statutes or regulations of the State.
3. Any other thing or activity which under the law constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 3-2017, 2017)
8.26.020: PROHIBITION OF NUISANCES:
No person, being the owner, agent or occupant of or having under his or her control, any building, lot, premises or
unimproved real estate within the limits of the City, shall maintain or allow any nuisance to exist or remain therein.
(Ord. 3-2017, 2017)
8.26.030: DEFINITIONS:
PERSON: A natural person, association, corporation, partnership, limited liability company and any other legal entity
capable of owning, using, or occupying real property.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 98/313
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, highway, public right-of-way, sidewalk, driveway or alley, school building, school
grounds, public building, library, fire station, public park or any parking lot.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person who makes or causes any nuisance to exist, or who has possession or control
of any real property or premises, whether as owner, occupant or tenant, where any nuisance is found, or, in the
case of a motor vehicle, as owner or operator of the same. (Ord. 3-2017, 2017)
8.26.040: NOTICE OF ABATEMENT:
A. Discovery Of Nuisance; Notification: A Code Enforcement Officer or other designee of the City Manager, upon
the discovery of any nuisance on private property in the City, shall notify the responsible party of the property in
writing, to remove and abate from the property, the thing or things therein described as a nuisance, within the
time specified in the notice.
1. The time for abatement of a nuisance posing an imminent danger of damage or injury to or loss of life, limb,
property or health shall not exceed one day.
2. As to other nuisances, the reasonable time for abatement shall not exceed seven (7) days, unless it appears
from the facts and circumstances that compliance could not reasonably be made within seven (7) days or that
a good faith attempt at compliance is being made.
3. If the responsible party shall fail to comply with the requirements for a period longer than that named in the
notice, then the Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized City official shall proceed to have the nuisance
described in the notice, removed or abated from the property described in the notice without delay; and the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to call for any necessary assistance. In no event shall the
notice, described by this section, be required prior to issuance of a summons and complaint.
4. Any nuisance located or found in or upon any street, avenue, alley, public sidewalk, highway, public right-ofway,
public grounds, park, recreational facility, or other public property owned or controlled by the City, in the
City, may be abated without notice. Nor shall a notice described in this section be required prior to issuance of
a summons and complaint pursuant to this chapter.
B. Service Of Notice: Service of a notice of a violation on the responsible party shall be by any of the following
means:
1. Personally delivering a copy of the notice to the responsible party;
2. Mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of a
responsible party, as reflected in the real estate records of the Yuma County Clerk and Recorder's Office; or
3. Mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner
of the property described in the notice as reflected in the County Assessor records if the property is
unoccupied and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place at the unoccupied premises.
4. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon the date of personal delivery or three (3) business days
after the date of mailing as required herein.
C. Contents Of Notice: The notice to abate, issued pursuant to the provisions of this section to the responsible party
upon which a nuisance was discovered, shall contain the following:
1. The address and other description of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered;
2. The name and address of the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered as reflected in
the County Assessor records;
3. The name and address of the occupant of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered, if known,
and if different from the owner;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 99/313
4. A description of the thing or things or condition deemed to be a nuisance;
5. The time in which the thing or things or condition are to be removed or abated from the property;
6. A statement that, if the responsible party fails to comply with directions contained in the written notice, the City
may enter the property, abate the nuisance described therein and assess the costs thereof to the owner of the
property; and
7. A statement that, if the cost of abatement is not paid, a lien may be placed upon any property for which the
abatement was performed and the City will be entitled to the actual costs of abatement, plus fifteen percent
(15%) of such abatement costs for inspection, a minimum fee assessment of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
and other incidental costs of abatement. (Ord. 3-2017, 2017)
8.26.050: ACTIONS TO ABATE A NUISANCE:
When, in the reasonable judgment of a Code Enforcement Officer, a violation of this chapter exists, the officer may,
on behalf of the City, abate a public nuisance by any of the following procedures:
A. Abatement After Notice: If, after written notice has been given as described in section 8.26.040 of this chapter,
the responsible party fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified in the notice, the City may enter upon such
property for the purpose of abating the nuisance if an emergency exists that eminently threatens the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
B. Abatement By Civil Action: If, after written notice has been given, as described in section 8.26.040 of this chapter,
the responsible party fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified in the notice, the Code Enforcement
Officer, on behalf of the City, may bring an action in the Municipal Court to have the nuisance declared as such
by the court and for an order enjoining the nuisance or ordering its restraint, removal, termination or abatement
by the responsible party, or authorize abatement by an appropriate official or agency of the City. The Municipal
Court is hereby authorized to make such findings and declarations, and to enter such orders in circumstances
deemed appropriate.
1. The City shall file a verified complaint for an abatement order which shall include an affirmation that the City
has complied with the notice requirements of subsection 8.26.040C of this chapter and that the responsible
party has failed to abate the identified nuisance upon the property.
2. The Municipal Court shall review the verified complaint and schedule a hearing on the request for an
abatement order. The Municipal Court shall direct the issuance of a summons stating the time, date, and place
at which the request for an abatement order will be heard by the Municipal Court.
3. The City shall serve the summons and complaint on the responsible party named in the complaint in the same
manner as provided above for service of the original notice at least five (5) days prior to the time of the
hearing.
4. At the time, date, and place stated in the summons, the Municipal Court Judge shall review and consider the
request for an abatement order, any statement of the City in support thereof, and any statement and evidence
presented by the responsible party, if present.
5. Upon the date and at the time set for the hearing, if the responsible party fails to appear, and if the City proves
that proper service was made on the responsible party, the Court may grant such orders as are requested by
the City. The Municipal Court Judge may consider evidence of actual notice received by a responsible party in
determining whether adequate notice of a violation has been provided. The Judge may find that notice is
adequate despite a lack of technical compliance with subsection 8.26.040C of this chapter upon evidence that
a responsible party received actual notice of a written notice to abate a reasonable amount of time prior to the
expiration of the abatement period. Failure to appear on any date set for a hearing shall be grounds for
entering a default and judgment thereon against a nonappearing party. For good cause shown, and prior to
enforcement, the Municipal Court may set aside an entry of default and the judgment entered thereon.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 100/313
C. Abatement By Civil Penalty: If, after written notice has been given, as described in section 8.26.040 of this
chapter, the responsible party fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified in the notice, the Code
Enforcement Officer may issue an administrative citation to the responsible party.
1. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve the administrative citation on the responsible party in the same
manner as provided above for service of the original notice. If personally served, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall attempt to obtain the signature of the person receiving the administrative citation on the citation. If
that person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the
validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings.
2. The administrative citation shall contain the following information:
a. The location of the violation(s) and the date and approximate time the violation(s) were observed. When
applicable, the administrative citation shall identify the property in violation by address or legal description.
b. Reference to the applicable sections of this Code that were violated and a description of the violations.
c. The action required to correct the violations.
d. A statement that the responsible party shall correct the violations immediately and a description of the
consequences of failure to correct said violations.
e. The amount of fine imposed for each violation.
f. An explanation of how the fine shall be paid, the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences
of failure to pay the fine.
g. The process for appealing the administrative citation.
h. The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer and the signature of the responsible party if it can be
obtained.
3. An administrative citation may be appealed by the responsible party within five (5) calendar days from the
service of the administrative citation by filing a notice of appeal. Compliance with this time limit shall be a
jurisdictional prerequisite to any appeal brought under this chapter, and failure to comply shall bar any such
appeal.
a. The notice of appeal shall be made in writing and shall be filed with the Municipal Court in person, by
facsimile transmission or by mail. Regardless of the manner of filing such appeal, the notice of appeal must
be filed with the Municipal Court within five (5) calendar days from the date the administrative citation was
served. The notice of appeal shall provide the basis for the appeal.
b. As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the Municipal Court shall schedule a
date, time and location for the hearing.
c. Written notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be personally served upon or sent by first
class mail to the responsible party at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The
hearing shall be held no more than fourteen (14) days after a timely notice of appeal has been filed.
d. In computing the day a notice of appeal must be filed or the day by which a hearing must be held, the first
day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the period is extended to the first day thereafter which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
4. Administrative appeals are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not
apply. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow the procedures provided in this
section.
a. Each party may call and question witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of
its case.
b. The court, at the request of any party to the hearing, may subpoena witnesses, documents and other
evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide
the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees, shall be
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 101/313
borne by the party requesting the subpoena and shall be paid in advance of the issuance of the subpoena
unless otherwise ordered by the court. The form of, and the process for issuing, subpoenas shall be the
same as in the Municipal Court.
c. The only issue to be decided by the court is whether the Code Enforcement Officer exceeded his/her
authority in issuing the administrative citation. The City bears the burden of proof to establish the existence
of a violation of the Code. In the case of a nuisance abatement hearing, the City bears the burden of proof
to establish the existence of a public nuisance. The City's meeting of this burden of proof shall constitute
prima facie evidence that the Code Enforcement Officer did not exceed his or her authority. The appellant
shall have the burden of rebutting such evidence.
d. Whenever it appears that an appeal is not filed within the time permitted by this chapter, or the particular
law or ordinance involved, or that the court for some other reason lacks jurisdiction, the appeal may be
dismissed on the motion of any party or on the court's own motion.
e. The decision of the court shall be known as an administrative enforcement order. The court may: 1) uphold
the administrative citation and all penalties, or 2) dismiss the administrative citation and all penalties, or 3)
waive or conditionally reduce the penalties assessed by the administrative citation. The court also may
impose conditions and deadlines for violators to correct violations or abate nuisances and may require
payment of any outstanding penalties and all fees and costs assessed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
f. In the event that the court does not dismiss the administrative citation, the court shall assess reasonable
administrative costs of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), but not to exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00).
g. The administrative enforcement order shall become final on the date the order is mailed to or served upon
the responsible party. A copy of the order shall be provided to the City.
h. Any responsible party who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the
adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that proper notice of the hearing had been given
to such responsible party. The court may take testimony, evidence and argument from the City and issue an
administrative enforcement order that may include an assessment of reasonable administrative costs in the
absence of a responsible party who fails to appear at the hearing.
5. The City Manager shall develop guidelines for fines based upon the City Manager's assessment of the cost to
the City for enforcing the various provisions of this chapter. The schedule of fines shall be graduated in
amount, with the smallest fine being assessed for the first administrative citation and increasingly larger fines
for second, third and subsequent administrative citations. No single fine assessed for an administrative citation
shall exceed two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00). Such guidelines and fine schedule shall be
approved by the City Council. The schedule of fines shall not be amended more often than once per year.
6. If the responsible party fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for
additional violations of the same section. The fine assessed for each administrative citation issued for
violations of the same section or sections shall not exceed the amount set in the City Manager's schedule of
fines regardless of the number of violations per citation. Payment of the fine shall not excuse the failure to
correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City.
7. The failure of any responsible party to pay the fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time
specified on the citation or by an administrative enforcement order, may result in the imposition of a late fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00), a twenty percent (20%) charge to defray the cost of collection, and interest at a rate of
ten percent (10%) per annum on all unpaid amounts, calculated from the date of the citation. In the event of
failure to pay all fines assessed, the City Manager may refer the matter for collection by whatever means are
available to the City. In the case of delinquent charges, assessments or taxes, including fines and the costs of
nuisance abatement respecting real property identified in an administrative citation and/or enforcement order
served upon or issued to an owner of such property, the City Manager shall, pursuant to Colorado Revised
Statutes section 31-20-105, certify the same to the Treasurer of the County to be collected and paid over by
the Treasurer of the County in the same manner as taxes are collected. An action or other process provided
by law may be maintained by the City to recover or collect any amounts, including late fees, interest, and
administrative costs, owing under this chapter.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 102/313
D. Abatement By Penalty Assessment: If a Code Enforcement Officer elects not to summarily abate the nuisance
pursuant to subsection A of this section, abate the nuisance pursuant to subsection B of this section, or issue an
administration citation pursuant to subsection C of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer may initiate an
action to have a nuisance declared as such by the court and to have the court impose penalty and otherwise
enter orders as provided for in this chapter.
1. The action shall be brought in the name of the people of the City of Yuma by serving a copy of the summons
and complaint upon the responsible party and filing the original with the court. Summonses and complaints
and subpoenas shall be served as in other criminal actions. Any employee or agent of the City of Yuma, who
is over the age of eighteen (18), may serve a summons and complaint upon the responsible party or a
subpoena upon any witness to the violation.
2. The responsible party served with the summons and complaint shall have the right to enter a plea of guilty or
not guilty in the Municipal Court. If the responsible party is found guilty, the court shall impose sentence and
order abatement as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 3-2017, 2017)
8.26.060: RECOVERY OF EXPENSE OF ABATEMENT:
A. If the City abates a nuisance pursuant to this chapter, it shall be entitled to recover the following:
1. The actual costs of abatement, plus fifteen percent (15%) of such abatement costs for inspection, a minimum
fee assessment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and other incidental costs of abatement.
2. Such costs shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days after the City has mailed notice of the assessment
by certified mail to the owner of the property; provided, however, that if the property is occupied by someone
other than the owner, the City shall mail such notice of assessment by certified mail, to both the occupant and
the owner. Service shall be complete upon depositing the notice within the United States Postal Service,
postage prepaid for certified mail. Every such assessment shall be a lien in the several amounts assessed
against such lot, lots or tract of land until paid.
3. Failure to pay such assessment within such period of thirty (30) days, shall cause such assessment to
become a lien against such lot, block or parcel of land and shall have priority over all liens, except general
taxes and prior special assessments, and the same may be collected by any legal means, including
certification at any time after such failure to pay the same, by the City to the County Treasurer to be placed
upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with
fifteen percent (15%) penalty to defray the cost of collection. (Ord. 3-2017, 2017)
8.26.070: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. It shall be a civil infraction for any person to:
1. Create, operate, maintain or conduct any nuisance as defined in this chapter.
2. Interfere with or prevent, or attempt to interfere with or prevent, the abatement of any nuisance pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
3. To allow any property, including any private residence, to deteriorate, either through abandonment or neglect,
to the extent that such property becomes an unsightly nuisance and a detriment or danger to surrounding
property or the general public. Evidence of abandonment or neglect which could render a property either an
unsightly nuisance, or a detriment, or a danger to surrounding property may include a combination of some of
the following occurrences or conditions, or occurrences and conditions which are similar to the following:
substantial peeling or faded paint, broken shutters or fascia, bent, broken or rusted gutters, broken windows or
screens, detached doors or screens, broken or damaged fencing, damaged or dead landscaping, cracked
and/or potholed cement or asphalt paving, presence of weeds in gravel or paved parking areas.
B. Any person found guilty of, or pleads nolo contendere to the commission of the civil infraction of violating any
provision of this chapter, shall be subject to the following penalties, provided that the maximum fine for any
violation shall not exceed the maximum fine authorized pursuant to title 1, chapter 1.24 of this Code and further
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 103/313
provided that nothing shall be construed as either prohibiting or limiting the City from pursuing such other
remedial provisions as set forth in this chapter.
1. Upon the first finding of guilt or plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this chapter in any twenty four (24)
month period, a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per count;
2. Upon the second finding of guilt or plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this chapter in any twenty four
(24) month period, a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per count;
3. Upon the third finding of guilt or plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this chapter in any twenty four (24)
month period, a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) per count;
4. Upon the fourth finding of guilt or plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this chapter in any twenty four (24)
month period, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per count.
C. In levying and imposing fines upon conviction of any of the sections specified herein, the court shall have no
authority to reduce or suspend all or any portion of the minimum fines specified herein, it being the expressed
intent of the City Council that the court will adhere to the fine schedule specified herein. The twenty four (24)
month period referred to in subsection B of this section shall be measured from date of violation to date of
violation.
D. As a portion of any judgment, fine or assessment levied upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the court
shall order that the violation be abated within a time established by the court, but in no event to exceed thirty
(30) days from the date of conviction. Failure to abate within the time so ordered may constitute contempt of
court, and may be punishable as such. The order also shall provide that, in the event the defendant has not
abated the nuisance within thirty (30) days after the court order, the City or its agents are authorized to do so, at
the expense of the defendant.
E. In addition to any fines levied hereunder, the court shall impose, as a portion of the costs assessed against a
convicted responsible party, any costs incurred by the City in prosecuting, enforcing and abating the nuisance.
F. Each day during which any responsible party commits, or allows to remain unabated, any of the actions specified
as unlawful in this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Multiple violations of this chapter may be included
on a single notice to abate or a single summons and complaint. (Ord. 3-2017, 2017)
Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
9.04.010: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to resist any police officer of the city or to in any way interfere with or hinder him while in
the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty. (Prior code §9.3)
9.04.020: RESCUE OF PRISONER:
It is unlawful for any person to rescue or attempt to rescue any person in the custody of a police officer or in the
custody of the police department at the city jail. (Prior code §9.4)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 104/313
Chapter 9.08
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
9.08.010: INTENTIONAL BODILY INJURY:
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally cause bodily injury to another person; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to injury caused by means of a deadly weapon, nor shall it apply in the event of serious
bodily injury. (Ord. 4-2004 §1, 2004)
9.08.020: BODILY INJURY; CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE:
It is unlawful for any person with criminal negligence to cause bodily injury to another person by means of a deadly
weapon. (Ord. 4-2004 §1, 2004)
9.08.030: HARASSMENT:
A. It is unlawful for any person, with the intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, to:
1. Strike, shove, kick or otherwise harm a person or subject him or her to physical contact;
2. In a public place, direct obscene language to or at another person;
3. Follow a person in or about a public place;
4. Initiate communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, in a manner intended to
harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or make any comment, request, suggestion or proposal
by telephone which is obscene;
5. Make a telephone call or cause a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no
purpose of legitimate conversation;
6. Make repeated communication at inconvenient hours that invades the privacy of another and interferes in the
use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; or
7. Repeatedly insult, taunt, challenge or make communications in offensively coarse language to another in a
manner likely toprovoke a violent or disorderly response.
B. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, "obscene" means a patently offensive description
of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory
functions.
C. Any acts prohibited by subsection A4 of this section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been
committed at the place at which the telephone call was either made or received. (Ord. 5-2004 § 1, 2004: Ord. 4-
2004 §1, 2004)
9.08.040: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment; however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes,
section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 4-2004 §1, 2004)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 105/313
Chapter 9.12
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
9.12.010: DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
It is unlawful for any person to consume or serve within the City any fermented malt beverages upon any street,
alley, park or public building. (Ord. 7-1974 §1, 1974: Prior Code §9-19-1)
9.12.020: POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS IN PUBLIC:
It is unlawful for any person to possess or have in his possession, or under his control, any open container
containing malt, vinous or spirituous liquors or any fermented malt beverages about or upon any street, alley, road,
highway, sidewalk, automobile parking lot, public way or public building, park or public place within the City. If the
container as sealed for distribution to the public has been unsealed or undone in any manner, it will be deemed to
have been opened. (Ord. 18-2018, 2018)
9.12.030: GRANTING OF VARIANCES:
A. Variances from the provisions of sections 9.12.010 and 9.12.020 of this chapter, may be granted by the City
Police Department upon written application, of not less than three (3) days in advance of the day for which said
variance is requested and upon payment to the police of an application fee.
B. A variance is granted to members of the Fire Department allowing them the privilege to consume alcoholic
beverages within the building owned by the City, and known as the Yuma Fire Hall. This right is not vested and
may be withdrawn by a majority vote of the City Council at any time without notice to the parties concerned.
C. A variance is granted, allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages during daylight hours upon the City owned
property leased to Hiplare, Inc., also known as the Yuma Golf Course. This variance is not a vested right and
may be withdrawn by a majority vote of the City Council at any time without notice to the parties concerned.
(Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1989, 1989: Ord. 7-1974 §1, 1974: Prior Code §9-19-3)
9.12.040: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of sections 9.12.010 and 9.12.020 of this chapter,
shall be fined in a sum of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 7-
1974 §2, 1974)
9.12.050: GAMBLING HOUSES:
It is unlawful for any person to keep a gambling house or to permit or suffer any faro bank, keno table, poker table,
dice table, playing cards or other instrument or device whatsoever, used for playing any game or games of chance,
to be set up or used in the City, whereon or wherewith any game or games of chance may be played for money or
other article of value, in any room, building or other place in his possession or under his control. (Prior Code §9.8)
9.12.060: PROSTITUTION:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a bawdyhouse, house of assignation, house of prostitution, house
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 106/313
of ill fame or other place for the practice of prostitution, fornication, adultery or sexual perversion, or to offer to
secure another person for the purpose of committing an act of prostitution, or to commit, offer or agree to commit an
act of prostitution. (Prior Code §9.10)
9.12.070: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS1:
(Rep. by Ord. 4-1993 §1, 1993)
9.12.080: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It is unlawful for any person to expose any part of his person indecently, or to make a meretricious display, in or
near any public place or place open to the public view. (Prior Code §9.12)
Chapter 9.16
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
9.16.010: BEGGING:
(Rep. by Ord. 22-2018, 2018)
9.16.020: DISTURBANCE OF THE PEACE:
A. It is unlawful for any person to disturb, or tend to disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or
obstreperous conduct, or by loud or unusual noise, or by unseemly, profane, obscene or offensive language
calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, or by assaulting, striking or fighting another.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: Prior Code §9.6)
9.16.030: ASSEMBLING TO COMMIT UNLAWFUL ACT:
A. It is unlawful for any three (3) or more persons to assemble together in this City with an intent to do any unlawful
act; or, being assembled, mutually to agree to act in concert, to do an unlawful act with force or violence of
another or against the peace and to the terror of others; or to make any move or preparation therefor; or, being
present at such meeting or assembly, to fail to endeavor to prevent the commission of or perpetration of such
unlawful act.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: Prior Code §9.7-1)
9.16.040: THROWING OF STONES, MISSILES, ETC.:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 107/313
A. No person shall throw any stone or other missile at or upon any person, animal, public or private property,
building, structure, tree or shrub.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: Prior Code §9.7-3)
9.16.050: LOITERING PROHIBITED:
A person shall be deemed in violation of this section if he or she:
A. Loiters for the purpose of unlawful gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia;
B. Lingers for the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in prostitution or deviate sexual
intercourse;
C. Loiters in or about a school building or grounds not having any reason or relationship involving custody of or
responsibility for a pupil or any other specific legitimate reason for being there and not having written permission
from a school administrator;
D. Loiters with one or more persons for the purpose of unlawfully using or possessing a narcotic or dangerous drug;
E. Loiters in or about any place or building owned or maintained by a governmental entity supported by general
Property Taxes without any specific legitimate reason for being there and not having permission from any
representative of such governmental entity responsible for the maintenance of such premises;
F. Loiters in or about any place or building owned or maintained by any religious organization without any specific
legitimate reason for being there and not having permission from any representative of such religious
organization responsible for the maintenance of such premises; provided that prior to enforcement of this
subsection as to property of any religious organization such religious organization must first file with the Chief of
Police a written request for the enforcement of this subsection as to the property of such religious organization.
(Ord. 22-2018, 2018: Ord. 17-2002 §2, 2002)
9.16.060: EXEMPTIONS TO LOITERING:
It shall be an affirmative defense to a conviction under section 9.16.050 of this chapter that the defendant's acts
were lawful and he or she was exercising his or her right of lawful assembly as a part of a peaceful and orderly
petition for the redress of grievances either in the course of labor disputes or otherwise. (Ord. 17-2002 §2, 2002)
9.16.070: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under this chapter; however, failure to pay a fine may result in
imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 17-2002 §2, 2002)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 108/313
Chapter 9.18
NOISE
9.18.010: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
This chapter shall apply throughout the city, including private areas therein as well as public streets, roads, parking
areas or other public ways and places. (Ord. 11-2002 §1, 2002)
9.18.020: NOISE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to make unnecessary noise upon, near or adjacent to the streets, highways and other
public places in the city. It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made any unnecessary or
unusual noise detrimental to the comfort, repose, peace, health or safety of others, unless the making and
continuing of the same is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or of the health, safety, life or limb
of some person or the public generally. Unlawful noise shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Operation or permitting the operation of any lawn mowers, leaf blowers, other motorized garden equipment, or
snowblowers between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in such a manner as to
cause a noise disturbance of the peace.
B. Operation or permitting the operation of any construction, digging, drilling, demolition, or other heavy equipment
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance of the peace.
C. At a gathering of multiple individuals, using, operating, or permitting the use or operation of any radio, television
set, loudspeaker, public address system, tape player, record player, CD player, DVD player, or similar device at
any time in such a manner as to permit the discernment of individual sounds at either the real property line or
through a party wall within a building.
D. Using, operating, or permitting the use or operation of any radio, television set, loudspeaker, public address
system, tape player, record player, CD player, DVD player, or similar device in a motor vehicle in such a manner
as to cause a noise disturbance of the peace. (Ord. 6-2003 §1, 2003: Ord. 11-2002 §1, 2002)
9.18.030: EXCEPTIONS:
Provisions of this chapter should not apply to sounds emitted as a result of any of the following:
A. Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church;
B. Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any alarm systems used in case of fire, collision,
civil defense, police activity or imminent danger; provided, however, that burglar alarms not terminating within
fifteen (15) minutes after being activated shall not be excepted from the provisions of this chapter;
C. Any aircraft in flight subject to federal law regarding noise control, or any rail traffic subject to protection as
interstate commerce;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 109/313
D. Any activities of a temporary duration which are permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been
granted by the city including, but not limited to, parades, sporting events, concerts, firework displays or public
address systems, rodeos;
E. Any entertainment or sporting events sponsored by a tax supported governmental entity or any nonprofit
organization;
F. Any power equipment operated between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. for the
purpose of maintenance or improvement of property;
G. Any construction activities within the city between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M., regardless of location, for the periods within which construction is to be completed pursuant to any
applicable building permit or pursuant to any contract with the city, as the case may be; or
H. Shooting at the Yuma Trap Club, during such time periods as may have been established by the City Council;
I. Any agricultural, industrial or commercial noise which is incidental to the activity which is lawfully performed;
J. Any sound incidental to the repairing of building roofs. (Ord. 11-2002 §1, 2002)
9.18.040: APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT:
A. Application for a permit for relief from the noise level controls designated in this chapter may be made to the City
Council on the basis of undue hardship.
B. Any permit granted by the City Council under this chapter shall contain all conditions upon which the permit shall
be granted, and shall specify a reasonable period of time that the permit shall be effective.
C. The City Council may grant the permit applied for if it is first deemed that:
1. Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his or her activity or operation to comply with
this chapter;
2. The activity, operation or noise source would be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner
which would otherwise comply with this chapter, and no other reasonable alternative is available to the
applicant; and/or
3. Granting of the permit would not be injurious to the best interests of the general health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the City.
D. The City Council shall prescribe any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects
upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood.
E. Application for the permit provided for in this chapter shall be made upon forms provided by the City, along with
payment of the applicable fee.
F. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on such application, and notice hereof shall be given in the same
manner as notices of public hearing before the City Council on applications for expansion of nonconforming use
under the Yuma zoning ordinance. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 11-2002 §1, 2002)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 110/313
9.18.050: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment; however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes
section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 11-2002 §1, 2002)
Chapter 9.20
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
9.20.010: INJURY TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. It is unlawful for any person to wantonly, maliciously, or in a grossly negligent manner, cut, deface, injure or
destroy any public property.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: prior code §9.14)
9.20.020: DEPOSITING RUBBISH IN PUBLIC PLACES:
A. It is unlawful to throw or deposit in any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in this city, any paper, old cloths,
cloth of any kind, boots, shoes, hats, leather, hair, grass, junk cars, straw or hay, trash or any other thing, on
public streets or alleys, except in public receptacles and authorized private receptacles.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: prior code §9.14-1)
9.20.030: LITTERING:
A. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon
private property.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: prior code §9.14-2)
9.20.040: DEPOSITING GARBAGE IN PUBLIC PLACES:
A. It is unlawful to throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, any offal composed of animal or
vegetable substance, or both, any dead animal, excrement, garbage or other offensive matter whatever, upon
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 111/313
any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or public grounds. No person shall in this city throw or deposit, or cause or
permit to be thrown or deposited, anything specified in any foregoing part of this section, or any other substance
that would tend to have a polluting effect, into the water of any stream, ditch, pond, well, cistern, trough or other
body of water, whether artificially or naturally created, or so near any such place as to be liable to pollute the
water.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: prior code §9.14-3)
9.20.050: ENTERING FENCED AREA AROUND CITY PARK SWIMMING POOL:
A. It is unlawful to enter the area designated by the fence surrounding the swimming pool located in the city park of
the city, except during the hours prescribed by the city council.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: prior code §9.14-4)
9.20.060: ENTERING CITY PARK SWIMMING POOL:
A. It is unlawful to enter the swimming pool located in the city park except during the hours prescribed by the city
council.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: prior code §9.14-5)
9.20.070: INJURING OR DESTROYING PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. It is unlawful for any person to either wilfully, maliciously or wantonly injure or destroy real property or
improvements thereto, or movable or personal property belonging to any person, persons, corporation,
partnership or association.
B. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a
fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 2-1982,
1982: prior code §9.14-6)
9.20.090: RUBBISH BURNING2:
(Rep. by Ord. 1-2008 §1, 2008)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 112/313
9.20.100: RADIO OR TELEVISION INTERFERENCE:
It is unlawful for any person to operate within the limits of the city any electrical apparatus, device, machine or
equipment which causes interference with radio reception or television reception, when such interference can be
reasonably prevented by means of repairs, adjustments, the installation of corrective appliances or other practicable
alterations. (Prior code §9.17)
9.20.110: ACTS CONSTITUTING TRESPASS:
A. A person is deemed to have committed criminal trespass if said person unlawfully enters or remains in or upon
the premises of another. A person unlawfully enters or remains in or upon the premises of another: 1) if said
person is in or upon the premises without permission of the owner, lessee or person with right to possession of
said premises; or 2) as to commercial or industrial premises or a city owned structure, if the person is in or upon
the premises, including off street parking areas serving the premises, not in the process of conducting business
or seeking to conduct business with the owner, lessee or person with right to possession of the premises, or not
present by invitation of a person in the process of conducting business or seeking to conduct business on the
premises.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if a person other than the owner, lessee or person
with right to possession of the premises is in or upon the premises, including the off street parking area serving
the premises, while the premises are not open to the public for the purpose of conducting business. (Ord. 17-
2002 §3, 2002)
9.20.120: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. A person who is found guilty or enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to violating this chapter shall be
punished as follows:
1. For the first offense, a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars
($300.00);
2. For the second offense committed within five (5) years of a first offense, a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00);
3. For the third and all subsequent offenses committed within five (5) years of the first offense a minimum
penalty of a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine.
B. The minimum fines imposed by this section shall be mandatory and the court shall not suspend a fine, in whole
or in part.
C. No jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive punishment, and no
imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a fine may result in
imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 17-2002 §3, 2002)
Chapter 9.24
SOLICITATION AND VENDORS
9.24.010: RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION - FINDINGS AND LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
A. The City Council makes the following legislative findings:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 113/313
1. The City of Yuma is a home rule municipal corporation organized in accordance with article XX of the
Colorado Constitution;
2. The City of Yuma has an interest in protecting its citizens' right to privacy in their own homes, in preserving
the public peace and order, and in protecting the public safety and welfare;
3. The City of Yuma has a residential community whose residents value the peace and quiet enjoyment of their
private property;
4. The City Council finds that unregulated door-to-door solicitation within the City would degrade and have an
adverse impact on the peace and quiet enjoyment of private property;
5. The City Council finds and determines that unregulated door-to-door solicitation within the City would present
a danger to City residents and their private property;
6. The City Council finds that the owner or occupant should be given the opportunity to post signs prohibiting
entry onto his or her property for door-to-door solicitation and that these methods provide a balance between
the individuals' right to privacy within their home, promote and protect the safety and privacy of the public, and
protect the interests of solicitors; and
7. The City Council desires to adopt a regulatory program in furtherance of these interests, purposes, and goals.
B. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, including any commercial solicitor or noncommercial solicitor, to enter or
remain upon any public or private premises in the City if a "No Solicitation", "No Trespassing", or other sign
conveying a similar message is posted at or near the entrance or entrances to such premises. This provision
shall apply to all solicitation including, without limitation, all solicitation activities that are religious, charitable, or
political in nature and all solicitation of newspaper or magazine subscriptions. (Ord. 11-2018, 2018)
9.24.020: CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words have the meanings indicated:
CANVASSER: A person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without
prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the noncommercial primary purpose of:
1. Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue
or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against
such cause.
2. Attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent,
educational, civic, fraternal, charitable, political or religious purpose, even if incidental to such purpose there
is the sale of some good or service.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR: A person, whether as volunteer, owner, agent, consignee or employee, who
engages in door-to-door commercial solicitation.
DOOR-TO-DOOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: To enter or remain upon any private premises in the City,
not having been requested or invited by the occupants thereof, to attempt to make or to make personal
contact with the occupant for the primary purpose of:
1. Contacting to solicit the immediate or future purchase or sale of any goods, wares or merchandise,
including newspaper or magazine subscriptions, or any services to be performed immediately or in the
future, whether or not the person has, carries or exposes a sample of such goods, wares or merchandise,
and whether or not he or she is collecting advance payments for such sales; or
2. Personally delivering to the resident a handbill or flyer advertising commercial events, activities, goods or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 114/313
services that are offered to the resident for purchase at a location away from the residence or at a future
time.
DOOR-TO-DOOR NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: To enter or remain upon any private premises in the
City, not having been requested or invited by the occupants thereof, to attempt to make or to make personal
contact with the occupant for the primary purpose of:
1. Seeking or asking for a gift or donation for a public entity or nonprofit organization exempt from Federal
Income Tax under 26 USC 501(c)(3) or related to fundraising activities authorized or sponsored by a public
entity;
2. Soliciting the sale of goods, wares or merchandise for present or future delivery or the sale of services to
be performed immediately or in the future, with the entire proceeds of such sale to be paid directly to, or
used exclusively for the benefit of, a public entity or nonprofit organization exempt from Federal Income Tax
under 26 USC 501(c)(3) or related to fundraising activities authorized or sponsored by a public entity;
3. Personally delivering to the resident a handbill or flyer advertising a future, not-for-profit event, activity,
good or service;
4. Proselytizing on behalf of a religious organization;
5. Soliciting support for a political candidate or organization, or ballot measure or ideology.
NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITOR: A person, whether as volunteer, owner, agent, consignee or employee, who
engages in door-to-door noncommercial solicitation.
SOLICITOR: A person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his or her residence without
prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of attempting to sell a good
or service, whether or not the goods or services are actually delivered at the time of sale.
B. Registration Required: No person shall act as a commercial solicitor within the City without first registering with
the City Clerk in accordance with this chapter. Canvassers and non-commercial solicitors are not required to
register but may do so for the purpose of reassuring City residents of the canvasser's or noncommercial
solicitor's good faith.
C. Application Fees: No application shall be received by the City Clerk unless accompanied by an application fee as
set by Council. All application fees are nonrefundable. No portion of any application fee paid shall be refunded if
registration is denied or a registration, once issued, is suspended or revoked.
D. Application For Registration: Any person or organization required to register under this chapter shall provide the
following information on application forms to be provided by the City Clerk:
1. Proof of age, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided by presenting the applicant's driver's
license, state identification card, passport or other government-issued identification card (issued by a
government within the United States). The City Clerk shall make a photocopy of the identification presented by
the applicant, which shall be retained with the application.
2. The name, permanent address and local address, if any, of the company represented by the applicant and a
copy of the organization's City tax license.
3. A brief description of the proposed activity related to this registration. (Copies of literature to be distributed
may be substituted for this description, at the option of the applicant.)
4. The motor vehicle make, model, year, color and state license plate number of any vehicle which will be used
by each person.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 115/313
5. A description of the individual, including height, weight, eye color and hair color.
6. The web, email or other address for the company where residents having subsequent questions can go for
more information.
7. A statement as to whether or not the applicant:
a. Has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation (other than a traffic violation) and, if
so, the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, the date when and place
where such offense occurred and the pertinent details thereof;
b. Has been institutionalized for mental illness which caused acts of violence against the person or property of
another; or
c. Is required to be registered as a sex offender or as a sexual predator and the nature of the offense or the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor, in this or any other state.
8. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of former places of employment of the applicant during the
previous two (2) years, if any.
9. All licenses currently held or previously held by the applicant within the five (5) years preceding the date of
application related to soliciting or a similar business endeavor, noting any nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation by the issuing authority and the pertinent details thereof.
10. A statement as to whether a civil judgment has ever been entered against the applicant or, to the applicant's
knowledge, the company, for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation and, if so, the full details thereof.
E. Registration; Grounds For Denial:
1. The City Clerk may deny registration for any of the following reasons:
a. Any person against whom a judgment based upon or a conviction for misrepresentation, fraud, deception,
breach of warranty or breach of contract in the City or elsewhere has been entered within the five (5) years
preceding the date of application.
b. Failure to comply with this chapter or violation of any ordinance applicable to his or her permitted activities.
c. Failure to obtain a business license or contractor's registration certificate as required by the City or failure of
the applicant, his or her supervisor or his or her employer to remit any Sales Tax due the City.
d. Registration as a sex offender or as a sexual predator in this or any other state, or conviction of any crime
that requires such registration.
e. Felony convictions for crimes against the person or property of another.
f. Institutionalization for mental illness which caused acts of violence against the person or property of another;
provided, however, that such felony convictions or institutionalization occurred within the five (5) years
preceding the date of application. For the purposes of this section:
Crimes or acts of violence against the property of another shall include: theft, burglary, breaking and
entering, larceny and other similar felonies involving moral turpitude by whatever name.
Crimes or acts of violence against the person or another shall include: homicide, attempted homicide, rape,
attempted rape, sexual assault, assault, battery and other similar felonies involving moral turpitude by
whatever name.
g. Any false, misleading or fraudulent statement on an application, or when an applicant has omitted pertinent
information on the application for registration.
h. The applicant is a person whose character and record are such as not to warrant the City Clerk's
confidence that he or she will conduct the business of soliciting lawfully, honestly and fairly or without
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 116/313
resorting to duress, coercion, intimidation or harassment of any person being solicited for business or other
acts of violence or force against persons or property.
i. Any person who has been denied registration or had his or her registration revoked pursuant to this chapter
within the previous year, unless the applicant can and does show, to the satisfaction of the City Clerk, that
the reasons for such earlier denial or revocation no longer exist.
2. In making a determination pursuant to subsection E1 of this section, when considering a criminal or ordinance
violation conviction or judgment, the City Clerk shall be governed by the provisions of Colorado Revised
Statutes section 24-5-101, pertaining to the effect of criminal convictions on employment rights. The City Clerk
shall also give consideration to the following criteria:
a. The reliability of any source as to character and record and any corroboration of any such evidence;
b. The nature of any criminal conviction or ordinance violation or any judgment involving fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation, including the classification of any felony or misdemeanor conviction; length of time
incarcerated or severity of remedy or penalty imposed; mitigating or aggravating factors involved;
subsequent record of conduct, including educational achievements and work history; subsequent
convictions or parole or probation violations; and the correlation, if any, between the illegal or fraudulent
activity and the activity for which commercial solicitor is registering; and
c. Any evidence presented tending to show the applicant's rehabilitation as being a law-abiding and productive
member of society.
3. Persons whose applications for registration have been denied shall be notified in writing of the reason for such
denial within three (3) business days of receipt of the application for registration by the City Clerk. Upon
written request to the City Clerk, applicants that have been denied are entitled to an administrative review of
the denial by the City Manager. The City Manager shall determine whether the reasons for registration denial
in fact exist and shall notify the applicant in writing of said determination within three (3) business days of
receipt of the written request for administrative review by the City Manager.
F. Permit; Replacement:
1. When an application for registration is approved, the City Clerk shall issue a permit to the commercial solicitor,
which permit shall be carried by the commercial solicitor at all times while the commercial solicitor is
performing any activities within the City that require registration pursuant to this chapter. The commercial
solicitor must produce the permit at any time requested by any member of City staff, including law
enforcement, or any resident or occupant of private property upon which the commercial solicitor enters.
2. Upon receipt of an application for a replacement permit, stating that the previously issued permit has been lost
or stolen and payment of a replacement fee, the City Clerk may issue a replacement permit. No replacement
permit shall be issued unless the City Clerk is able to verify that the commercial solicitor remains employed by
the company listed in the original application, or otherwise will be engaged in the same soliciting activities as
specified in the original application.
G. General Prohibitions: No solicitor shall:
1. Enter upon private property or remain upon any private property when any form of sign or sticker is clearly
displayed advising that the occupant does not wish to be called upon by solicitors.
2. Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main entrance to the dwelling or step from the
sidewalk or indicated walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the front or main entrance,
except by express invitation of the resident or occupant of the property.
3. Remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign or sticker that gives notice to such person that the resident or
occupant does not invite solicitors.
4. Enter upon any private property within the City after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and before nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 117/313
H. Registration; Revocation:
1. Each registration is issued in the name of the person and for solicitation on behalf of the organization
specified in the application and is not transferable to any other person or organization.
2. If the City Clerk finds that any of the grounds stated in subsection E of this section exist or that the applicant
has, during the period of registration, been convicted of a violation of this chapter or any other crime or
ordinance violation that would be cause for denial of a registration, the City Clerk shall revoke the certificate of
registration; or, for other just cause related to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the City or related
to the person's business integrity or responsibility, the City Clerk may revoke the certificate of registration.
3. A person whose certificate of registration has been revoked shall be notified in writing of the reason for such
revocation immediately upon revocation and, upon written request to the City Clerk, is entitled to an
administrative review of the revocation by the City Manager or his or her designee. The City Manager or his or
her designee shall determine whether the reasons for revocation in fact exist and shall notify the applicant in
writing of said determination within three (3) business days of receipt of written request for administrative
review by the City Manager or his or her designee.
I. Registration; Expiration: Each registration shall expire on the date specified on the permit, and the City Clerk shall
issue no permit for a period longer than one year. On the expiration of a permit, any person may apply for the
issuance of a new permit. Each successive registration shall be subject to all requirements for issuance of a new
permit, including but not limited to a new background check, new identification being provided and a new
application fee being paid.
J. Transfer Of Registration: No person shall transfer or attempt to transfer a registration or any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter to any other person, and no person shall use a registration or permit issued to any other
person.
K. Violation; Penalty:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, corporation or business entity to instruct, direct, command,
order, organize or otherwise arrange for any person to engage in solicitation in violation of this section.
2. It shall be an affirmative defense to any violation of this section that the solicitor has an express invitation from
the resident or occupant of a dwelling allowing him or her to enter upon any posted property.
3. Any violation shall be punishable pursuant to title 1, chapter 1.24 of this Code. (Ord. 11-2018, 2018)
9.24.030: VENDORS PERMITS:
Except as provided for in title 12, chapter 12.38 of this Code, the following activities shall require a permit from the
City:
A. The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, or commodities from or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, park or property owned or controlled by the public or by the City or upon any vacant property within the
City.
B. A permit under this section shall be issued for no longer than thirty (30) days. The permit may be issued by the
City Manager or his or her designee upon a finding that the proposed site is adequate for the proposed activity.
C. Any structure associated with the activities under this section shall be dismantled and removed from the site
upon termination of the permit and the site shall be returned to its former condition as near as practicable.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 118/313
D. Upon application for any permit under this section, every applicant shall be required to submit proof of currently
effective State Sales Tax license, unless such license is not required by applicable law and pay the applicable
permit fee as set by Council.
E. Any such permit issued by the City may be revoked at any time under the following circumstances:
1. If the requirements of this section are violated in any manner;
2. Violation of any Federal, State, County or City law, rule or regulation;
3. Violation of any standard of professional conduct established for regulating the activities of recipient of said
permit.
F. It is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. Such violation may be punishable pursuant to
title 1, chapter 1.24 of this Code. (Ord. 11-2018, 2018)
Chapter 9.28
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
9.28.010: CURFEW FOR PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS:
It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain or loiter upon any street, alley or other
public place or way subsequent to the hour of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. or prior to the hour of five o'clock (5:00)
A.M., except where there exists a reasonable necessity therefor or except where such person is accompanied by
the parent, guardian or other person of the age of twenty one (21) years having permission of the parent or guardian
who has the care and custody of such child. (Ord. 11-2008 §1, 2008)
9.28.020: PARENT OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY:
It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having care or custody of any child under the age of sixteen
(16) years to allow or permit any such child to remain or loiter on any public street, alley or other public way or place
subsequent to the hour of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. or prior to the hour of five o'clock (5:00) A.M., except for lawful
employment, or except where there exists a reasonable necessity therefor or except where such child is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other person of the age of twenty one (21) years having permission
from the parent or guardian who has the care and custody of such child. (Ord. 17-2002 §4, 2002)
9.28.030: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00). No jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine
being the exclusive punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under section 9.36.010 of this title; however,
failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-113, as
amended. (Ord. 17-2002 §4, 2002)
9.28.040: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL BY PERSONS UNDER AGE TWENTY ONE:
A. It is unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to possess alcoholic beverages, as defined
under State law.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 119/313
B. The penalty for violation of this section shall be no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and may include up to ten (10) hours' community service by the violator. (Ord. 18-2018, 2018:
Ord. 5-1990, 1990)
9.28.050: OBTAINING, USE, POSSESSION OR PURCHASE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY
MINORS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
SMOKING: The holding or carrying of a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind, and includes
the lighting of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind.
TO CONSUME OR USE ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT: To smoke, ingest, absorb, inhale or chew any tobacco
product.
TO POSSESS ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT: The minor has or holds any amount of tobacco product anywhere
on his or her person, or owns or has custody of a tobacco product, or has a tobacco product within his or her
immediate presence and control.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars,
pipes, tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco. It shall be rebuttably presumed that a substance
within a package or container is a tobacco product if the package or container has affixed to it a label which
identifies the package or container as containing a tobacco product.
B. Unlawful Possession Of Tobacco Products By Minors:
1. It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any tobacco product within the city.
2. It shall be unlawful for any minor to consume or use any tobacco product within the city.
3. It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, obtain, or attempt to purchase or obtain any tobacco product
within the city.
C. Unlawful Furnishing Of Tobacco Products To Minors:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish to any minor, by gift, sale, or any other means, any
tobacco product.
2. It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that the person furnishing the tobacco
product is presented with a reasonable and relied upon document which identified the minor receiving the
tobacco product as being eighteen (18) years of age or older.
D. Penalties: Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each violation, and may include up to ten (10) hours of community service by the violator, but no jail sentence
or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment
pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 12-2008 §1, 2008)
Chapter 9.30
THEFT; SHOPLIFTING
9.30.010: THEFT:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 120/313
It is unlawful to commit theft. A person commits theft when that person knowingly obtains or exercises control over a
thing of value of another without authorization, or by threat or deception, and:
A. Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; or
B. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person of its
use or benefit; or
C. Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will
deprive the other person of its use and benefit; or
D. Demands any consideration to which that person is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of
value to the other person. (Ord. 17-2002 §5, 2002)
9.30.020: SHOPLIFTING:
It is unlawful for any person, including minors, to commit shoplifting. A person commits shoplifting if he or she
knowingly or intentionally conceals or carries away, with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of its use or
benefit, any item or items of merchandise offered for sale or display within a retail store where the aggregate retail
value of the item or items does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 17-2002 §5, 2002: Ord. 7-1986 §1,
1986)
9.30.030: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under this chapter; however, failure to pay a fine may result in
imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 17-2002 §5, 2002: Ord.
7-1986 §3, 1986)
Chapter 9.32
WEAPONS
9.32.010: CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person not a peace officer, level I or Ia, level II, while on duty, to carry concealed upon
his or her person any dangerous or illegal weapon as defined by Colorado Revised Statutes, title 18, article 12, as
may be amended from time to time, except that it shall be an affirmative defense that the person carrying a
concealed weapon was:
A. A person in his own dwelling or place of business, or on property owned or under his control at the time of the act
of carrying;
B. A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance who carries a weapon for lawful
protection for his or another person or property while traveling; or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 121/313
C. A person who, prior to the time of carrying a concealed weapon, has been issued a written permit pursuant to
Colorado Revised Statutes section 18-12-105.1, as may be amended from time to time, to carry the weapon by
the chief of police of a city, or city and county, or the sheriff of a county. (Ord. 10-2002 §1, 2002: Ord. 17-1982,
1982: Ord. 2-1982, 1982: prior code §9.1)
9.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
DANGEROUS WEAPON: A firearm silencer, machine gun, short shotgun or short rifle.
DEADLY WEAPON: Any of the following which, in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is capable of
producing death or serious bodily injury:
A. A firearm, whether loaded or unloaded;
B. A knife;
C. A bludgeon; or
D. Any other weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate.
ILLEGAL WEAPON: A blackjack, gas gun, metallic knuckles, gravity knife or switchblade knife. (Ord. 17-1982,
1982: Ord. 2-1982, 1982: prior code §9.1)
9.32.030: PERSONS EXEMPT FROM PROVISIONS:
It shall be an affirmative defense to the charge of possessing a dangerous weapon, or to the charge of possessing
an illegal weapon or to possessing a deadly weapon, that the person so accused was a peace officer, or member of
the armed forces of the United States or Colorado national guard acting in the lawful discharge of his duties, or that
the person has a valid permit and license for possession of such weapon. (Ord. 17-1982, 1982: Ord. 2-1982, 1982:
prior code §9.1)
9.32.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of section 9.32.010 or 9.32.060 of this chapter shall be punished by fine, up to and including three hundred
dollars ($300.00) for each violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment shall be allowed under
section 9.36.010 of this title; however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised
Statutes, 1973, section 13-10-113. (Ord. 9-2013, 2013)
9.32.050: DISCHARGING FIREARMS UNLAWFUL; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, to fire or discharge within the city, a revolver or pistol of any description, shotgun
or rifle which may be used for the explosion of cartridges or shells, or any air gun, gas operated gun or spring gun.
This section shall not apply to the following:
A. A law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her duties;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 122/313
B. A person in defense of person or property; or
C. Those members of the High Plains Recreation Association firing shotguns while involved in an organized trap
club shooting event during hours which are approved in writing by the Yuma city council and on property
designated and approved in writing by the Yuma city council. The Yuma city council may revoke this privilege at
any time by majority vote. (Ord. 10-2002 §2, 2002: Ord. 2-1982, 1982: prior code §9.2)
9.32.060: OPEN CARRY OF WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to openly carry a dangerous weapon or deadly weapon in any public building
owned by the city and open to the public if a sign has been posted to that effect at every public entrance to the
building. This section shall not apply to the following:
A. A peace officer;
B. A person who has been issued a written permit pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 18-12-201 et seq.,
as may be amended from time to time, to carry the weapon. (Ord. 9-2013, 2013)
Chapter 9.33
BAD CHECKS
9.33.010: PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to write a bad check. A person is guilty of writing a bad check when he or she issues to
an individual or entity, located within the city of Yuma, a check or similar sight order for payment of money, in an
amount less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), knowing that he or she had a closed bank account, or did not
have sufficient funds in or on deposit with the bank or other drawee for the payment in full of the check as well as all
other checks outstanding at the time of issuance. It shall be up to the discretion of the chief of police for the Yuma
police department to determine whether or not to pursue charges for bad checks in an amount equal to or less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 3-2002 §1, 2002: Ord. 5-2000 §1, 2000)
9.33.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The following penalties set out in this section, shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provisions stated or adopted in this chapter.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), for each violation, but no jail sentence or other form of
imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed
under this chapter. (Ord. 5-2000 §1, 2000)
Chapter 9.35
OFFENSES IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
9.35.010: INTERFERENCE WITH BUILDING ACCESS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 123/313
No person shall so conduct himself at or in any public building owned, operated, or controlled by the city as to
wilfully deny to any public official, public employee, or invitee on such premises the lawful right of such official,
employee, or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of, or to leave any such public building. (Ord. 8-1995 §1, 1995)
9.35.020: IMPEDING PUBLIC EMPLOYEES:
No person shall, at or in any such public building, wilfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful
performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion, or intimidation or by force and
violence or threat thereof. (Ord. 8-1995 §1, 1995)
9.35.030: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REQUEST TO LEAVE:
No person shall wilfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the chief
administrative officer or his designee charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has
committed, is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed,
disrupt, impair, interfere with, or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures, or functions being carried on
in the public building. (Ord. 8-1995 §1, 1995)
9.35.040: DISRUPTION OF MEETINGS:
No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative, or administrative body or official at
or in any public building, wilfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by an
act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting
or session or byany act designed to intimidate, coerce, or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the
performance of duties at such meeting or session. (Ord. 8-1995 §1, 1995)
9.35.050: HINDRANCE OF PROCEEDINGS:
No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive
body, council body, or official at or in any public building, wilfully impede, disrupt, or hinder the normal proceedings
of such body or official. (Ord. 8-1995 §1, 1995)
9.35.060: PERMITTED CONDUCT:
This chapter shall in no way impede the legitimate and lawful actions of any individual legally entitled to be present
in a public building. Nor shall this chapter impede the actions of any individual in the process of any act pursuant to
the public (open) records act, Colorado Revised Statutes (cum. supp. 1995), section 24-72-102 et seq., the open
meetings law, Colorado Revised Statutes (cum. supp. 1995) section 24-6-401 et seq., or any other federal, state,
county or local rule, law, regulation or ordinance provided said individual does not conduct himself/herself in
violation of this or any other federal, state, county or local rule, law, regulation or ordinance. (Ord. 8-1995 §1, 1995)
9.35.070: DEFINITIONS:
The term "public building", as used in this chapter, includes any premises being temporarily used by a public officer
or employee in the discharge of his official duties. (Ord. 8-1995 §1, 1995)
9.35.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 124/313
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter or any part thereof shall be punished as follows:
A. First offense: Fifty dollar ($50.00) fine;
B. Second offense: One hundred dollar ($100.00) fine;
C. Additional offenses: One hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) fine. (Ord. 8-1995 §1, 1995)
Chapter 9.36
PENALTY
9.36.010: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person, firm or corporation who is convicted of a violation of any
section of this title, shall for each offense be fined in a sum of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisoned not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both so fined and imprisoned. (Ord. 2-1982, 1982: prior code §9.19-1)
Chapter 9.40
STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF OPTIONAL PREMISES
LICENSE
9.40.010: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The following standards for the issuance of optional premises licenses or for optional premises for a hotel and
restaurant are hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-3-310, as
amended:
A. Additional Standards: These standards adopted herein shall be considered in addition to all other standards
applicable to the issuance of licenses under the Colorado Liquor Code for optional premises license or for
optional premises for a hotel and restaurant license. These two (2) types of licenses for optional premises will
collectively be referred to as "optional premises" in these standards unless otherwise provided.
B. Eligible Facilities:
1. An optional premises may only be approved when that premises is located on or adjacent to an "outdoor
sports or recreational facility" as defined in Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-3-103(33)(b), as amended.
2. There are no restrictions on the minimum size of the outdoor facilities which may be eligible for the approval of
an optional premises license. However, the local licensing authority may consider the size of the particular
outdoor sports or recreational facility in relation to the number of optional premises requested for the facility.
C. Number Of Optional Premises: There are no restrictions on the number of optional premises which any one
licensee may have on his/her outdoor sports or recreational facility. However, any applicant requesting approval
of more than one optional premises shall demonstrate the need for each optional premises in relation to the
outdoor sports or recreational facility and its guests.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 125/313
D. Submitted Requirements: When submitting a request for the approval of an optional premises, an applicant shall
also submit the following:
1. A map or other drawings illustrating the outdoor sports or recreational facility boundaries and the approximate
location of each optional premises requested.
2. A legal description of the approximate area within which the optional premises shall be located.
3. A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises when it is
in use.
4. A description of the provisions which have been made for storing malt, vinous and spirituous liquors in a
secured area on or off the optional premises for the future use on the optional premises.
E. Advanced Notification: Pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-3-310, as amended, no alcoholic
beverages may be served on the optional premises until the licensee has provided written notice to the State
and local licensing authorities forty eight (48) hours prior to serving alcoholic beverages on the optional
premises. Such notice must contain the specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used.
(Ord. 18-2018, 2018: Ord. 5-2002 §1, 2002)
Chapter 9.42
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
9.42.010: LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION:
The city council hereby finds and declares that the possession, sale, manufacture, delivery or advertisement of drug
paraphernalia results in the legitimization and encouragement of illegal use of controlled substances by making the
drug culture more visible and enticing and that the ready availability of drug paraphernalia tends to promote,
suggest or increase public acceptability of the illegal use of controlled substances. Therefore, the purpose of the
provisions controlling drug paraphernalia are:
A. To protect and promote the public peace, health, safety and welfare by prohibiting the possession, sale,
manufacture, delivery or advertisement of drug paraphernalia; and
B. To deter the use of controlled substances by controlling the drug paraphernalia associated with their use.
C. To regulate, and in certain circumstances prohibit, the use and possession of marijuana and marijuana
accessories. (Ord. 6-2013, 2013: Ord. 17-2002 §6, 2002)
9.42.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or
designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance (as defined in
Colorado Revised Statutes section 18-18-101 et seq., including marijuana, marijuana concentrated, hashish,
cocaine, crack cocaine, opium and opium derivatives) in violation of the laws of this state. Drug paraphernalia
includes, but is not limited to:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 126/313
A. Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness or purity of controlled substances under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state;
B. Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled
substances;
C. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in
otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;
D. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
compounding controlled substances;
E. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging
small quantities of controlled substances;
F. Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled
substances; or
G. Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana,
cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
1. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens,
hashish heads or punctured metal bowls;
2. Water pipes;
3. Carburetion tubes and devices;
4. Smoking and carburetion masks;
5. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material such as a marijuana cigarette that has become
too small or too short to be held in the hand;
6. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
7. Chamber pipes;
8. Carburetor pipes;
9. Electric pipes;
10. Air driven pipes;
11. Chillums;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 127/313
12. Bongs; or
13. Ice pipes or chillers.
H. "Marijuana accessories", which means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, or
designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into
the human body.
MARIJUANA OR MARIHUANA: All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marihuana concentrate. "Marijuana" or "marihuana" does
not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of
the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient
combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. (Ord. 6-2013, 2013:
Ord. 17-2002 §6, 2002)
9.42.030: DETERMINATION; CONSIDERATIONS:
A. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all
other relevant factors, the following:
1. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
2. The proximity of the object to controlled substances (as defined in Colorado Revised Statutes section 18-18-
101 et seq., including marijuana, marijuana concentrate, hashish, cocaine, crack cocaine, opium and opium
derivatives);
3. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
4. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, or
evidence that such person reasonably should know that it will be delivered to persons whom he or she knows
or reasonably should know could use the object to facilitate a violation of this chapter;
5. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
6. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
7. National or local advertising concerning its use;
8. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
9. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community
for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
10. The existence and scope of legal uses of the object in the community; and
11. Expert testimony concerning its use. (Ord. 17-2002 §6, 2002)
9.42.040: MANUFACTURE, SALE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
Any person who sells or delivers, possesses with intent to sell or deliver, or manufactures with intent to sell or
deliver equipment, products or materials knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that
such equipment, products or materials could be used as drug paraphernalia commits a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 17-2002 §6, 2002)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 128/313
9.42.050: PENALTY FOR POSSESSION:
A. Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia:
1. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to possess drug paraphernalia. A person commits
possession of drug paraphernalia if he or she possesses drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should
know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state.
2. It shall not be a violation of this chapter for a person twenty one (21) years of age or older to possess, use,
display, purchase or transport marijuana accessories to the extent provided by article XVIII, section 16(3) of
the Colorado constitution.
B. Possession And Use Of Marijuana:
1. It is unlawful for any person to use, display, purchase, transport, transfer, possess or have in his possession,
or under his control, more than one ounce of marijuana.
2. It is unlawful for any person age twenty one (21) years or older to use, display, purchase, transport, transfer,
possess or have in his possession or under his control marijuana for any reason other than personal use.
3. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) to use, display, purchase, attempt to purchase,
transport, transfer, possess or have in his possession nor under his control, or obtain marijuana as defined in
this chapter, either directly or indirectly, or through an intermediary, by misrepresentation of age or by any
other means.
4. It is unlawful for any person to possess, grow, process or transport more than six (6) marijuana plants, with
three (3) or fewer being mature, flowering plants. A person may possess the marijuana produced by these
plants, provided that such possession is limited to the premises where the plants were grown and further
provided that the growing takes place in an enclosed locked space and is not conducted openly or publicly or
made available for sale.
5. It is unlawful for any person to possess, consume, or use marijuana as defined in this chapter in a public place
or on property owned, leased or operated by the state or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or upon
property owned, leased or operated by the city. For purposes of this section, "public place" shall mean and
include any place commonly or usually open to the general public or any resort or club accessible to members
of the general public. By way of illustration, public places include, but are not limited to, public ways, streets,
buildings, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, retail stores and centers, shopping malls, places of business usually
open to the general public, and automobiles or other vehicles in or upon any such place or places; but shall
not include the interior or enclosed yard of private homes, residences, condominiums or apartments.
6. It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that a person who possesses or uses marijuana
is so permitted by Colorado or federal law under the direction of a duly licensed medical or osteopathic doctor
and in possession of a valid registry identification card authorizing the medicinal use of marijuana issued by
the state health agency, so long as consumption or use does not occur in a public place.
C. Penalty: Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be punished, upon conviction, by a fine in the
amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment
may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under this
chapter. Failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-
113, as amended. (Ord. 6-2013, 2013)
Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 129/313
Chapter 10.04
TRAFFIC CODE
10.04.010: MODEL TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
Pursuant to parts 1 and 2 of article 16 of title 31, Colorado Revised Statutes, there is hereby adopted by reference
articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 edition of the "Model Traffic Code" promulgated and published as such by the
Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP
700, Denver, CO 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic
control regulations for the City. The purpose of this chapter and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of
traffic regulations throughout the State and the Nation. Three (3) copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein
are now filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City of Yuma, Colorado, and may be inspected during regular business
hours. (Ord. 6-2012, 2012)
10.04.020: DELETIONS:
The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length save and except the following articles
and/or sections which are declared to be inapplicable to this Municipality and are therefore expressly deleted: None.
(Ord. 6-2012, 2012)
10.04.030: ADDITIONS OR MODIFICATIONS:
The said adopted code is subject to the following additions or modifications:
A. City Speed Limits:
Section 1101 is amended to read as follows:
1. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed, the basic prima facie speed limit in this
municipality shall be twenty miles per hour in any business district and thirty miles per hour in any residential
district, unless otherwise posted with appropriate signs giving notice of a different prima facie speed limit, and
unless as otherwise provided herein.
a. The speed limit on South Elm Street between West Third Avenue and West Sixth Avenue shall be 20 miles
per hour, except when school zone traffic signals are active or when school zone hours are designated by
sign, in which case the speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limit on South Main Street between First Avenue and Fifth Avenue shall be 20 miles per hour.
The speed limit on South Main Street between Fifth Avenue and Tenth Avenue shall be 30 miles per hour.
B. Establishment Of Truck Route; Exemption:
Section 508.5 is amended to read as follows:
1. All truck traffic of trucks weighing 11,000 pounds or more empty weight within the city limits of Yuma,
Colorado, shall utilize the following streets:
All of Beatty Avenue;
All of U.S. Highway 34 or Eighth Avenue within the city limits of Yuma, Colorado;
All of North Main Street and South Main Street to U.S. Highway 34;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 130/313
All of Colorado Highway 59 or Detroit Street within the city limits of Yuma, Colorado;
East Second Avenue between Detroit Street And Main Street;
South Ash Street between First Avenue and Second Avenue;
West Second Avenue between South Ash Street and Main Street;
South Albany Street between First Avenue and Second Avenue;
South Buffalo Street between First Avenue and Second Avenue;
All of First Avenue;
All of East Railroad Avenue;
East Second Avenue between Detroit Street and Idlewild Street;
East Fifth Avenue between Evergreen Street and Idlewild Street;
All of Evergreen Street;
All of Flagstaff Street;
All of Georgetown Street;
All of Houston Street;
All of Idlewild Street;
West Hoag Avenue from North Kamala Street to the Eastern edge of the Yuma County Fairgrounds;
South Cedar Street from West 8th Avenue (Highway 34) to West 9th Avenue;
West 9th Avenue from South Date Street to South Cedar Street; and
South Date Street from West 8th Avenue (Highway 34) to West 9th Avenue.
The above truck traffic streets shall be known as Yuma truck traffic route, and use of same shall be adhered to
by truck traffic unless the truck operator can show delivery points other than along the Yuma truck traffic route.
2. Exemption: This ordinance shall not apply to city of Yuma vehicles and said ordinance shall not apply to
franchised public utility vehicles, tow vehicles, emergency vehicles, vehicles used for construction or
demolition, or delivery trucks which are driven or parked in the ordinary course of business.
C. Speed Limits For State Highways: Through streets designated as State Highways are Eighth Avenue (U.S.
Highway 34) from County Road E to Idlewild Street; Detroit Street (State Highway 59) from Twelfth Avenue to
one block North of East Beatty Avenue.
D. Section 26-3 Amended; Speed Limits For State Highways:
This provision is added to section 1102 to read as follows:
1. The speed limits of Detroit Street (State Highway 59) and Eighth Avenue (U.S. Highway 34) shall be regulated
by the state of Colorado and shall be designated by posted speed limit signs.
E. Restricted Use Of Snowmobiles, Skis, Toboggans, Coasters, Skates, And Similar Devices:
This subsection shall be added to the traffic code to read as follows:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 131/313
1. No person shall ride on skateboards, coasters, skates or similar devices upon the sidewalks of South Main
Street between 1st Avenue and 4th Avenue.
F. Parking Restriction:
1. Trucks weighing eleven thousand (11,000) pounds or more empty weight are only permitted to park on
Highway 34 and on Highway 59, south of the Burlington Northern main track. Parking shall be limited to no
more than two (2) consecutive hours, except as provided for in subsection F2 of this section.
2. Any truck subject to the parking restrictions in this section that emits or will emit odors that are detrimental to
the health, comfort, safety or welfare of the public, that causes or tends to cause injury or substantial
annoyance, interfere with the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of property, or inconvenience to
persons exposed thereto or causes or tends to cause damage to property shall not park on permitted
locations, listed in subsection F1 of this section, for longer than fifteen (15) minutes.
G. U-Turns: It shall be unlawful for any person driving a motor vehicle to complete a U-turn on any portion of South
Main Street from the Burlington Northern main track to U.S. Highway 34, or on any portion of South Elm Street
from West Third Avenue to West Sixth Avenue, so as to proceed in the opposite direction, or for the purpose of
parking in a position located across the centerline of said street. However, this subsection shall not be
interpreted as to impede any motorist from crossing the centerline of said street for the purpose of entering
avenues, alleys, residential driveways, or business parking lots which are located across the centerline.
H. Animal Waste Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person driving a truck or pulling a trailer which contains
livestock, or has been used to contain livestock, to throw, deposit, discharge, excrete, or leave animal waste on
any street, avenue, alley, or highway within the City limits of Yuma, Colorado.
I. Jake Brake Prohibition; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with a
compression release engine braking system (otherwise known as a "jake brake") engaged within the City limits
of Yuma, Colorado, except:
1. To avoid imminent danger.
J. Additional Parking Restriction: It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on that portion of Colorado Highway 59,
also known as Detroit Street, which is located within the City limits of Yuma, Colorado, beginning at the
Burlington Northern main track and continuing north to the intersection of Colorado Highway 59 and Centennial
Road; except for the purposes of receiving or delivering inventory, materials, grain, agricultural products or
merchandise to residences and commercial or industrial businesses located on Colorado Highway 59.
K. Low Speed Electric Vehicle: No individual shall be allowed to operate any electric golf cart, motorized golf cart,
engine powered golf cart, or low speed electric vehicle as defined by section 42-1-102, Colorado Revised
Statutes, as amended, on the streets, avenues, alleys or highways within the City of Yuma, except as follows:
1. Pursuant to a permit granted by the Yuma Police Department. Individuals shall submit an application to the
Yuma Police Department, including the applicable fee. After careful review of the matter, the permit shall be
granted or denied in writing by the Chief of Police, based upon the criteria set forth in this chapter. If granted,
said written permit shall state all limitations on use of said vehicles within the City of Yuma. Said written permit
shall be for a term of no longer than one year, but may be renewed or denied annually by the Chief of Police,
upon an application by the permittee to the Yuma Police Department. A permit may be revoked at any time by
the Yuma Police Department for any violation of this section, or any other ordinance or State law. The
following restrictions shall apply to applicants and operators of an electric golf cart, motorized golf cart, engine
powered golf cart, or low speed electric vehicle:
a. Under no circumstances shall any vehicle be allowed access to any street, avenue, alley or highway which
is contrary to State law.
b. All applicants must possess a valid driver's license.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 132/313
c. All applicants must show proof of compliance with State law pertaining to the operation of the electric golf
cart, motorized golf cart, engine powered golf cart, or low speed electric vehicle.
d. All persons shall operate the electric golf cart, motorized golf cart, engine powered golf cart, or low speed
electric vehicle in compliance with this chapter, as well as all other relevant State traffic laws.
e. No electric golf cart, motorized golf cart, engine powered golf cart, or low speed electric vehicle may be
operated later than sunset, nor earlier than sunrise.
f. No person shall operate an electric golf cart, motorized golf cart, engine powered golf cart, or low speed
electric vehicle while using cellphones, headphones, or other communication or audio devices, except an
operator and passenger may wear hearing protection devices when involved near loud industrial or
commercial activity.
g. Upon request of the Yuma Police Department, all applicants shall provide proof that any electric golf cart,
motorized golf cart, engine powered golf cart, or low speed electric vehicle used pursuant to a particular
permit complies with State law pertaining to the operation of said vehicle.
h. No person shall operate an electric golf cart, motorized golf cart, engine powered golf cart, or low speed
electric vehicle in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour.
i. Every electric golf cart, motorized golf cart, engine powered golf cart, or low speed electric vehicle operated
in the City limits shall comply with the vehicle insurance requirements of section 1409 of the Model Traffic
Code for Colorado municipalities. Additionally, the applicant shall obtain and provide evidence of a general
liability policy with limits of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per individual and six hundred
thousand dollars ($600,000.00) per incident.
2. A denial or termination of a permit under this section may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeal shall
be made in writing and received within fifteen (15) days of said denial or termination. Upon receipt of the
appeal, the Yuma City Council shall schedule a public hearing within thirty (30) days, at which time the
applicant/permittee as well as the Yuma Police Department shall be allowed to testify and present evidence in
support of their position. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Yuma City Council shall render a final
verdict of approval, denial, or termination.
L. Utility Terrain Vehicle: For the purposes of this chapter, the term "utility terrain vehicle" shall mean as follows: A
self-propelled vehicle with four (4) or more wheels, which is constructed to hold two (2) or more passengers in a
side by side manner, and containing a box on the rear of the vehicle for the purpose of transporting cargo. A
"utility terrain vehicle" must meet the definition requirements of an "off highway vehicle", pursuant to section 33-
14.5-101, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. "Utility terrain vehicle" does not include: snowmobiles; allterrain
vehicles designed without a cargo box and which do not carry the passenger(s) side by side; military
vehicles; golf carts, low speed electric vehicles; watercraft; vehicles designed to carry disabled persons; and
vehicles registered pursuant to article 3 of title 42, Colorado Revised Statutes. No individual shall be allowed to
operate any utility terrain vehicle on private property of another without written permission of the owner or
occupant of the property. No individual shall be allowed to operate any utility terrain vehicle on the streets, alleys
or highways of the city of Yuma, except as follows:
1. Pursuant to a permit granted by the Yuma police department (said permit is in no way intended to be
interpreted as a license or registration of an off highway vehicle in the city of Yuma). Individuals shall submit
an application to the Yuma police department. After careful review of the matter, the permit shall be granted or
denied in writing by the chief of police, based upon the criteria set forth in this chapter. If granted, said written
permit shall authorize a business or individual with permission to use utility terrain vehicles within the city
limits, which comply with the terms of this chapter, and shall state all limitations on use of said vehicles within
the city of Yuma which are not set forth in local or state law. Said written permit shall be for a term of no longer
than one year, but may be renewed or denied annually by the chief of police, upon an application by the
permittee to the Yuma police department. A permit may be revoked at any time by the Yuma police
department for any violation of this section, or any other ordinance or state law. The following restrictions shall
apply to applicants and operators of a utility terrain vehicle:
a. Under no circumstances shall any vehicle be allowed access to any street, avenue, alley or highway which
is contrary to state law.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 133/313
b. All operators of a utility terrain vehicle must possess a valid driver's license.
c. The operational use of a utility terrain vehicle shall be limited to the assistance of a commercial or industrial
business, and not for recreational purposes.
d. All operators and passengers of a utility terrain vehicle who are not a permit holder, must be acting as an
employee, agent or volunteer of the permit holder and in the course of conducting business on behalf of the
permit holder.
e. The applicant must submit a nonrefundable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) with the application to reimburse the
administrative expense of processing the permit.
f. Upon request of the Yuma police department, all applicants shall provide proof that any utility terrain vehicle
used pursuant to a particular permit complies with state law pertaining to the operation of said vehicle.
g. All persons shall operate the utility terrain vehicle in compliance with this chapter, as well as all other
relevant state traffic laws.
h. A utility terrain vehicle may only be operated between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M.
i. No person shall operate a utility terrain vehicle while using cellphones, headphones, or other communication
or audio devices, except an operator and passenger may use hearing protection devices when involved
near loud industrial or commercial activity. This provision shall not apply to law enforcement officers using a
utility terrain vehicle in the scope of their duties.
j. Every utility terrain vehicle shall be equipped with at least two (2) headlamps with at least one on each side
of the front of the vehicle.
k. Every utility terrain vehicle shall be equipped with at least one taillamp mounted on the rear of the vehicle,
which when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') in normal
sunlight, to the rear.
l. Every utility terrain vehicle shall be equipped with at least one stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle, which
shall display a red or amber light, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') in normal
sunlight, to the rear.
m. Every utility terrain vehicle shall be equipped with lamps showing to the front and rear for the purpose of
indicating an intention to turn either to the right or to the left. Such lamps showing to the front shall be
located on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and when in use shall display a
white or amber light, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') in normal sunlight, and
the lamps showing to the rear shall be located at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as
practicable, and when in use shall display a red or amber light, visible from a distance of not less than one
hundred feet (100') to the rear in normal sunlight. When actuated, such lamps shall indicate the intended
direction of turning by flashing the light showing to the front and rear on the side toward which the turn is
made.
n. Every utility terrain vehicle shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'), but no horn
or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound. The driver, when reasonably
necessary to ensure safe operation shall give audible warning with the horn but shall not otherwise use
such horn when upon a public street, avenue, alley or highway.
o. Every utility terrain vehicle shall be equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly
maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise, and no such muffler or exhaust system shall be
equipped with a cut off, bypass, or similar device.
p. Every utility terrain vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror or mirrors so located and so constructed as to
reflect to the driver a free and unobstructed view of the highway for a distance of at least two hundred feet
(200') to the rear of such vehicle.
q. Every operator and/or passenger of any utility terrain vehicle which is equipped by the manufacturer with a
seat belt restraining device shall wear said seat belt restraining device when the vehicle is in operation.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 134/313
r. Every utility terrain vehicle operated in the city limits shall comply with the vehicle insurance requirements of
section 1409 of the model traffic code for Colorado municipalities. Additionally, the applicant shall obtain and
provide evidence of a general liability policy with limits of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00)
per individual and six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000.00) per incident.
s. No utility terrain vehicle may be operated on municipal parks, at the municipal airport, or on sidewalks,
except in the case of emergencies, or upon permission of the Yuma police department.
t. No person shall operate a utility terrain vehicle in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour.
u. No person shall tow any load or carry any cargo which is in excess of the weight limits set by the
manufacturer's recommended towing, load and carrying capacities.
v. No person shall operate a utility terrain vehicle while carrying a number of passengers that is in excess of
the limits set by the manufacturer's recommended maximum passenger limitations.
w. No individual or business shall be allowed the use of more than two (2) utility terrain vehicles per permit.
x. No person shall operate a utility terrain vehicle without physical possession of the utility terrain vehicle
permit. Upon request by any peace officer, the operator shall immediately provide the utility terrain vehicle
permit.
y. No person shall operate a utility terrain vehicle while under the influence, in any amount, of intoxicating
liquor, fermented malt beverages, or illegal or controlled substances or drugs.
z. The operator of a utility terrain vehicle shall immediately report to the proper law enforcement agency, any
accident or damage to the vehicle while operating on city streets, avenues, alleys and highways.
2. These restrictions shall not apply to the operation of a utility terrain vehicle on state or federal highways which
are located in the city limits.
3. In the event of a weather related emergency, the chief of the Yuma police department is hereby authorized to
issue a temporary exemption allowing the use of snowmobiles and off highway vehicles on the city streets,
avenues and alleys. Said exemption shall be in writing specifying the time period, and shall be posted in the
same manner used by the city for notification of council meetings. For the purpose of this section,
"snowmobiles" shall be defined by section 33-14-101, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, and "off
highway vehicle" shall be defined by section 33-14.5-101, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended.
4. All Federal, State and local governments may operate off highway vehicles on the streets, avenues and alleys
of the City and shall be exempt from obtaining a utility terrain vehicle permit, however, said government entity
and off highway vehicle operators shall comply with all other provisions set forth in this section.
5. All off highway vehicles used strictly for agricultural purposes shall be exempt from obtaining a utility vehicle
permit, however, said owner and operator shall comply with all other provisions set forth in this section.
6. All public utilities, as defined in section 40-1-103, Colorado Revised Statutes, or cooperative electric
associations, as defined in section 40-9.5-102, Colorado Revised Statutes, or any agent thereof designated
specifically for the purpose of meter reading or repair, and who are using an off highway vehicle for business
purposes, may operate off highway vehicles on the streets, avenues and alleys of the City of Yuma and shall
be exempt from obtaining a utility terrain vehicle permit, however, said public utility or cooperative electric
association and vehicle operators must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter.
7. A denial or termination of a permit under this section may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeal shall
be made in writing and received within fifteen (15) days of said denial or termination. Upon receipt of the
appeal, the Yuma City Council shall schedule a public hearing within thirty (30) days, at which time the
applicant/permittee as well as the Yuma Police Department shall be allowed to testify and present evidence in
support of their position. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Yuma City Council shall render a final
verdict of approval, denial, or termination. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 3-2016, 2016: Ord. 6-2012, 2012)
10.04.040: APPLICATION:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 135/313
This chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public
place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of this Municipality, the use of which this
Municipality has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of sections 1401, 1402, 1413, and part 16 of
the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively, concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer,
and accidents and accident reports shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout this
Municipality. (Ord. 6-2012, 2012)
10.04.050: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the State's
uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this chapter and adopted
Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or
extent of the provision of any article or section thereof. (Ord. 6-2012, 2012)
10.04.060: PENALTIES:
The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions adopted in this chapter.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision adopted in this chapter shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 6-2012, 2012)
Chapter 10.08
AIRPORT TRAFFIC
10.08.010: APPLICABILITY:
The traffic ordinances of the city and the model traffic code for Colorado municipalities apply to the streets, roads,
runways and parking areas on the airport. (Prior code §9.18-1)
10.08.020: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDERS AT SCENE OF FIRE OR ACCIDENT
REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the lawful orders of the city council or any employee of
the airport designated by him, a police officer or member of the fire department, at the scene of a fire or accident.
(Prior code §9.18-3)
10.08.030: OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON YUMA MUNICIPAL AIRPORT:
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate a motor vehicle on the Yuma municipal airport. This
section shall not apply to the following:
A. Areas designated for approved airport traffic, as follows:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 136/313
1. An area containing the Yuma municipal airport hangars. Said area shall include the hangars and is described
as extending from the northernmost hangar north thirty feet (30'); extending from the westernmost hangar,
west to U.S. Highway 34; extending from the southernmost hangar, south thirty feet (30'); and extending from
the easternmost hangar, east to the tie down area. The city shall designate by sign, the points near the
hangars beyond which the operation of motor vehicles becomes unlawful.
B. Entities and/or persons having received authorization from the Yuma city manager for access to certain portions
of the Yuma municipal airport.
C. All traffic by and on behalf of the city, its agents and employees.
D. Aircraft. (Ord. 4-1998 §1, 1998: Prior code §9.18-4)
10.08.040: PARKING IN OTHER THAN DESIGNATED AREAS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle for loading, unloading or any other purpose, on the airport,
except in the areas specifically established for parking and designated as such by signs, lines or other means. (Prior
code §9.18-5)
10.08.050: ABANDONING VEHICLES UNLAWFUL; TOWING AUTHORITY:
It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on the airport. The city council shall have the authority to
tow or otherwise move motor vehicles which are parked by their owners or operators on the airport in violation of the
regulations of the airport, at the owner's expense, and to detain the aircraft until all the charges are paid. (Prior code
§9.18-6)
10.08.060: OBSTRUCTING FIRE GATES; YIELDING RIGHT OF WAY TO AIRCRAFT:
It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any manner that will obstruct fire gates on entrances to the
airport. In all cases vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to aircraft. (Prior code §9.18-7)
10.08.070: CITY COUNCIL'S ENFORCEMENT POWER:
The city council shall be empowered to enforce all traffic rules and regulations. (Prior code §9.18-2)
10.08.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The following penalties, set forth in full, shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this chapter.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 4-1998 §2,
1998)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 137/313
Chapter 10.10
TRAVEL TRAILERS
10.10.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms or words shall have the meaning herein ascribed to them unless
a different meaning appears from the context:
TRAILER PARK: An area of no less than one acre clearly defined and separate from a mobile home park area, with
individual parking lots, which may or may not have facilities for temporary connection with electrical and plumbing
outlets to travel trailers, campers and motor homes.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle portable structure built on a chassis (other than a "mobile home" as defined in section
17.03.302 of this Code) designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use and
equipped for the road. It may be a self-propelled motor home or designed to be towed or carried by a separate
vehicle, and may be self-contained with bath and toilet facilities or classified as a dependent type without bath and
toilet facilities. Except as otherwise specifically provided, the provisions of this chapter will also apply to campers
mounted on a truck chassis, tent type trailers, and all such vehicles and equipment shall be considered to fall within
the definition of travel trailer for the purposes of this chapter. The definition of travel trailer is not intended to include
any vehicle which does not have the primary purpose of being used as a temporary dwelling. (Ord. 22-2006 §1,
2006)
10.10.020: PARKING OF TRAVEL TRAILERS1:
A. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, no travel trailer, either attached or detached from the vehicle pulling or
propelling the same, shall park or be parked upon any real property within the City, except in a licensed and
approved travel trailer park as contemplated by this chapter, and by title 17, chapter 17.05 of this Code
approving conditional uses to the zoning ordinance of Yuma.
B. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to regulate or restrict the parking of trucks or pickups with
campers carried or mounted thereon beyond those restrictions or regulations generally specified for the truck or
pickup itself.
C. Further, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the parking of uninhabited, unused travel trailers upon
private property for the purpose of storage or sale upon compliance with all other applicable provisions of this
Code or other ordinances of the City.
D. No travel trailer of whatever kind shall, however, be occupied as a dwelling, unless:
1. It is placed in a duly licensed travel trailer park, as approved by the Yuma City Council as a conditional use
pursuant to title 17, chapter 17.05 of this Code.
2. It is placed on private property; no closer than ten feet (10') from the nearest dwelling on adjacent property;
and temporarily so occupied for a period of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days pursuant to a
nonrenewable permit for that purpose issued by the Public Works Department upon application of an owner or
occupant of the property. No more than three (3) such permits shall be granted for any particular parcel of
private property in any one year, unless permission is granted by the Department of Public Works due to
emergent situations. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 22-2006 §1, 2006)
10.10.030: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAILER PARKS:
A. Trailer parks, as herein defined, shall each provide the following:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 138/313
1. Every travel trailer park shall be a contiguous parcel of land consisting of no less than one acre planned,
designed, and improved to accommodate the parking of travel trailers. When calculating the area consisting of
one acre, it may consist of, but is not required to include, roadways; entrances; exits; laundry; and bathroom
facilities.
2. Every trailer park shall designate one individual as the caretaker.
3. Individual trailer park spaces with no less than fifty feet (50') in length, and no less than twenty five feet (25') in
width. Setback limitations shall be four feet (4') from the side, and five feet (5') from the rear.
4. Identification of each individual trailer park space, with letters no less than six inches (6") in height, displayed
in front of each travel trailer space.
5. All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free
of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance or fire
hazard.
6. The owner of any travel trailer park shall be responsible for the promulgation and enforcement of rules and
regulations governing solid waste storage and handling that will meet or exceed City requirements and any
applicable State or Federal governmental regulations.
7. Each trailer park shall have one master meter for electric service, water service, and sewer service, which
shall be read by the City and charged to the trailer park for billing purposes.
8. Each trailer park space shall have individual access to Municipal electric and water utilities. Each trailer park
shall provide individual access to sewer utilities unless conditions exist which prevent individual hookups, in
which case, central dumping will be allowed for those portions of the park without individual access.
9. The owner of any travel trailer park, and not the City, shall be responsible for guaranteeing access to
Municipal utilities and will provide all access meets or exceeds any and all local Electrical Code, Plumbing
Code or other Building Code.
10. A trailer park may have individual spaces designated for tents, only, which do not have individual access to
water, electric or sewer utilities, provided they have access to lavatories, sinks, toilets, and baths.
11. Each trailer park shall comply with any conditions placed upon it by the Yuma City Council pursuant to title
17, chapter 17.05 of this Code.
12. Any urinal and water closet located on the premises shall be furnished with cold water.
13. Any lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower or laundry fixture on the premises shall be furnished with hot and cold
water.
14. No human excrement shall be deposited or allowed to be placed on any land within the City by any person.
No wash water, garbage or trash shall be thrown on the ground by any person using a travel trailer. All toilets,
baths, trailers, wash trays or tubs, garbage and trash containers and grounds of any trailer park shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
15. Any structure containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
a. Meet or exceed all local, State and Federal regulations and laws.
b. Have at least one window which can be easily opened or a mechanical device which will adequately
ventilate the room.
16. Any toilet located on the premises shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing
doors. Shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the
interior when the exterior doors are open.
17. City will design and install all electric infrastructure from City electric lines to the transformer pursuant to City
specifications (hereinafter "primary side"). Owner shall pay all costs of material on the primary side. Owner
shall install electric infrastructure from the transformer to his trailer park (hereinafter "secondary side"). Owner
shall pay all labor and costs of material on the secondary side. When possible, the electric infrastructure shall
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 139/313
be designed and installed so the electric lines are underground. Each lot must have an electric outlet in
weatherproof housing and an electric circuit with a capacity of no less than thirty (30) amps, unless otherwise
required by state regulation.
18. Electric illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
a. Laundry room work area shall be illuminated with a minimum of a sixty (60) watt bulb.
b. Toilet room in front of mirrors shall be illuminated with a minimum of a sixty (60) watt bulb.
c. All park lights shall burn from one-half (1/2) hour after sundown to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise.
19. There shall be no removal of any wheels from any travel trailer, except temporarily for the purpose of repairs.
There shall be no placement of posts, piers, foundations or other items which will prevent the ready removal of
the trailer from the premises.
20. Each trailer park shall be equipped with such number of fire extinguishers as may be required by the Yuma
fire department. Each travel trailer located in a trailer park shall be equipped with at least one fire extinguisher
suitable for suppressing oil and gasoline fires.
21. No tow car, travel trailer or other vehicle shall be parked in any roadway or any other walkway in a trailer
park.
22. No person shall allow any domestic animal or house pet to run at large within the limits of a trailer park.
23. No additional propane tanks other than those which are installed by a travel trailer's manufacturer, shall be
allowed unless approved by the public works director after recommendation by the Yuma fire department.
24. One mobile home may be placed in a travel trailer park and occupied as a residence or office by the
caretaker or owner of the park. Such mobile home shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Setback
limitations and lot size limits for the mobile home shall be those which are defined under mobile home parks
pursuant to the Yuma zoning ordinance.
25. If any laundry, bathroom, lavatory, or toilet facilities are constructed on the trailer park, they shall be a
permanent structure and shall meet or exceed all local, state and federal regulations and laws.
26. If provided, outdoor barbecues shall be in a safe and convenient area where they will not constitute fire
hazards to vegetation, undergrowth, trees and travel trailers. No open fires are allowed.
B. The owner shall provide trash containers be located no less than two hundred fifty feet (250') from any particular
travel trailer space. The owner shall provide adequate location or locations for such containers which shall
facilitate the collection of trash from the premises. Such locations shall be accessible to collection crews and
occupants of the premises. When possible, the collection vehicle should be able to remain on a public street or
alley and to stop directly adjacent to the trash container location. If private drives must be used, they should
provide sufficient space around parked vehicles for easy operation of the collection vehicle without the backing
up of the vehicle. The collection points, including the containers located therein, must be kept in a neat and
sanitary condition by the owner or the owner's agent. (Ord. 22-2006 §1, 2006)
10.10.040: TRAVEL TRAILER PARK LICENSE:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or
maintained upon any property owned or controlled by such person, a trailer park in the city without first having
obtained a license from the Yuma city hall to do so. Prior to issuance of the license, the city clerk shall receive
from the director of public works a written letter determining the applicant is in compliance with all provisions of
this code and that said applicant has received a conditional use by the Yuma city council pursuant to title 17,
chapter 17.05 of this code. The letter shall be attached to the license register of such park and a copy shall be
maintained on file in the office of the Yuma municipal clerk. All licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year.
Application for license renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the original license.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 140/313
B. The application for such license, or the renewal thereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be
accompanied by the applicable annual fee. The cost of any license secured having less than six (6) months to
run before the expiration date, as herein provided, shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%). The application for a
license, or a renewal thereof, shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk and shall include the name,
address and signature of the owner in fee of the tract; name, address and signature of the applicant, if other than
owner; and the legal description of the premises upon which the travel trailer park is or will be located.
C. No license may be issued for a travel trailer park unless the plans for such a park have been approved as may
be required by section 17.06.603.6 of this Code.
D. No license may be issued for a travel trailer park unless a certificate is represented that shows that all Real
Estate and personal Property Taxes and all special assessments have been paid.
E. No City license issued for a travel trailer park shall be transferable or assignable unless approved by the City
Council.
F. The owner or operator of a travel trailer park shall be, and at all times remain, responsible for all utilities and
buildings thereon. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 22-2006 §1, 2006)
10.10.050: DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS; POLICE:
It is hereby made the duty of the Director of Public Works, as well of the Police Department, to enforce all provisions
of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein. For such purpose, the Director of Public Works or his or her
duly authorized representatives, as well as any City police officer, shall have the right and is hereby empowered to
enter any premises on which any travel trailer is located, or about to be located, and to inspect the same and all
accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. (Ord. 22-2006 §1, 2006)
10.10.060: CONFLICTS WITH OTHER PROVISIONS:
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or the higher standard shall
govern. (Ord. 22-2006 §1, 2006)
10.10.070: PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under this chapter; however, failure to pay a fine may result in
imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-113, as amended. Each day for which the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 22-2006 §1, 2006)
Chapter 10.12
PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES1
10.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings, except where
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 141/313
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
PICKUP CAMPER: A camper body capable of being loaded or unloaded from or to the bed of a pickup truck.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any public road, street, avenue, alley or municipal easement.
TRAILER: Any wheeled vehicle without motive power and designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. (Ord. 3-2007
§1, 2007)
10.12.020: DETACHED TRAILERS, PICKUP CAMPERS AND BOATS:
A. No trailer shall be detached from a towing vehicle and left standing in any public right of way adjacent to any lot
zoned residential single-family district (R-1), residential single-family and two-family district (R-2), residential
district (R-3), or mobile home district (MH), for a period of longer than five (5) days.
B. No pickup camper shall be unloaded from a pickup truck and left standing in any public right of way adjacent to
any lot zoned residential single-family district (R-1), residential single-family and two-family district (R-2),
residential district (R-3), or mobile home district (MH) for a period of longer than five (5) days.
C. No boat, whether standing on a trailer or standing by itself, shall be left standing on any public right of way
adjacent to any lot zoned residential single-family district (R-1), residential single-family and two-family district
(R-2), residential district (R-3), or mobile home district (MH), unless attached physically to a motor vehicle. (Ord.
3-2007 §1, 2007)
10.12.030: PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed under this chapter; however, failure to pay a fine may result in
imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 13-10-113, as amended. Each day for which the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 3-2007 §1, 2007)
Title 11
RESERVED
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04
STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES
12.04.010: DATUM PLANE AND BENCH MARK FOR ESTABLISHING GRADES:
The datum plane from which all elevations are determined for the purpose of establishing the grades of streets and
sidewalks shall be four thousand one hundred feet (4,100') above mean sea level, USC and GS. The bench mark is
at the library at Third Avenue and South Ash Street, elevation 4,130.543 feet. For the accurate ascertainment and
establishment of the grades of streets and sidewalks, reference shall be made to the vertical control map of the city,
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 142/313
as surveyed and platted by Damon Runyan, consulting engineer, in 1952, which profiles are declared to be official in
all matters pertaining to grades. The map shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk. (Prior code §6.1)
12.04.020: GRADES OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
The grade upon the several streets of the city shall be the grade upon the centerline of the streets, and the grade
between the points shall be in uniform direct line between each two (2) points given. The grade upon the streets for
the purpose of sidewalks shall be the grade upon the building line of the property adjacent to such streets, and the
grade between all such points shall be in a uniform direct line between each two (2) points given for such purpose.
(Prior code §6.2)
12.04.030: ESTABLISHING CROSS SECTION OF STREET:
The cross section of a street is established as follows: Commencing on either side of the street, the sidewalk of the
outer line of the street shall be at grade; thence descending one-eighth (1/8) of an inch per foot to the outer edge of
the sidewalk; and if there is a parking strip, on the same grade of descent across the parking strip to the edge of the
gutter; thence dropping to the bottom of the gutter a distance or distances varying according to the necessary slope
adequate to give proper drainage only, thence rising with a line curving upward to the center of the street, which
shall be at grade. (Prior code §6.3)
Chapter 12.08
SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION
12.08.010: COUNCIL'S AUTHORITY TO ORDER CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR;
NOTIFICATION OF OWNER; WORK TO BE DONE BY STREET DEPARTMENT UPON
NONCOMPLIANCE AT OWNER'S EXPENSE:
The city council of the city shall have the power to order the construction, installation, repair and maintenance of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters within the city whenever in its judgment the same is necessary. When any sidewalk or
curb and gutter in front or alongside of any lot or premises is required to be constructed, or existing sidewalks, curbs
and gutters have been destroyed or are out of repair, the city council shall cause notice in writing to be served upon
the owner or agent in charge of such premises to construct or repair, as the case may be, such sidewalk, curb and
gutter within thirty (30) days. If the owner is a nonresident or his whereabouts are unknown, such notice may be
given by publication for two (2) times, a week apart, in a newspaper published in the city and by the city clerk
mailing a copy of such notice to the last known address of such owner. Service shall be complete on the last date of
publication. If such construction or repairs are not made by the owner within the required time, the city council may
order such construction or repairs to be made by the street department, and expenses connected therewith shall be
a lien upon the property alongside such sidewalk until the cost thereof with interest thereon at the rate of six percent
(6%) per year is fully paid. (Prior code §6.7)
12.08.020: NONCOMPLIANCE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any owner to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements of any such notice to construct
or repair within the time therein specified, and each day's neglect or refusal to comply with the terms of such notice
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Prior code §6.8)
12.08.030: SIDEWALK AND CURB SPECIFICATIONS:
Concrete shall be used in the construction of all sidewalks, curbs and gutters, which concrete shall consist of not
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 143/313
less thanone part cement and five (5) parts gravel. Each sidewalk shall be not less than three and one-half inches
(31/2") in depth. Curbs and gutters shall have a base of not less than two feet (2') in width and a depth of six inches
(6"), with curb upright six inches (6") high and six inches (6") wide, either of old upright type or of new sloping face.
(Prior code §6.6)
12.08.040: STREET CURB LINE SPECIFICATIONS:
The curb line shall be a line parallel to the street, lot or building line at a distance therefrom as follows:
A. In blocks 2, 3, 6, 7, 10 and 11 of the original city, fronting what is now Main Street, fourteen feet (14') to outer
edge of curb;
B. In all other blocks fronting Main Street, seventeen feet (17') to outer edge of curb;
C. In all other blocks fronting streets eighty feet (80') in width, fifteen feet (15') from the lot line;
D. In all other blocks fronting streets sixty feet (60') in width, eleven feet (11') from the lot line. (Prior code §6.4)
12.08.050: SIDEWALKS; LOCATION AND WIDTH:
All sidewalks on lots facing on Main Street in blocks 2, 3, 6, 7, 10 and 11 shall be ten feet (10') in width; all
sidewalks in other locations shall be three feet (3') in width and shall be set back one foot (1') from the property line;
provided, however, that where the council finds that the public safety and convenience will be served by the
construction of sidewalks at the curb line, it may grant a special permit for such location. (Prior code §6.5)
Chapter 12.12
STREET EXCAVATIONS1
(Rep. by Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
Chapter 12.16
OBSTRUCTING STREETS OR OTHER PASSAGEWAYS
12.16.010: OBSTRUCTING PROHIBITED:
An individual or corporation commits an offense if without legal privilege such individual or corporation intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly:
A. Obstructs a highway, street, sidewalk, railway, waterway, building entrance, elevator, aisle, stairway, or hallway to
which the public or a substantial group of the public has access or any other place used for the passage of
persons, vehicles, or conveyances, whether the obstruction arises from his or her acts alone or from his or her
acts and the acts of others; or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 144/313
B. Disobeys a reasonable request or order to move issued by a person the individual or corporation knows to be a
peace officer, a firefighter, or a person with authority to control the use of the premises, to prevent obstruction of
a highway or passageway or to maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a
fire, riot, or other hazard.
The Yuma city council, by a majority vote may approve a temporary obstruction of a public street, alley, avenue,
or sidewalk, provided said temporary obstruction lasts no longer than twenty four (24) hours. Obstructions
occurring due to construction projects shall be allowed provided they comply with all relevant provisions of
chapter 12.32 of this title. (Ord. 4-2005 §1, 2005)
12.16.020: OBSTRUCT DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, "obstruct" means to render impassable or to render passage unreasonably
inconvenient or hazardous. (Ord. 4-2005 §1, 2005)
12.16.030: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes,
section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 4-2005 §1, 2005)
Chapter 12.20
SNOW REMOVAL
12.20.010: ACCUMULATION UNLAWFUL; PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, block or parcel of ground within the City, or for any agent in
charge of such property, to allow any snow or ice to accumulate or remain upon any sidewalk adjoining such
property longer than twenty four (24) hours from the time of the last accumulation of such snow or ice. Properties
abutting Main Street, between First and Fifth Avenues are exempt from the requirement to remove snow under this
section. (Ord. 6-2016, 2016)
Chapter 12.24
STREET TREES
12.24.010: APPOINTMENT OF CITY FORESTER AND ASSISTANTS:
The city council of the city shall appoint the city manager as the city forester together with personnel of the local
agricultural soil conservation service office and the state forester as assistants, whose powers and duties are
hereafter specified. (Ord. 5-1974 §1, 1974)
12.24.020: POWER TO PROMULGATE RULES, REGULATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The city manager shall have the power to promulgate rules, regulations and specifications for the trimming,
spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges and other plants upon the public
right of way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the city. (Ord. 5-1974 §2, 1974)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 145/313
12.24.030: POWER TO MAINTAIN TREES OR ORDER OWNER TO:
A. The city manager shall have the power to trim, spray, remove, plant and protect all trees, shrubs, vines, hedges
and other plants upon the public right of way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, or to require the
owner of property abutting on the right of way of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place to trim, remove
or protect any tree, shrub, vine, hedge or other plant which may project beyond the property line of such owner,
onto or over public property at the expense of such owner.
B. If the property owner refuses or neglects to trim, protect or remove any such tree, shrub, vine, hedge or other
plant within ten (10) days after receipt of a written notice from the city manager to do so, the city manager may
do or cause to be done the necessary work incident thereto, and the expenses thereof shall be collected from
the owner of such property. (Ord. 5-1974 §3, 1974)
12.24.040: DEAD OR DANGEROUS TREES; REMOVAL:
A. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any property to remove any dead trees or dead, overhanging
boughs dangerous to life, limb or property located on the premises of such owner or upon public property
abutting the premises of such owner, upon receipt of written notice from the city manager to do so, and within
such reasonable time as specified in the notice.
B. If such owner fails to remove same within the time required, the city manager is authorized to remove or cause to
be removed such trees or branches at the expense of such owner; such expenses may be recovered in a proper
action at law. (Ord. 5-1974, §4, 1974)
12.24.050: INSPECTION AUTHORITY:
The city manager is empowered to inspect any trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, logs or branches existing or
growing upon any property within the city. The city manager or his authorized representatives shall from time to time
conduct surveys to determine if any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence exists which may be
detrimental or which may endanger the good health and well being of trees or other plant life in the city. (Ord. 5-
1974 §5-1, 1974)
12.24.060: INFECTED OR INFESTED TREES; REMOVAL OR TREATMENT BY OWNER:
Upon discovery of any destructive or communicable disease, or other pestilence which endangers the growth,
health, life or well being of other trees or plants, or which is capable of causing an epidemic spread or
communicable disease or insect infestation such as Dutch elm disease, the city manager shall at once notify in
writing the owner, agent or occupant of the premises whereon the same are located, of the condition thereof, and
direct such owner, agent or occupant to eradicate, remove or otherwise control such condition within a reasonable
time to be specified in the written notice. (Ord. 5-1974 §5-2, 1974)
12.24.070: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for the owner, agent or occupant of the premises to fail or refuse to comply with the terms of the written
noticeprovided for in section 12.24.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 5-1974 §5-3, 1974)
12.24.080: INFECTED OR INFESTED TREES; REMOVAL OR TREATMENT BY CITY AT
OWNER'S EXPENSE:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 146/313
Should the owner, agent or occupant of the premises fail or refuse to comply with the terms of the written notice
provided for in section 12.24.060 of this chapter, the city manager, or his authorized representatives, may enter
upon the premises and cause to be removed, treated or otherwise cared for by competitive bids or other appropriate
means, infected or infested trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, logs or branches in order to eradicate or control the
same, or prevent the spreading of any threatening communicable disease or insect infestation, at the expense of
such owner, agent or occupant. (Ord. 5-1974 §5-4, 1974)
12.24.090: AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE OWNER TO TREAT TREES AND SHRUBS ON
ABUTTING PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
The city manager is authorized to require any owner, agent or occupant of any premises to trim, spray, treat,
remove or otherwise care for trees or other plants upon that portion of the public right of way upon which such
premises abut whenever the condition of such trees or plants interferes with, obstructs or in any way endangers the
safe public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places. Whenever any tree or other plant upon that
portion of the public right of way is in such condition as to jeopardize the health or well being of other trees or plants
by virtue of insect pestilence or disease, the city manager is authorized to require the owner, agent or occupant of
premises which abuts that portion of the public right of way to trim, spray, treat, remove or otherwise care for such
trees or plants. (Ord. 5-1974 §6-1, 1974)
12.24.100: NOTIFICATION OF OWNER; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Whenever the city manager, after investigation, determines that any trees or other plants are in a condition
described in section 12.24.060 of this chapter, he shall notify, in writing, the owner, agent or occupant of such
premises that certain conditions exist which must be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified in the notice.
It is unlawful to fail or refuse to comply with the requirements set forth in the notice, within the time specified. (Ord.
5-1974 §6-2, 1974)
12.24.110: EXPENSES INCURRED BY CITY IN TREE REMOVAL OR TREATMENT TO BE A
LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY:
All expenses incurred by the city for removal, maintenance or destruction of trees shall be a lien upon the respective
lots orparcels of land and shall be a perpetual charge against the lots or parcels of land until paid, and such charge
shall be collected and such lien enforced as provided by law. (Ord. 5-1974 §7, 1974)
12.24.120: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The penalties set out in this section shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision stated or adopted in this chapter.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall pay a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), for each violation, and may be required to render community service
as deemed appropriate by the municipal court, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be
imposed, a fine and community service being the exclusive punishments, and except for failure to pay a fine, no
imprisonment shall be allowed under this chapter.
C. This section shall in no way interfere with the city's authority to remove, trim, spray, treat or otherwise provide
care at the owner's expense as set forth in this chapter. Further, this section shall in no way interfere with the
city's authority to establish liens for expenses incurred on behalf of the city, against the lots or parcels of land at
issue, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 13-1998 §1, 1998)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 147/313
Chapter 12.28
PUBLIC PARK HOURS
12.28.010: UNLAWFUL TO BE IN PUBLIC PARKS BETWEEN CERTAIN HOURS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to be in, upon, or about any of the public parks of the city between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
B. "Public parks" shall be defined as the library grounds and all designated parks within the city, but, however,
registered guests of the RV park shall be exempted from the aforementioned hours within the RV park only.
C. The RV campground located in the old city park shall be dictated by rules promulgated by the office of city
manager for the city. A copy of such rules shall be provided to the city police department for reference and a
copy shall be provided to all registered guests of the campground. (Ord. 10-2008 §1, 2008: Ord. 6-1992, 1992:
Ord. 3-1980 §1, 1980)
12.28.020: VARIANCES; APPLICATION REQUIRED:
Variances from the provisions of this chapter may be granted by the city police department upon written application.
(Ord. 3-1980 §2, 1980)
12.28.030: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in a sum of not less
than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 3-1980 §3, 1980)
Chapter 12.30
VEHICLE REGULATION IN PUBLIC PARKS
12.30.010: PROHIBITIONS:
No person, other than persons authorized by the city manager, or traffic engineer, shall:
A. Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any park patrol officer authorized and instructed to
direct traffic in any park, parkway, recreation area, or open space and on the public roads and parkways therein;
B. Fail to comply with any traffic control device in a park, parkway, recreation area or open space regulating the
operation of motor vehicles;
C. Drive a motor vehicle within any park, parkway, recreation area or open space, in excess of the posted speed
limit. If no speed limit is posted, then no person shall drive a motor vehicle in a park, recreation area or open
space in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour;
D. Drive a motor vehicle within or upon any part of a park, parkway, recreation area or open space, except on
designated roadways, parking areas or areas that the city manager or traffic engineer designates as temporary
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 148/313
parking areas;
E. Remove or relocate any barricade, barrier or other device erected to control motor vehicle traffic in a park,
parkway, recreation area or open space;
F. Park any vehicle in a park, parkway, recreation area or open space in a manner that blocks or impedes travel on
or into a designated fire road or other emergency access;
G. Park a motor vehicle in a park, parkway, recreation area or open space in the manner contrary to posted signs.
(Ord. 3-1986 §1, 1986)
12.30.015: RESTRICTIONS ON TRAFFIC IN LEGION/VETERANS' PARK:
No trucks weighing eleven thousand (11,000) pounds' or more empty weight shall use the roadways or driveways
within Legion park ("Veterans' park"), which is located south of Eighth Avenue between South Cedar Street and
South Elm Street. (Ord. 11-2004 §1, 2004)
12.30.020: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
The penalties set out in this section shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this chapter.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), for each violation, but no jail sentence or other form of
imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive punishment, and no imprisonment shall be allowed
under this chapter; however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to section 13-10-113
Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973. (Ord. 3-1986 §4, 1986)
Chapter 12.32
WORK IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
12.32.010: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. A separate permit is required for each site where work within the right-of-way is conducted.
B. The permit shall be retained at the site location to which the permit is issued at all times until completion of the
work unless specifically exempted by the City.
C. Any work performed by City or the City's representative(s) or agent(s) shall be exempt from the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
CITY MANAGER: Means the City Manager of the City of Yuma and his or her designee.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 149/313
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, utility easement, owned or controlled by the
City.
WORK: Means any labor performed on, or any use or storage of equipment or materials, including but not limited to,
construction of streets and all related appurtenances, fixtures, improvements, sidewalks, driveway openings, bus
shelters, bus loading pads, street lights, and traffic signal devices. It shall also mean construction, maintenance, and
repair of all underground structures such as pipes, conduit, ducts, tunnels, manholes, vaults, buried cable, wire, or
any other similar structure located below surface, and installation of overhead poles and wires or conductors, used
for any purpose. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.030: LIABILITY:
Any person who performs work in any right-of-way in the City shall be answerable for any damage occasioned to
persons, animals or property by the reason of carelessness or negligence or by any intentional act connected with
such work, and by obtaining a permit for such work shall thereby be deemed to consent and agree to hold the City
harmless from any such damage or injury. The acceptance of a permit under this chapter shall be deemed to be the
permittee's acceptance of the duty to repair any and all damage to City pipes, cables, lines, utilities or structures
which may occur due to the permittee's excavation and obligation to pay the costs of damage pursuant to
subsection 12.32.070H of this chapter. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.040: RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. Application for a public right-of-way permit shall include the following information:
1. The name, address and principal place of business of the applicant and of the person or utility that will own,
operate and maintain any facility to be installed;
2. The location and description of the proposed work;
3. The approximate size of any excavation;
4. The approximate time required to complete all work, including backfilling of any excavation and removal of all
materials, equipment and debris from the site and removal of all obstructions from the property;
5. Construction methods, equipment to be used and operation procedures;
6. Drawings and specifications in a form satisfactory to the City depicting, at a minimum:
a. The applicable public right-of-way and any intersecting streets, trails or sidewalks within three hundred feet
(300') thereof;
b. The existing utilities;
c. The public right-of-way to the back of the curb;
d. The existing landscaping;
e. The existing irrigation and drainage facilities; and
f. Detail of the proposed trench;
7. A schedule of proposed work; and
8. Other information required by the City to efficiently administer and enforce this chapter.
B. The City shall impose conditions on the permit as may be necessary to protect public health and safety and to
assure compliance with the ordinances and regulations of the City.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 150/313
C. Permittee, at the time of application, shall pay a permit application fee as shall be set by City Council by
resolution and may be changed from time to time. Such permit application fee shall be retained by the City
regardless of whether the permit application is approved, approved with modifications, or denied.
D. The City shall have ten (10) days to review the application and issue an approval, approval with modifications, or
denial. The City may extend the time for consideration of an application if additional technical review is required.
E. The City may deny any application for a permit for the following reasons:
1. The application is incomplete and the deficiencies are not remedied after reasonable notice to the applicant;
2. The work for which the permit is requested is unnecessary or in violation of City ordinances, rules or
regulations;
3. The applicant is in default of any other outstanding permit of similar character without good cause;
4. The applicant has failed to obtain required insurance or has failed to post required bonds or other guarantees
of performance;
5. The applicant has failed to pay the required permit fee and any applicable deposit;
6. The applicant is not qualified by experience, training or education to engage in the work authorized by the
permit or has not engaged a person who is qualified by experience, training or education to engage in work; or
7. The City has determined that the location of the facility will interfere with existing or proposed improvements in
the public right-of-way to be affected. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.050: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
If the application for a permit under this chapter meets the criteria in this chapter, the City Manager may issue a
permit. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.060: TERM OF PERMIT:
A. The term of a permit issued under this chapter shall be set forth in the permit, in the sole discretion of the City
and depending on the type of project. The City may, for good cause shown, grant an extension of up to ninety
(90) days. A new permit and associated fees shall be required if the permit and any extension period have
expired and the work is not substantially complete.
B. All work authorized by a permit shall be commenced within a reasonable time after the issuance of the permit
and shall be diligently and continuously performed until completion. If weather, process of law or any other
unexpected obstacle causes work to be stopped for so long a time that public travel will be unreasonably
obstructed, the City Manager may order the excavation refilled and repaved as if the work contemplated in the
permit were actually completed.
C. If the permittee fails to comply with an order of the City Manager in subsection B of this section, the City may
complete the work created by the excavation. The costs of such completion, plus fifteen percent (15%), shall be
charged by the City to the permittee. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.070: PERMITTEE RESPONSIBILITY:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 151/313
A. The permittee is responsible for notification of all public utility companies and for determining the location of
existing underground utilities prior to proceeding with construction. All work performed in the area of existing
utilities shall be performed according to the requirements of the agencies responsible for such existing utilities.
The permittee, at its own expense, shall protect all existing utilities and be responsible for their repair if they are
damaged during construction.
B. Permittee shall call for inspection twenty four (24) hours in advance of commencement of actual construction.
Prior to the initiation of construction, the permittee shall provide proof to the City that the permittee possesses all
necessary agreements and easements with affected property owners for the installation of the utilities. This
subsection shall not apply when an emergency exists. However, the permittee is not exempted from compliance
with section 12.32.110 of this chapter during emergency work.
C. Access to any adjacent property shall be maintained throughout the construction and warranty period.
D. Permittee shall have a copy of the permit and an approved set of construction drawings on the job site at all
times.
E. Permittee shall be responsible for establishing safety measures to protect the public from any and all harm until
construction is complete and for compliance with current Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
standards.
F. All work performed under the permit shall be in accordance with applicable law, including any construction or road
standards adopted by the City. All underground installations in City rights-of-way shall be a minimum of twenty
four inches (24") deep, unless an exception is granted by the City Manager. The backfilling shall be made in six
inch (6") lifts and mechanically tamped and packed, and the last twelve inches (12") of backfill shall be of stable
granular material, such as crushed rock or gravel. All underground installations crossing hard surface type paved
roadways shall be done by boring unless an exception is granted by the City Manager. All street cuts, when
approved, must be saw cut prior to street patch.
G. At the time of application for a permit, the City shall determine the approximate costs of materials and time for
the street patch. The permittee shall be required to make a deposit of the amount of those estimated costs prior
to approval of the permit. If the application is denied, the deposit shall be refunded.
H. The City shall replace, repair or reinstall any damage and disruption whatsoever to the streets, alleys or
sidewalks of the City, including paving and surfacing, caused by construction, excavation, maintenance and
repair of any utility or structure and charge the amount of materials and time against the deposit and bill any
excess to the permittee, to ensure the quality of the work and to preserve the character of the streets, alleys and
sidewalks of the City.
I. The City shall be notified in writing within forty eight (48) hours after the completion of construction.
J. The permittee warrantees all workmanship and installations for one year after completion of the project. In the
event repairs are needed, the permittee who has performed the excavation work shall be notified by the City
Manager and be given reasonable opportunity to correct the condition to the satisfaction of the City. If the
permittee fails to correct the condition to the satisfaction of the City Manager and the City is required to correct
the condition, the permittee shall be responsible for repair costs occasioned thereby plus fifteen percent (15%).
The permittee shall discontinue any and all other work in the streets within the City and shall be issued no
additional excavation permits until such time as the required repair has been completed and paid for.
K. Upon completion of construction, the permittee shall submit to the City a written request for final inspection and
initiation of the warranty period and shall supply as-built drawings of the completed facilities. (Ord. 10-2018,
2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 152/313
12.32.080: PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND ROUTING OF TRAFFIC:
A. Every person excavating or engaging in any other construction in or on any public right-of-way shall place and
maintain barricades and warning devices to warn the general public of such construction or excavation in
conformance with the requirements of the City and the Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices, including but
not limited to sufficient warning light during nighttime. No traffic-regulating, warning, directional or street name
signs shall be removed or relocated from the area of the work unless so indicated on the plans or ordered by the
City. The cost for removing or replacing such signs shall be borne by the permittee.
B. Traffic conditions shall be maintained as normal as possible at all times. Where feasible, the permittee shall
maintain safe crossings for two (2) lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections and safe crossings for
pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred feet (300'). When traffic conditions permit, the City may
permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic. This requirement may be waived by the City Manager upon a
showing of good cause. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.090: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. If the relocation of any facilities in the public right-of-way becomes necessary to allow the City use of the public
right-of-way, or because of the improvement, repair, construction or maintenance of any public right-of-way, or
because of traffic conditions, public safety or installation of any type of public improvement by the City or other
public agency or special district, or if the City implements any general program for the undergrounding of such
facilities, the City may require an owner to relocate facilities within or adjacent to public rights-of-way, either
temporarily or permanently.
B. Should the owner fail to perform the relocation, the City may perform such relocation at the owner's expense, and
the owner shall reimburse the City for all related costs.
C. Following relocation, the City shall, at the owner's expense, restore all affected property to, at a minimum, the
condition which existed prior to the work pursuant to subsection 12.32.070H of this chapter. (Ord. 10-2018,
2018)
12.32.100: INSURANCE:
A. Each permittee shall carry and maintain in full effect at all times the following insurance coverage:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including broad form property damage, completed operations
contractual liability, explosion hazard, collapse hazard and underground property damage hazard, for limits not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence for damages of bodily injury or death to one or
more persons; and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence for damage to or destruction
of property; and
2. Workers' compensation insurance as required by law.
B. The permittee shall file with the City proof of such insurance coverage in a form satisfactory to the City prior to
issuance of the permit. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.110: EMERGENCY WORK:
Any person may make an excavation in any street or sidewalk in response to an emergency. However, such person
must immediately notify the City Manager or, if the emergency situation is discovered after regular business hours,
the Police Department, of such excavation, and must obtain a permit and pay the required fees on the first working
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 153/313
day after making such excavation. Should such person fail to make this notification and obtain the required permit,
the matter will be governed by section 12.32.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.120: RIGHT TO INSPECT:
The City shall have the right to access the construction site at any time to inspect materials and workmanship and to
inspect the installation to determine compliance with the permit, the general conditions of this chapter, specifications
adopted by the City and all other ordinances or resolutions adopted by the City. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.130: STOP WORK:
The City Manager has the authority to issue a stop work order on any excavation within the City until the provisions
of this chapter are complied with. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
12.32.140: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Any facilities installed without the prior written approval of the City may be removed by the City at the cost of the
installer, and the installer shall also be responsible for payment of all attorney fees, engineering fees and other
costs, expenses and damages caused to the City by the installation or removal of the nonpermitted facilities.
When feasible, installation of facilities shall utilize a joint trench.
B. Any person who fails to obtain a permit applicable to a particular excavation shall pay twice the usual fee that
would have been charged if a permit had properly been obtained prior to making the excavation. Such penalty
fees shall be in addition to any penalties that may be imposed by any court for violation of this chapter.
C. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this chapter. Every person
convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this chapter shall be punished by a fine up to two
thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
D. Every day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 10-2018, 2018)
Chapter 12.33
POLE ATTACHMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
Chapter 12.36
PUBLICLY POSTED CAMPAIGN POSTERS, BILLS, STICKERS,
AND USE OF CITY UTILITY POLES FOR SIGNAGE
12.36.010: GENERALLY; VIOLATION:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 154/313
A. All campaign posters, bills, and stickers posted on city property shall be removed within ten (10) days after the
general election. Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a ten dollar ($10.00) fine per violation per day to
be incurred against the candidate or treasurer of the committee whose name appears on the said poster, bill, or
sticker.
B. The Yuma city mayor, and in his or her absence the mayor pro tem, upon consultation with the city manager and
director of public works, may approve use of city utility poles for signage, provided the following requirements
have been met:
1. The signage is for a nonprofit event;
2. The nonprofit event is conducted by a local governmental, civic, social, fraternal, or patriotic organization;
3. The signage does not interfere with the city use of utility poles;
4. The signage does not interfere with any existing franchise agreement;
5. The signage complies with all relevant city, state, and federal electric, safety, fire, sign, and building
regulations and laws;
6. The signage is placed by city employees, unless written authorization by the city manager is obtained allowing
the event holder to place the signage;
7. The signage material, shape and size is not a danger to the public;
8. The signage is not an impediment or nuisance to vehicle or pedestrian traffic;
9. The signage is placed on city utility poles located within the city limits; and
10. The signage is installed no sooner than and removed no later than the dates specified by the mayor.
The city reserves the right to reject any and all requests for signage which do not meet these standards. (Ord.
14-2008 §1, 2008)
Chapter 12.37
CITY RECREATION FACILITIES
12.37.010: RENTAL RATES FOR CITY RECREATION FACILITIES:
Baseball/softball fields with field
lights
$15.00 per hour per field
Baseball/softball fields without field
lights
$10.00 per hour per field
Concessions at baseball/softball
fields
Yearly awarded to highest responsible bidder per section 3.50.020
of this code
Deposit for facility $150.00
(Ord. 4-2012, 2012)
12.37.020: RENTAL PROCEDURES:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 155/313
All persons or organizations wishing to rent the facilities shall contact the city of Yuma recreation director to reserve
facilities. Facilities shall be reserved on a first come, first serve basis. The required deposit and full rental shall be
paid in full to the city of Yuma at the time the reservation is made. If the reservation is canceled at least twenty four
(24) hours prior to a scheduled event, then any sums paid to the city of Yuma shall be refunded. All persons or
organizations renting the facilities shall enter into a rental agreement with the city. Any persons or organizations who
fail to schedule an event will not be permitted to use the facility. Provided, however, that any organization that is
running city sponsored events and reserves city facilities will not be required to pay the deposit or rent. (Ord. 4-
2012, 2012)
Chapter 12.38
LOCAL EVENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
12.38.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for and regulate the use of public property owned by the City, to minimize
the impact by large groups and special events and to ensure that public property is reasonably available and safe
for use by the public. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
DEMONSTRATION: A rally, a gathering of picketers or protestors, a speech, a march, a vigil, a religious service or
any other similar gathering that either requires traffic control, or has fifty (50) or more participants and occurs on a
public street, sidewalk, public right-of-way or park in the City, for the purpose of communication or expression of
views or grievances.
PARADE: A march or procession with individuals, animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, on any public street,
sidewalk or public right-of-way in the City but that is not a demonstration.
PARKS: All developed recreational areas and facilities (including fields and shelters) owned, leased, or operated by
the City and open to the public or available for public use.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any property owned or controlled by the City and open to the public or available for public
use, including, but not limited to, public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, parks, and public buildings.
SPECIAL EVENT: A temporary activity with fifty (50) or more participants including, without limitation, block parties,
parades, soap box derbies, rallies, walks, running or bicycle races, birthday parties, weddings, family reunions,
fundraisers, picnics, or sports tournaments, or any event requiring traffic control, but shall not include
demonstrations. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.030: PERMIT OR RESERVATION REQUIREMENT:
A. Any person desiring to conduct a special event on public property shall first obtain a special event permit from the
City.
B. Any person desiring to hold a demonstration on public property shall first obtain a demonstration permit from the
City.
C. Certain designated structures or areas require a reservation regardless of the number of participants under fifty
(50) or if the applicant desires to have exclusive use of such designated buildings or areas. Reservation of these
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 156/313
properties shall be governed by resolution or this Code, as applicable. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.040: APPLICATION:
A. Any person desiring to sponsor or conduct a special event or demonstration shall apply for a special event permit
or a demonstration permit, as applicable, by filing an application with the City on a form supplied by the City.
B. At a minimum, the application shall include the following information:
1. The applicant's name, address, and phone number;
2. The date and time of the special event or demonstration, including the estimated set-up period, the start time,
the end time, and the estimated break-down and clean-up period;
3. A map showing the proposed location of the special event or demonstration, including a detailed map of the
route of the special event or demonstration, if applicable;
4. The nature of the special event or demonstration;
5. The estimated number of participants and animals, if any;
6. The estimated number of vehicles;
7. A waste disposal and clean-up plan;
8. A parking plan, if the number of participants is anticipated to be one hundred (100) or more;
9. A list of vendors and business license numbers, if items will be sold at the special event;
10. A list of any previous special event or demonstration permits issued by the City;
11. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever applied for and been denied, or had revoked, a special
event, demonstration or similar permit by the City or any other jurisdiction and the grounds therefor;
12. A description of any planned amplified noise;
13. A statement as to whether the special event or demonstration will involve hazardous, combustible or
flammable materials and, if so, the safeguards planned; and
14. Any other information requested by the City relevant to either the criteria set forth in section 12.38.050 of this
chapter or the possible conditions that may be imposed pursuant to section 12.38.060 of this chapter that will
aid the City in deciding whether to issue the special event or demonstration permit and under what conditions.
C. Except as otherwise required in this chapter, demonstration permit applications shall be submitted not less than
two (2) business days nor more than one year before the date for the demonstration. The City shall, upon a
showing of good cause, consider an application that is filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time to
process and investigate the application and obtain necessary police services for the special event. Good cause
may be demonstrated by a showing that the circumstance that gave rise to the application did not reasonably
allow the applicant to file within the time prescribed. If the City refuses to consider a late application, the City
shall inform the applicant, in writing, of the reasons therefor, and of the applicant's right of appeal.
D. Special event permit application shall be submitted not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one year before
the special event.
E. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set by City Council which fee shall
defray the costs of processing the application.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 157/313
F. Each application shall also be accompanied by any applicable rental fee and/or deposit as set by City Council.
Any rental fees and/or deposits shall be refunded if the application is denied.
G. Each application shall be accompanied by an indemnification agreement stating that the applicant, in exchange
for issuance of the special event or demonstration permit, agrees to reimburse the City for any costs incurred by
the City in repairing damages to public property caused by the sponsors of the special event or demonstration or
the participants in the event or demonstration, or by actions that the sponsors directed, authorized, or ratified,
and also agreeing to defend the City against, and indemnify and hold the City harmless from, any liability to any
person or property that arise from or are related to the special event or demonstration. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.050: CRITERIA FOR DENIAL:
A. The City shall approve an application for a special event or demonstration permit unless the City determines,
upon consideration of the application and other pertinent information, that:
1. Information contained in the application or supplemental information obtained from the applicant is found to be
false in any material detail;
2. The applicant has failed to complete the application after having been notified of any additional information or
documents required;
3. Another special event or demonstration permit has already been issued, or an application has been received
prior in time, to hold another special event or demonstration on the same date and time, or so close in time
and place as to cause undue vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion, or as to burden the City's ability to
meet the needs of police, fire or other emergency services to the remainder of the City;
4. The time, route or size of the special event or demonstration will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on or contiguous to the site or route or will disrupt the use of a
public street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion;
5. The size, nature or location of the special event or demonstration will present a substantial risk to the health or
safety of the public or participants in the special event or other persons;
6. The size of the special event or demonstration will require diversion of so great a number of police officers or
firefighters to ensure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the special event or
demonstration, or to protect participants in the special event or demonstration, as to prevent normal protection
to the rest of the City; provided that nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit, because of the need to
protect participants from the conduct of others, if reasonable permit conditions can be imposed to allow for
adequate protection of participants with the number of police officers available to police the special event or
demonstration;
7. The location of the special event or demonstration will substantially interfere with any construction or
maintenance work scheduled to take place on or near a public street, sidewalk or public right-of-way or with
any previously issued public right-of-way;
8. The special event or demonstration will occur at a time when a school is in session at a location near the
school, and the noise created by the activities of the special event or demonstration would substantially disrupt
the educational activities of the school;
9. The special event or demonstration involves the use of hazardous, combustible or flammable materials which
create a fire or safety hazard;
10. The special event or demonstration, as described in the application, would violate any applicable law;
11. The applicant has failed to pay costs, fees or deposits for any previous special event or demonstration
permit; or
12. The applicant has failed to abide by the terms or conditions of any previous special event or demonstration
permit.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 158/313
B. When the grounds for denial of an application can be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, route or
location of the special event or demonstration, the City shall, instead of denying the application, conditionally
approve the application upon the applicant's acceptance of appropriate corrective conditions. (Ord. 12-2018,
2018)
12.38.060: CONDITIONS:
A. The City may impose reasonable conditions on any special event or demonstration permit necessary to protect
the safety of persons and property and the control of traffic, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Alteration of the date, time, duration, frequency, route or location of the special event or demonstration;
2. Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of other special events or demonstrations
occurring along a route;
3. Conditions concerning accommodation of available parking, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting
the special event or demonstration to only a portion of a street or right-of-way;
4. Requirements for the use of traffic cones, barricades or other traffic-control devices to be provided, placed
and removed by the permittee at its expense;
5. Requirements for provision of emergency access and first aid or sanitary facilities;
6. Requirements for arrangement of supplemental fire protection or law enforcement personnel to be present at
the special event or demonstration at the permittee's expense;
7. Requirements for providing notice of permit conditions to participants;
8. Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures at the special event or demonstration
and inspection and prior approval of floats, structures and decorated vehicles for fire safety;
9. Requirements for use of trash receptacles, cleanup and restoration of property;
10. Restrictions on use of amplified sound;
11. A requirement that notice be provided to the residents of dwellings along any affected streets;
12. Compliance with any applicable law and obtaining any other legally required permits or licenses; and
13. Designation of a contact person with decision making authority who will be continuously available to law
enforcement personnel and present at the special event or demonstration. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.070: ISSUANCE:
A. The City Manager shall designate an individual responsible for reviewing applications and issuing permits for the
use of public property under this chapter, who shall be referred to as the Events Coordinator. Depending on the
location of the public property, there may be more than one Events Coordinator.
B. Within twenty four (24) hours of receipt of a complete demonstration permit application, the Events Coordinator
shall consider the criteria in section 12.38.050 of this chapter and approve, conditionally approve or deny the
application.
C. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete special event permit application, the Events Coordinator shall
consider the criteria in section 12.38.050 of this chapter and approve, conditionally approve or deny the
application.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 159/313
D. If any application is denied, the Events Coordinator shall inform the applicant in writing of the grounds for denial
and the applicant's right of appeal. If the application is approved, the Events Coordinator shall issue the
demonstration or special event permit, including any conditions. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.080: INSURANCE:
A. In addition to any other conditions allowed by section 12.38.060 of this chapter, the Events Coordinator may
require the applicant to possess public liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for
damages for bodily injury or property damage arising from the special event or demonstration. The Events
Coordinator shall determine whether to require such insurance, and the amount of insurance that shall be
required, based upon the considerations routinely taken into account by the City in evaluating loss exposures,
including, without limitation, whether the special event or demonstration poses a substantial risk of damage or
injury due to the anticipated number of participants, the nature of the special event or demonstration involved
and the physical characteristics of the proposed site or route. Such insurance shall name the City and its
officers, employees and agents as additional insureds.
B. If insurance coverage is required, a copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance, along with all necessary
endorsements, shall be filed with the Events Coordinator no less than twenty four (24) hours before the
demonstration or special event.
C. The insurance requirement may be waived by the Events Coordinator if the applicant signs a verified statement
that the cost of obtaining insurance is so financially burdensome that it would constitute an unreasonable burden
on the right of First Amendment expression, or that it has been impossible to obtain insurance coverage. The
statement shall include the name and address of at least one insurance agent or other source for insurance
coverage contacted to determine insurance premium rates for insurance coverage. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.090: DEPOSIT:
A. The applicant shall provide a deposit at the time of the application. The deposit shall be in the amount
established by the Events Coordinator, consisting of a base amount established by Council and any additional
amount the Events Coordinator finds is appropriate based upon an estimate of the actual costs, above the base
amount, to be incurred by the City in the clean-up of a special event or demonstration of like nature and size.
B. The deposit shall be returned after the special event or demonstration if the property used for the special event or
demonstration has been cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the special event or
demonstration.
C. If the property used for the special event or demonstration has not been properly restored, the deposit, or a
portion thereof, shall be applied toward payment of the actual costs incurred by the City in restoring the property.
D. If after the City uses the deposit, or a portion thereof, for restoring the property, the City shall refund any
remaining amount of the deposit to the applicant. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.100: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
A. The permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions of the permit.
B. The permittee shall ensure that the person leading or in charge of the special event or demonstration is familiar
with every provision of the permit and carries the permit on his or her person for the duration of the special event
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 160/313
or demonstration.
C. Immediately following the completion of the special event or demonstration, the permittee shall ensure that the
area used for the special event or demonstration is cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior
to the special event or demonstration. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.110: REVOCATION:
A. The City may, at any time prior to a special event or demonstration, revoke or terminate a permit that has been
issued for the special event or demonstration if conditions change so that the application could have been
denied in the first instance.
B. The City may revoke a permit during the course of the special event or demonstration if continuation of the
special event or demonstration presents a clear and present danger to the participants or the public health,
safety or welfare.
C. The City may revoke the permit and terminate the special event or demonstration during the course of the special
event or demonstration for noncompliance with any term or condition of the permit.
D. A decision to revoke a permit may be made by the City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, or Events Coordinator,
who issued the permit. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.120: FEE REDUCTIONS:
A. An applicant may request a fee reduction from the Events Coordinator at the time of filing its application for a
permit. Applications for a fee reduction shall be filed at the same time as the application for a special event or
demonstration. The Events Coordinator will consider and decide all fee reductions, based upon the following
criteria:
1. Fee reductions may only be applied to application and rental fees but not to direct costs or deposits.
2. There is a limit of one fee reduction per organization per year.
3. The applicant has not had any violations of other special event or demonstration permits previously issued
from the City.
4. The event is compatible with City priorities.
5. The sponsoring organization is a nonprofit corporation and proof of 501(c)(3) status is provided.
6. There is a direct benefit to City programs, activities or facilities as a result of the special event or
demonstration.
7. There is a significant potential to attract visitors to the City and encourage tourist activity.
8. The ability of the applicant to provide in-kind or other contributions of goods, services, or programs that will
benefit the City or its residents. The in-kind or other contribution must be equal to or exceed the value of the
reduced fee. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
12.38.130: APPEALS:
A. Any decision of the Events Coordinator under this chapter may be appealed to the City Manager by filing a
written notice of appeal, setting forth the grounds for appeal, within five (5) days after the decision.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 161/313
B. For denials of demonstration permit application, the City Manager shall review the appeal and issue a written
decision no later than one day after the filing of the appeal. The applicant and the City may present written
evidence or written argument to assist the City Manager's review. In the event that a notice of appeal is filed in
accordance with this section, but less than one day prior to the requested date for a demonstration for which the
permit has been denied and the City Manager is unable to review the appeal prior to the requested date, the City
Manager shall notify the appealing applicant that circumstances do not permit a determination of the appeal, and
said applicant is entitled to seek judicial review of the permit denial with no further administrative review. The
City Manager's decision shall be final, subject only to judicial review.
C. For denials of a special event permit application, the City Manager shall review the appeal and issue a written
decision no later than ten (10) days after the filing of the appeal. The applicant and the City may present written
evidence or written argument to assist the City Manager's review. The City Manager's decision shall be final,
subject only to judicial review.
D. Any decision made by Council under this chapter shall be final, subject only to judicial review. (Ord. 12-2018,
2018)
12.38.140: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. It is unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a special event or demonstration without a permit issued
under this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to participate in a special event or demonstration without a permit
with the knowledge that the sponsor of the special event or demonstration has not been issued a permit.
B. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or disrupt a lawful special event or demonstration.
C. It is unlawful for a permittee to violate the terms and conditions of a permit, or for any participant with knowledge
thereof, to knowingly violate the terms and conditions of the permit.
D. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in title 1, chapter 1.24
of this Code. (Ord. 12-2018, 2018)
Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.02
YUMA UTILITY EMERGENCY FUND
13.02.010: CREATION:
The city by this section creates a fund which shall be titled the Yuma utility emergency fund and the city shall initially
place into said fund the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The city of Yuma utility emergency
fund shall be dictated by the terms of this chapter and said fund may be supplemented at any time by public or
private funding, but any removal of monies from said fund shall be done only upon compliance of all terms as set
forth within this chapter. (Ord. 5-1992, 1992)
13.02.020: INTEREST:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 162/313
All interest earned by the utility emergency fund shall be retained within the fund and may be withdrawn by the city
only if conditions are met pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 5-1992, 1992)
13.02.030: PURPOSE:
Purpose of the utility emergency fund shall be for the exclusive use of providing a reserve for emergencies which
meet the requirements of subsections A and B of this section.
A. A catastrophic or unforeseen breakdown of the water, electric or sewer system where insufficient funds exist in
the general funds of the city to remedy such breach of the utility infrastructure.
B. An unforeseen change or occurrence which by its very nature causes the water, sewer or electric utility to
become dangerous to the health, safety and/or welfare of the community and where insufficient funds exist in the
general fund for the city to remedy such dangerous situation. (Ord. 5-1992, 1992)
13.02.040: PROCEDURE:
Funds may be removed, whether accrued interest or principal, when or if the city council determines that an
emergency exists which meets the requirements of subsection 13.02.030A or B of this chapter and where
insufficient funds are held in the general fundof the city to meet such an emergency and where a majority of the
entire council shall vote by ordinance that such funds may be removed from the utility emergency fund. (Ord. 5-
1992, 1992)
Chapter 13.03
UTILITY ACCOUNTS, BILLING AND COLLECTIONS
13.03.010: DEFINITIONS:
CUSTOMER: Means an adult who has requested utility service for a service address. Customer may include the
owner, tenant or occupant of a property located at a service address.
MAIL OR DELIVERY: Means that the notice or the document is deposited in the United States mail or physically
delivered to the address of the addressee, and does not mean actual physical receipt by the addressee.
OWNER: Means one or more owners of a service address according to the records of the Yuma County Assessor.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Means the address to which utility service is provided.
SERVICES: Means trash, water, sewer and electric services provided by the City.
THIRD PARTY: Means a party identified in writing by a customer to whom the City shall provide written notification
of a delinquency in payment of a utility bill. (Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.020: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
A. Approval by City staff of an application for utility service by the City and acceptance of utility service by the
customer constitutes a contract between the City and the customer consisting of the provisions of this chapter.
No promise, agreement, or representation of any employee of the City shall be binding on the City, unless the
City and the customer incorporate the promise, agreement, or representation into the customer's application for
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 163/313
utility service. By accepting utility service, each customer agrees to provide the City with all information
requested by the City to determine the appropriate rate schedule. The application shall include the required
deposit, identification and other documentation as required by City staff.
B. All customers and owners, if the property at the service address is not owner occupied, are jointly and severally
liable for payment of the utility service. No one shall connect utilities in another's name to avoid payment of a
prior balance due for utility services. In such cases, the City may transfer the balance owed to the new account.
No one shall connect utilities in the name of a minor.
C. All utility services are presumed to be furnished and supplied to the real property served without regard to the
actual user or person billed for the services. Therefore, all utility fees and charges are chargeable against and
payable by the owner of such real property, as well as the person contracting for the utility service.
D. Proof of residency may be required before service is connected. Proof of residency includes, but is not limited to,
leases, rental agreements and deeds. (Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.030: BILLING:
A. The fees and charges established by this Code for services from the electric, water, sewer, and trash collection
utilities may be billed together in one utility bill with such fees and charges separately itemized, and shall be
billed to utility users not less than once each month.
B. The City will issue bills monthly for the cost of service provided which are due and payable in full as of the due
date specified on the utility bill and become delinquent after that date. Failure to receive a bill does not relieve a
customer from the obligation for timely payment.
C. Whenever the City is unable to read the customer's meter, the City may issue an estimated bill for the month,
based on the best available information.
D. Once the City transfers or discontinues service, the City will compute and mail the final bill promptly. (Ord. 7-
2018, 2018)
13.03.040: DEPOSITS:
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the City requires a deposit from any customer to secure payment of bills.
If, at any time, the City determines that a previous deposit from a customer is insufficient, the City may require
an additional deposit.
B. A deposit shall be required to connect service in an amount not to exceed twice the estimated monthly bill, or one
hundred dollars ($100.00), whichever is greater.
C. The City will not apply a customer's deposit to the customer's bill until the City discontinues the utility services for
that customer. The City will refund any deposit in excess of the outstanding balance to the customer, unless the
customer has an outstanding balance for service to another address, in which case the City may apply the credit
balance to the outstanding balance at the other address. If the customer moves to a new service address in the
City, the City may transfer the deposit to the customer's new account. To the extent the outstanding balance due
is in excess of the deposit, the City will bill the customer for the remaining amount due. In the event the deposit
is insufficient to satisfy the entire bill and the customer fails to pay the remaining amount due, application of the
deposit to amounts past due does not constitute a settlement or satisfaction of the customer's bill, or otherwise
limit the City's right to pursue all legal remedies in an effort to collect any amount due.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 164/313
D. In the event a customer files a petition in bankruptcy, section 13.03.080 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 7-2018,
2018)
13.03.050: DUE DATE; DELINQUENCY:
A. It is the customer's responsibility to pay each utility bill when due. Acceptance of partial payment will not be
deemed a waiver of the City's right to collect any remaining balance or to exercise any of its authorized remedies
for nonpayment.
B. In case the customer fails to pay a utility bill by the due date or fails to pay any other utility fee, charge, additional
deposit or assessment prescribed by this Code, the City may disconnect the customer's water and/or electric
services to the property and has the right to enter upon private property to accomplish this purpose.
Extraterritorial customers may also have trash service terminated pursuant to this section and the trash
containers may be removed by the City.
C. Before discontinuing a utility service for nonpayment of any utility charge, fee, additional deposit or assessment
prescribed by this Code, the City shall give written notice to the customer, and the property owner, if not owner
occupied, of the delinquency and the intent to terminate service.
D. The City Clerk shall assess any late penalty as provided by City Council by resolution. No penalty shall be
collected by the City on any amount that is paid in full within five (5) days after the due date.
E. The City may add to the balance due all collection costs and fees, including attorney fees, incurred by the City, or
its representative, in collecting the balance owed by the customer on disconnected utility accounts.
F. The City Council may set any fees, by resolution, applicable to the disconnection and reconnection of service.
(Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.060: INSUFFICIENT FUNDS TRANSACTIONS:
A returned check, electronic fund transfer return, or charged back credit card transaction received by the City
constitutes non-payment of the amount of the returned check, electronic fund transfer return or charged back credit
card transaction. When a customer makes a payment resulting in a returned check, the City shall charge a fee for
insufficient funds. When a customer makes a payment resulting in a returned check following a notice of
discontinuance, the City may discontinue service without additional notice. If the City receives three (3) insufficient
funds checks from any customer, the City may, following written notice to the customer, require all future payments
to be made in cash or certified funds. (Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.070: CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY:
When a change of occupancy, or of legal responsibility, for an account occurs regarding any premises served by the
City, the outgoing customer shall give notice of such change within five (5) days before such change. The City shall
hold the outgoing customer responsible for all service provided for five (5) days after the City receives such notice.
(Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.080: BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE:
A. In the event any customer files a bankruptcy petition, the City will charge a three-month estimated usage deposit
pursuant to the Federal Bankruptcy Code, title 11 USC section 366 as security for services provided to the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 165/313
customer after the date the customer files a bankruptcy petition. The deposit is due and payable within twenty
(20) days of the City's receipt of notice of filing the bankruptcy petition. The City will return the deposit as
described in this chapter consistent with the Bankruptcy Code. Unless excused by the Bankruptcy Court, failure
to pay a deposit in the time specified may result in disconnection of service until the City receives the deposit.
B. Unpaid charges for services rendered before the filing of a bankruptcy petition are pre-petition charges. Charges
for services rendered after the customer files a bankruptcy petition are post-petition charges, if authorized by the
bankruptcy trustee, if any, or the debtor. Pre-petition charges are the responsibility of the bankruptcy debtor;
post-petition charges are the responsibility of the party authorizing them.
C. When authorized, the City will file a claim with the Bankruptcy Court for all services rendered to the bankruptcy
debtor. The City shall credit any amount received for pre-petition services to the City's bad debt expense. (Ord.
7-2018, 2018)
13.03.090: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE AT CUSTOMER'S REQUEST:
A customer wishing to discontinue service shall give at least five (5) days notice to the City, in order to allow
sufficient time for final meter reading and disconnection of service. When the City does not receive such notice, the
customer will be liable for service for five (5) days following receipt of notice to discontinue service. Notice of
discontinuance of service will not relieve the customer of responsibility for payment. (Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.100: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY THE CITY:
A. The City will only discontinue utility service in accordance with this chapter.
B. The City will provide written notice of any proposed discontinuance of service by first class mail at least seven (7)
days in advance of the proposed date for discontinuance of service to the customer and the owner of the
property, if the property at the service address is not owner occupied. The notice will advise the customer and/or
the owner which provisions of this Code have been violated, which service will be discontinued, and, if
applicable, the amount past due and the date by which the past due amount must be paid in order to avoid
discontinuance of service. For the purposes of this chapter, amount past due means any sum overdue for, or
charge related to, services provided by the City, additional deposits or other charges.
C. A notice of discontinuance will advise a customer:
1. That a customer may avoid discontinuance of service by paying on or before the expiration date of the notice,
the current month's bill in full; and
2. That in the event a residential customer is unable to pay for services as billed by the City, and a medical
certification is received by the City's Utility Billing Department indicating that discontinuance of service would
be dangerous to the health or safety of a residential customer or a permanent resident of the residential
customer's household, the City will not discontinue service for thirty (30) days from the date of the medical
certification. Residential customers may request a 30-day extension upon delivery of a second medical
certification to the City's Utility Billing Department.
D. In the event a residential customer has signed a third-party notification form identifying a third-party to whom a
notice of discontinuance is to be sent, a notice of discontinuance will also be mailed by first class mail or
delivered at least seven (7) days in advance of the proposed discontinuance of service date to the designated
third-party. The City will make available a third-party notification form to each new residential customer, if
requested.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 166/313
E. The City will restore service within twenty four (24) hours of a customer satisfying any of the following provisions
of this subsection, unless a physical impediment prevents restoration of service.
1. Pays in full the amount shown on the notice of discontinuance of service plus any additional deposit and other
fees required by the City; or
2. Presents a medical certification in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
F. The City will not discontinue service, or if the City has discontinued service, the City will restore service during
any period, when discontinuance of service is demonstrated by a residential customer to be dangerous to the
health or safety of the residential customer, or a permanent resident of the customer's household, as provided in
this chapter.
1. A customer demonstrates a danger to the health or safety of a residential customer or a permanent resident of
the customer's household when a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of Colorado, or a health
practitioner licensed to practice in the State of Colorado and acting under a licensed physician's authority,
certifies in writing that such a danger exists and the written certification is received by the City Clerk.
2. Upon receipt of a medical certification, the City will refrain from discontinuing service, and restore
discontinued service, for thirty (30) days from the date of the medical certification. The City will refrain from
discontinuing service for an additional thirty (30) days upon receipt of a second separate medical certification
prior to the expiration of the initial 30-day period.
3. A residential customer may invoke the provisions of subsection E2 of this section only once during any twelve
(12) consecutive months. In addition, a customer must arrange for payment of any past due amount at the
time the medical certification is presented. (Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.110: UNPAID CHARGES SHALL BE A LIEN ON PROPERTY:
A. Any charges imposed by this title for utility services, together with interest and the collection costs, if not paid by
the due date specified on the utility bill, constitute a perpetual lien on the property to which service was
delivered.
B. The attachment of such lien is not dependent on the recording of written notice, and the lien is prior and superior
to all other liens, claims, titles and encumbrances whether or not prior in time, except liens for general taxes. The
lien remains attached to the property from the date the fees and charges became due until the delinquent fees
and charges, together with interest and costs of collection, if any, are paid.
C. When the tenant in possession of the property served or any third party pays the utility bill, it relieves the owner
from the obligations and lien imposed by this title, but the City is not required to seek payment of utility bills from
any person other than the owner. No change of ownership, occupation, or possession, affects the application of
this section, and the failure of any owner to discover that he or she purchased property against which a lien for
utility services exists in no way affects such owner's liability for payment in full.
D. The City may enforce the lien by a suit for foreclosure and sale of the property subject to the lien. The proceeds
of the sale shall be applied to the unpaid fees and charges and allowable costs in the manner provided for
foreclosure of statutory liens. The lien may also be enforced by certification of assessment upon the property to
the County Treasurer for collection by the County in the same manner as delinquent general taxes and special
assessments upon such property are collected, or by any other means provided by law.
E. Delinquent fees, together with interest and collection costs, may also be collected by civil suit against the owner
of the property served or by any other lawful means, at any time after the charges become delinquent. The
remedies provided under this chapter are cumulative and supplemental to each other. (Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.120: RELEASE OF INFORMATION:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 167/313
A. In accordance with provisions of the Colorado Open Records Act, customer and account information is not public
and the City will not release customer or account information except as provided below:
1. The City will provide a customer a copy of their own records, upon request of the customer.
2. The City will provide customer and account information to persons whose names do not appear on the
account when the customer provides to the City written authorization to release information from the
customer's account, specifying to whom and when the information may be released.
3. The City will provide customer and account information upon request of law enforcement when made in
compliance with State or Federal law and to City employees in connection with their official duties.
4. The City will provide customer and account information in response to lawfully issued subpoenas or other
legal process. (Ord. 7-2018, 2018)
13.03.130: BILLING ERRORS:
A. When an error has been made in an account, the following shall apply:
1. Overpayment: When the City determines a customer has overpaid for utility service and the overpayment
occurred no more than one year before the date the error is made known to the City, the City will issue to the
customer a credit or a refund, as reimbursement for the overpayment if each of the following conditions is met:
a. Documentation evidencing the overpayment is available in utility records or has been provided to the utility
by the customer; and
b. The City confirms the accuracy and sufficiency of the documentation based on utility records.
2. Credit Balances: The City will make reasonable efforts to refund or credit, to the customer, any amount paid or
credited to an account for utility service in excess of applicable charges where there are current billing records
acceptable to the City. Any refund mailed to the last known address of the customer and returned unpaid to
the City or not cashed by the customer within one year of either the date of delivery or mailing of the check,
will be retained by the City, and disposed of according to the unclaimed intangible property policies of the City.
3. Undercharges: When the City determines a current customer has been undercharged for any reason and has
underpaid for utility service, the customer shall be billed for the undercharges, except when the undercharges
occurred more than one year before the date the City discovers the error. The number of billing cycles over
which collection will occur will be determined by the City, up to a maximum of twelve (12) months.
4. Meter Failure: When the City determines a meter has failed to register usage within prescribed accuracy
limits, the customer will be billed based on the estimated metered consumption for the period during which the
meter malfunction occurred, as determined by the City. Customers who have been undercharged for services
received, will be re-billed, for the actual or estimated services delivered, based on utility service records or
other information acceptable to the City that verify previous billing statements do not appropriately reflect
actual consumption. The number of billing cycles over which collection will occur will be determined by the
City, up to a maximum of twelve (12) months.
5. Misleading Billing Error: Any attempt or action by a utility customer to mislead the City with regard to a billing
error shall be a violation of this Code. Each day upon which any violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense, punishable as such.
6. Customer Billing Review: Each customer is responsible for using reasonable diligence to review billing
statements and for immediately notifying the City of a billing error.
7. Billing Petition: Any customer aggrieved by a final determination or decision regarding a billing error correction
under this section may petition the City Manager for a hearing by making a written application for such hearing
within seven (7) days of the date of such determination or decision. The City Manager shall conduct such
hearing. If a timely request for hearing is made, a hearing concerning the propriety of the determination or
decision shall be granted to the aggrieved party and, after notice to the aggrieved party, the hearing shall be
held no more than ten (10) calendar days after the filing of the request for hearing. At the hearing, the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 168/313
appellant and the City may be represented by an attorney, may present evidence and may cross-examine
witnesses. The decision of the City Manager shall be based upon competent evidence and shall be final. (Ord.
7-2018, 2018)
Chapter 13.04
SEWER SYSTEM
13.04.010: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION:
It is unlawful for any person to open, uncover or in any manner make connection with any sewer main or line of the
City, or to lay drain or sewer pipes on any premises or in any street or alley within the City without obtaining a
written permit therefor. (Prior Code §5.3-1)
13.04.020: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for such permit shall be made in writing on forms prepared for that purpose. When obtained, such permit
must be kept on the premises, available for inspection during the progress of the work. It shall be the duty of the
person to whom such permit is issued to notify the City Manager before making connection to any City sewer, and
all such connections must be made by a licensed plumber under the direction and supervision of the City Manager.
When the work has been completed and it has been inspected and approved by the City Manager, and the
connection to the sewer has been made, the permit shall be signed by the licensed plumber doing the work and by
the City Manager and the same shall then be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
13.04.030: SEWER AND DRAIN REQUIREMENTS:
Every sewer drain connected to the City sewer must conform to the following requirements:
A. Every drain pipe or sewer pipe connected with the sewer system of the City must be sound and impervious in all
its parts and joined in the best manner possible, and in no case shall any pipe of any description that is
connected with the sewer system of the City to be covered up until properly inspected and approved by the City
Manager.
B. Vitrified clay pipe or cast iron soil pipe of the best quality, or any other soil pipe of equal quality, shall be used for
sewer drain laying and sewer connection and such vitrified clay pipe shall be joined with Portland cement mortar
mixed one part cement and three (3) parts first class building sand, and no sewer drain pipe or sewer connection
shall be laid at a depth less than two feet (2') underground at a point within three feet (3') of the building wall of
the building drained, and the sewer drain pipe shall be laid with a minimum and constant grade of fall of not less
than one-fourth inch (1/4") to the linear foot toward the main sewer, and all connections of the sewer drain pipe
with another line of the same shall be made with "Y" branches and one-eighth (1/8) bend.
C. When proposed to be connected with any sewer main, the size of such sewer drain shall be not less than four
inches (4") and not more than eight inches (8") in diameter, and the size of the sewer drain shall be determined
by the City Manager at the time of the installation of the same and before any permit to lay the same shall be
issued.
D. No trap known to the plumbing trade as a house trap shall be installed in any sewer drain or connection, nor shall
any rain or surface water be admitted to any soil or drain pipe. Any licensed plumber or drain layer who places
any trap, obstruction or obstacle in the course of any sewer drain pipe shall immediately forfeit his local license
and shall be subject to the penalties of this Code. (Prior Code §5.3-3)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 169/313
13.04.040: BRACING OF TRENCHES REQUIRED:
All trenches excavated to a depth of four feet (4') or more and all trenches made in treacherous soils and all
trenches made near any building shall be properly braced and protected from caving or causing damage to persons
or property. (Prior Code §5.3-4)
13.04.050: EXCAVATIONS; WARNING DEVICES AND BARRICADES REQUIRED:
Red lights or flare pots shall be kept burning around all unfinished work at night and sufficient barricades shall be
placed around all excavations at all times to safeguard the public. (Prior Code §5.3-5)
13.04.060: RATES:
A. All sewer utility customers shall pay a monthly charge of thirty three dollars fifteen cents ($33.15) per equivalent
residential unit (EQR). The schedule of equivalent residential unit shall be established by resolution by City
Council.
B. All sewer tap fees shall be as follows: One thousand one hundred twenty dollars ($1,120.00) per equivalent
residential unit (EQR). (Ord. 5-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-2010, 2010)
13.04.070: COLLECTION OF SEWER RENTAL CHARGES:
(Rep. by Ord. 5-2018, 2018)
13.04.080: SEWER FUND:
The revenues derived from sewer rental charges shall be placed in the Treasury of the City and kept in a separate
fund, to be known and designated as the "Sewer Fund", and shall not be paid out or distributed except for the
purpose of operating, renewing, improving or extending the sewerage system and the payment of the salaries of
employees engaged in operating the sewerage system. Provided, however, that no part thereof shall be used for the
extension of such sewer system into unsewered areas. Provided, further, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed as in any way prohibiting the City Council from applying and crediting to the fund monies derived from
taxation or other sources. (Prior Code §5.3-8)
13.04.090: STOPPAGE OF SEWERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any solids or insoluble matter of any kind or nature
whatsoever within any sewer belonging to the City, or any part thereof, or within any connection thereto. (Prior Code
§5.3-9)
13.04.100: PRIVIES, VAULTS AND CESSPOOLS NOT CONNECTED TO PUBLIC SEWER
DECLARED A NUISANCE:
All privies, vaults and cesspools within the City not connected with and discharging into the public sewers of the
City, are hereby severally defined and declared to be a nuisance and are ordered abated and removed. (Prior Code
§5.3-10)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 170/313
13.04.110: SEPTIC TANKS:
Septic tanks already installed or which may hereafter be installed shall be installed and supervised under the
direction of the City and be supplied with an approved and properly operating drainage field, which septic tanks may
be permitted to continue in operation until such tanks or drainage fields malfunction at which time they may be
declared nuisances by the City or other public health official after which they shall be treated as nuisances and
abated. (Ord. 8-2018, 2018)
13.04.120: REPORTING OF NUISANCES; CITY MARSHAL'S DUTY:
It is made the duty of the City Marshal and he is ordered to ascertain and to report in writing to the City Clerk the
location of any and all such nuisances, describing them, together with the name or names and address of the owner
or occupant of the premises whereon any such nuisance is maintained. (Prior Code §5.3-12)
13.04.130: NOTIFICATION OF OWNER TO ABATE NUISANCE; CITY CLERK'S DUTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 8-2018, 2018)
13.04.140: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 8-2018, 2018)
13.04.150: TOILETS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to construct, maintain or use any residence, place of business, or other building or place where
persons reside, congregate, or are employed which is not provided with a flush toilet connected with the City
sewerage system. (Prior Code §7.6)
Chapter 13.08
WATER SERVICE
13.08.010: APPLICATION FOR WATER; TAPPING CHARGE:
Every person desiring a supply of water must make application therefor to the City Clerk upon blanks furnished for
that purpose. The application must state fully and clearly all the uses to which the water is to be applied and no
different or additional use will be allowed except by permission given in writing. Not more than one house or place of
business shall be supplied from one tap. All water connections with the water mains must be by the City Water
Department and all parts of the connections between the water mains and to and including the shutoff shall be a
part of the water system of the City. Each applicant shall pay to the Clerk the following charges for tapping the
mains to make any such connections:
A. Water taps of three-fourths inch (3/4") shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00);
B. Water taps of one inch (1") shall be three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00);
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 171/313
C. Water taps of one and one-half inches (11/2") shall be seven thousand eight hundred seventy five dollars
($7,875.00);
D. Water taps of two inches (2") shall be eleven thousand twenty five dollars ($11,025.00);
E. Water taps of four inches (4") shall be forty four thousand one hundred dollars ($44,100.00). (Ord. 26-2006 §2,
2006: Ord. 14-2002 §1, 2002: Res. R-1, 1982: Prior Code §5.1-1)
13.08.020: RATES:
All water utility customers shall pay a monthly charge for each meter as follows:
A. Twenty one dollars seventy five cents ($21.75) minimum charge for the usage of up to five thousand (5,000)
gallons of water, and one dollar seventy eight cents ($1.78) for the usage of each additional one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water. (Ord. 4-2018, 2018: Ord. 1-2011, 2011)
13.08.030: DELINQUENT BILLS TO BE A LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 4-2018, 2018)
13.08.040: RULES AND REGULATIONS PART OF CONTRACT:
The rules and regulations concerning water service heretofore set forth shall be taken and held to be a part of the
contract with every person who is supplied with water through the waterworks of the City, and every such person by
taking water shall be considered and held to consent to be bound thereby; and whenever any of the rules and
regulations are violated, after compliance with the proper administrative procedure for termination of water service,
the City may terminate water from the building or place of such violation and shall not be let on again except by
order of the City Council. (Ord. 16-1982, 1982: Prior Code §5.1-5)
13.08.050: FIRE HYDRANT USAGE:
The City of Yuma will make available access to Municipal water from a standard fire hydrant to any user upon the
following conditions:
A. Deposit: The user shall pay to the City in advance a one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) refundable
deposit, with such deposit to be used if damage to the City's fire hydrant occurs. User agrees to and accepts full
responsibility for the care, use, and control of the fire hydrant. If no damage occurs during the use of the fire
hydrant, then the deposit shall be refunded in full. In the event of damages to the fire hydrant, the City will
provide to user, within thirty (30) days after the termination of the use, a report detailing the damages, the
amount of the deposit retained and a refund, if any.
B. Protection And Metering:
1. A City approved and inspected backflow prevention device, water usage meter and water flow control valve (a
"hydrant package") is required. If requested by the user, the City will provide the complete hydrant package,
which the user may inspect prior to use. If the City's hydrant package is requested, user shall pay to the City in
advance a two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) refundable deposit, with such deposit to be used if
damage to the City's hydrant package occurs. User agrees to and accepts full responsibility for the care, use,
and control of the hydrant package. If no damage occurs during the use of the hydrant package, then the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 172/313
deposit shall be refunded in full. In the event of damages to the hydrant package, the City will provide to user,
within thirty (30) days after the termination of the use, a report detailing the damages, the amount of the
deposit retained and a refund, if any.
2. If user elects to provide its own hydrant package components/devices, user consents and acknowledges that
City retains all rights to inspect and test each of the devices of the user's hydrant package.
3. By use hereunder user agrees to strictly comply with all applicable Federal, State and Municipal laws,
regulations and codes.
C. Potable Water Use: User will pay to the City, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of invoice, an amount equal to ten
dollars ($10.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used as measured by the metering device in the
hydrant package. The invoice will be based on water meter readings taken or verified by City employee(s). Prior
to any use, user and City will each inspect and confirm to their satisfaction the accuracy of the metering device.
If any issue with the metering device occurs, each party agrees to notify the other immediately if they suspect or
become aware of a malfunction or inaccuracy issue. The minimum charge for use is one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
D. Collection: If the user fails to pay the invoice when due, the City shall be entitled to all reasonable fees and costs,
including reasonable attorney fees, for the collection of sums due. (Ord. 8-2012, 2012)
13.08.060: WATER LOADER USAGE:
The rate for use of the water loader shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water
delivered. (Ord. 8-2012, 2012)
Chapter 13.10
WATER SYSTEM; CROSS CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW
CONTROL
13.10.010: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL; GENERAL POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A. Protect the public water systems from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its
customers' internal distribution system(s) or its customers' private water system(s) such contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow or backsiphon into the public water systems;
B. Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between its customers' in
plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems;
C. Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will systematically and
effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the potable water system. (Ord. 2-1983 §1, 1983)
13.10.020: DEFINITIONS:
AGENCY: The city of Yuma, Colorado, which is vested with the authority and responsibility of the enactment and
enforcement of this chapter.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 173/313
APPROVED: Accepted by the agency as meeting the applicable specification stated or cited in this chapter, or as
suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved
public potable watersupply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water
supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial
fluids". These waters may be polluted or contaminated or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable
water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.
BACK PRESSURE: Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means that could create pressure
within the system greater than the supply pressure.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: A device or means designed to prevent backflow or backsiphonage.
A. Air Gap: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from
any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the rim of the vessel; and, in no case less than one inch
(1"). When an air gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public
potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the air gap system and an approved
reduced pressure principle device shall be installed in the bypass system.
B. Double Check Valve Assembly: An assembly of two (2) independently operating approved check valves with
tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing
of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval
of a recognized and agency approved testing establishment for backflow prevention devices. To be approved,
these devices must be readily accessible for in line maintenance and testing.
C. Reduced Pressure Principle Device: An assembly of two (2) independently operating approved check valves
with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two (2) check valves, tightly closing shutoff
valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief
valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a
recognized and agency approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall operate
to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two (2) check valves at a level less than the pressure on the
public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normalflow the pressure between the two (2) check
valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of
either of the check valves the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the
zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2) pounds
per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be
readily accessible for in line maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device
will be submerged.
BACKSIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a
potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of
pressure in the potable water supply system.
CERTIFIED INSPECTOR AND/OR TESTER: A person who has passed a state approved and/or sponsored testing
and/or inspection course and who is listed by the state as a certified inspector and/or tester.
CHECK VALVE: A self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one direction and to close if
there is a reversal of flow.
COLORADO DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL MANUAL: A manual that has been
published by the state addressing cross connection control practices which will be used as a guidance document for
the agency in implementing a cross connection control program.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids,
compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or
through the spread of disease.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 174/313
CRITICAL LEVEL: The critical level C-L or C/L marking on a backflow prevention device or vacuum breaker which
is a point conforming to approved standards and established by the testing laboratory (usually stamped on the
device by the manufacturer), which determines the minimum elevation above the flood level rim of the fixture or
receptacle served at which the device may be installed. When a backflow prevention device does not bear a critical
level marking, the bottom of the vacuum breaker, combination valve, or the bottom of any such approved device
shall constitute the critical level.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any unprotected, actual, or potential connection or structural arrangement between a
public, or a consumer's potable water system and any other source, or system, through which it is possible to
introduce into any part of the potable system any substance, other than the intended potablewater, with which the
system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices
and other temporary, or permanent, devices through which, or because of which backflow can or may occur, are
considered to be cross connections.
CROSS CONNECTIONS, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water
system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
FLOOD LEVEL RIM: The edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
HAZARD, DEGREE OF: "Degree of hazard" is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and
the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
Health Hazard: Any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could
create, or in the judgment of the manager may create a danger to the health and well being of the water
consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross connections, in a water supply
system.
Plumbing Hazard: A plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been
properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air gap separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected
plumbing type cross connections are considered to be a health hazard.
Pollutional Hazard: An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the
potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be
dangerous to health.
System Hazard: An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable
water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM: Any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional
or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or
contaminated waters; all types of process waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water
system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulated
cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically
treatedor stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers,
bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions
and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes.
MANAGER: The manager of the city of Yuma, Colorado, or his/her duly authorized representative.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable potability.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that
may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 175/313
POTABLE WATER: Water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological
effects. The bacteriological, chemical, and radiological quality shall conform with state of Colorado drinking water
regulations.
SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply terminating in a tank, vessel,
fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is
unprotected against backflow.
VACUUM: Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
VACUUM BREAKER, ATMOSPHERIC TYPE: A vacuum breaker which has a moving element inside, which during
flow prevents water from spilling from the device and during cessation of flow, drops down to provide a vent
opening. The atmospheric vacuum breaker cannot be installed where there can be backpressure, only where there
can be backsiphonage. This device should not remain under pressure for long durations (more than 12 hours in any
24 hour period) and it cannot have any shutoff valve downstream of it.
VACUUM BREAKER, PRESSURE TYPE: A vacuum breaker that cannot be installed where there can be
backpressure, only where there can be backsiphonage. The pressure vacuum breaker can have shutoff valves
downstream of the device.
WATER SERVICE CONNECTION: The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system;
i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the
customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection
shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of
any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service
connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency
water service connections from the public potable water system. (Ord. 2-1983§2, 1983)
13.10.030: WATER SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the utility system and the customer system.
B. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system; and shall include all those
facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's
system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and
delivery of water to the distribution system.
D. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the
customer's system.
E. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution
system which are utilized in conveying utility delivered domestic water to points of use. (Ord. 2-1983 §3.1, 1983)
13.10.040: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REGULATIONS:
No water service connection shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is
protected as required by state laws and regulation and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be
discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention device required by this chapter is not installed, tested
and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected
cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
(Ord. 2-1983 § 3.2.1, 1983)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 176/313
13.10.050: INSPECTION; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the
city manager to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of
these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the city manager shall deny or immediately
discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has
corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state and agency statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies
and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 2-1983 § 3.2.2, 1983)
13.10.060: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE; INSTALLATION:
An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed depending on degree of hazard. Such a device shall be
installed at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first
branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:
A. In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or
chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the city manager, the public water
system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the
service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.
B. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a
fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line
appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating
from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.
C. In the case of premises having: 1) internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and
controlled, or 2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not
dangerous cross connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the
premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line. (Ord. 2-1983 § 3.2.3, 1983)
13.10.070: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE; DEGREE OF HAZARD:
The type of protective device required under subsections 13.10.060A, B and C of this chapter shall depend upon
the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
A. In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection 13.10.060A of this
chapter, and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an
approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
B. In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to
health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved
double check valve assembly.
C. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion
as tocreate an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected
by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping
stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 177/313
D. In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross connections, either actual or potential, the
public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device at the service connection.
E. In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions it is
impossible or impractical to make a complete in plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall be
protected against backflow or backsiphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention
device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved air gap
separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in each
service to the premises. (Ord. 2-1983 § 3.2.4, 1983)
13.10.080: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE; APPROVAL:
A. Any backflow prevention device required in this chapter shall be of a model and size approved by the city
manager. The term "approved backflow prevention device" means a device that has been manufactured in full
conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled "AWWA C506-78
Standards For Reduced Pressure Principle And Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices" and have
met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by "Specifications Of
Backflow Prevention Devices - #69-2" dated March 1969 or the most current issue.
B. The AWWA and Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research standards and specifications
have been adopted by the agency. Final approval shall be evidenced by a "certificate of approval" issued by an
approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research specifications.
C. The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the city manager to test and certify backflow preventers:
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research
University of Southern California
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90007
Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are
qualified by the city manager.
D. Only "approved backflow prevention devices" may be used. (Ord. 2-1983 § 3.2.5, 1983)
13.10.090: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE; INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow devices are installed to have certified
inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the city manager deems
the hazard to be great enough, he/she may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These shall be
performed by a certified inspector and/or tester. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the
expense of the customer-user whenever the devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and
overhauls shall be kept and made available to the city manager. The form attached to the ordinance codified herein
shall be submitted to the agency within thirty (30) days after the device has been tested and/or inspected. (Ord. 2-
1983 §3.2.6, 1983)
13.10.100: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE; NEW INSTALLATIONS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 178/313
The agency will be informed of all backflow prevention devices that are installed on any premises. Upon installation,
the device will be inspected and tested by a certified inspector and/or tester. The agency will be informed in writing
of the results of this inspection and test. (Ord. 2-1983 § 3.2.7, 1983)
13.10.110: EXISTING CROSS CONNECTIONS:
Within a reasonable time following the adoption of the regulations, existing cross connections between a public
water system and any secondary water system shall be eliminated or protected by means of an approved backflow
preventer. (Ord. 2-1983 §4.1, 1983)
13.10.120: IRRIGATION SYSTEMS:
The following guidelines relating to backflow prevention devices for irrigation systems shall apply:
A. Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be installed after the last control valve of each sprinkler circuit and at a
minimum of six inches (6") above the highest irrigation head. The atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed
only on irrigation circuits with heads that will not return any pressure in the circuit when the circuit control valve is
closed.
B. Pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed at the beginning of each irrigation circuit and at a minimum of twelve
inches (12") above the highest irrigation head on the circuit. Individual irrigation circuits having quick coupling
valves or other similar type heads that will permit pressure to be retained in the circuit shall have a pressure
vacuum breaker installed as a minimum requirement for each circuit. Irrigation systems using the subsurface
drip method shall have a pressure vacuum breaker on each circuit. A pressure vacuum breaker may not be
installed where a double check valve assembly, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, or air
gap separation is required.
C. A double check valve assembly may be installed to serve multiple irrigation circuits in lieu of vacuum breakers on
each individual irrigation circuit.
D. A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer or air gap separation shall be required before any piping
network in which fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals or toxic contaminants are injected or siphoned into
the irrigation system. A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer may be installed to serve multiple
irrigation circuits in lieu of vacuum breakers on each individual irrigation circuit. (Ord. 2-1983 §5.1, 1983)
13.10.130: FIRE SYSTEMS:
A. Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use
shall, whenever practicable, be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. In cases
where the domestic water system is used for both drinking and firefighting purposes, approved backflow
prevention devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines as are not used for firefighting
purposes. It is the responsibility of the person or persons causing the introduction of said unapproved or unsafe
water into the pipelines to see: 1) that a procedure is developed and carried out to notify and protect users of this
piping system during the emergency; 2) that special precautions be taken to disinfect thoroughly and flush out all
pipelines which may have become contaminated before they are again used to furnish drinking water. In the
event the means of protection of water consumers is by disinfection of the auxiliary firefighting supply, the
installation and its use shall be thoroughly reliable.
B. When disinfection of the auxiliary supply itself is depended upon to render the water safe, the means of applying
the disinfectant under this regulation shall be automatic with operation of the pump or pumps employed with the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 179/313
dangerous water in question. Adequate supplies of chlorine or its compounds must be kept on hand at all times.
Chlorine dosing equipment shall be tested daily and kept in good operating condition.
C. The public water supply must be protected against backflow from dual domestic fire systems. (Ord. 2-1983 §5.2,
1983)
13.10.140: VIOLATION; NOTIFICATION:
The city manager shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in which there
is found a violation(s) of these regulations. The city manager shall set a specific time for the owner to have the
violation removed or corrected. If the owner fails to correct the violation(s) in the specified time, the city manager
may, if in his/her judgment an imminent health hazard exists, request that the water service to the building or
premises be terminated. Additional fines or penalties may also be invoked following termination of service. (Ord. 2-
1983 §6.1, 1983)
13.10.150: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing system in the building
who knowingly permits a violation to remain uncorrected after the specified time set by the city manager, shall upon
conviction thereof by the court, be required to pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or be
imprisoned in jail for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, or be punished by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 2-1983 §6.2, 1983)
Chapter 13.12
ELECTRIC SERVICE
13.12.010: APPLICATION; METER DEPOSIT:
Every person, for all classes of service, desiring a supply of electrical current from the City electric system for light
or power must make application therefor to the City Clerk upon blanks furnished for that purpose and make a
deposit of an amount not to exceed twice the estimated monthly bill, but not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00), for each meter installed. Such deposit shall be held as a guarantee of the return of the meter in good
condition and the payment of any sum due for electric service. Upon application for such service being made, the
City electrician shall make an inspection, install a meter and connect the service wires if the electrical wiring of the
premises to be connected complies with this Code and if the same is safe and will not cause fires, accidents or
injury to life or property. (Ord. 2-2013, 2013)
13.12.020: MULTIPLE UNITS:
Every dwelling, apartment house, motel or trailer court requiring electric service to more than one family shall be
equipped with the smallest number of electric meters possible to furnish light and power, to be installed upon the
City property, the meters to be considered as a unit from which monthly readings shall be taken and bills rendered
thereon to the owner, occupant or other operator of the premises. (Prior Code §5.2-2)
13.12.030: METERS:
All electric current furnished by the City shall be metered and sold at rates established by the City Council. All
meters shall be read monthly. (Ord. 3-2018, 2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 180/313
13.12.040: RATES:
The following rates shall be charged by the City for electric service:
A. Residential service: As defined in the City of Yuma Electric Department Rules and Regulations shall be the
following:
Service charge per meter, per month $7.25
Energy charge, per kWh 0.1010
B. Commercial service: As defined in the City of Yuma Electric Department Rules and Regulations shall be the
following:
Service charge, per meter, per month $15.00
Energy charge, per kWh 0.1010
C. General service demand: As defined in the City of Yuma Electric Department Rules and Regulations shall be the
following:
Service charge, per meter, per month $75.00
Demand charge, per kW 5.00
Energy charge, per kWh 0.0867
1. Determination Of Billing Demand: The billing demand shall be the greater of subsection C1a or C1b of this
section:
a. The highest measured demand (kW) during any thirty (30) minute period occurring in the current monthly
billing period.
b. Sixty five percent (65%) of the highest measured demand (kW) during any thirty (30) minute period
occurring within the previous eleven (11) monthly billing periods.
D. Security lights: Applicable for outdoor area lighting of customer's property where such service can be provided
directly from existing secondary distribution lines of the City, shall be the following:
250-watt high pressure sodium lamp, per month $13.22 per lamp
This subsection D is not applicable for lighting of public streets or highways. (Ord. 3-2018, 2018)
13.12.050: NOTICE TO REMOVE DEFECTIVE EQUIPMENT; REMOVAL BY CITY:
Whenever electrical wiring or apparatus becomes unsafe or in a defective condition, the City electrician shall notify
the owner or occupant, in writing, to repair or remove the same, and upon the owner's or occupant's failure to repair
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 181/313
or remove the defective wiring or apparatus within twenty four (24) hours, or within such time as the City electrician
may reasonably deem necessary, the City electrician shall cause service to be discontinued and such owner or
occupant shall not have the service renewed until the defects have been removed. (Ord. 15-1982, 1982: Prior Code
§5.2-4)
13.12.060: RETURN OF DEPOSIT UPON DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
Whenever any premises is disconnected from the service the meter deposit shall be returned, less any amount due
for service and any depreciation of the meter caused by neglect or abuse of the same, by the customer. (Prior Code
§5.2-5)
Chapter 13.14
ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS EXTENSIONS
13.14.010: ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS; INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The city shall design, furnish, install and energize all electrical systems extensions and the same shall remain the
property of the city. The cost of all materials including both overhead and underground construction, pole mount
and pad mount transformers necessary to provide service shall be borne by the consumer, owner, developer or
contractor receiving the service.
B. The electric department shall furnish, install, energize and maintain all individual overhead services up to the
weatherhead and individual underground services up to the line side of the meter socket and the same shall
remain the property of the city.
C. For industrial and commercial underground services, the service cables from the transformer or transformers to
the premises shall be supplied and installed by the person receiving the service at his cost and in accordance
with the national electrical code. The consumer shall provide all necessary utility easements. (Ord. 1-1989,
1989)
13.14.020: COSTS; DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
A. The city shall begin engineering of facilities upon receipt of a deposit sufficient to cover estimated costs. The city
shall provide material and perform their portion of the construction upon receipt of an advance in aid of
construction in the amount estimated by the city to cover the cost of the city's expenditures.
B. The requirement for an advance may be satisfied by paying one-half (1/2) thereof before materials are supplied
and one-half (1/2) before the system is energized; provided, that the city has been furnished with a letter of credit
or other security satisfactory to the city attorney to assure the payment of the entire balance due.
C. All charges of the city for construction will be based on unit prices in effect at the time the work is requested,
provided, however, that if the work is delayed beyond six (6) months fromsuch request for reasons beyond the
control of the city, such charges may, at the option of the city, be based upon unit prices in effect at the time the
work is accomplished. All unit prices shall be reviewed at least annually, and shall be adjusted as necessary to
reflect actual costs to the city.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 182/313
D. If the actual cost of any material provided by the city is less than the estimated costs, the excess amount of
advance or deposit will be refunded. If the actual cost of any material provided by the city is more than the
estimated costs, the additional costs shall be paid by the person receiving the service. (Ord. 1-1989, 1989)
13.14.030: ADDITIONAL TRANSFORMER CAPACITY; COST TO BE BORNE BY CONSUMER:
If transformer capacity becomes inadequate due to the addition of load and/or increased service capacity, the cost
for additional transformer(s) to meet the demand shall be borne by the consumer. (Ord. 1-1989, 1989)
13.14.040: ELECTRICAL SYSTEM DISTURBANCES:
Whenever an electrical consumer's equipment causes system disturbances such as, but not limited to, voltage dips,
spikes or harmonics, the department may require such consumer to take corrective action, including disconnection
of such equipment, at the consumer's expense. In the event the consumer fails to take such corrective action, the
department may discontinue electric service to the customer until such time as corrective action has been taken.
(Ord. 1-1989, 1989)
Chapter 13.15
REFUSE COLLECTION
13.15.010: SERVICE ESTABLISHED:
A. The City shall provide refuse collection service to property owners who utilize such service in accordance with
the terms and conditions set out in this chapter. Such service may be provided by using City employees or
independent contractors or both.
B. Commercial trash haulers or other refuse collection services are not restricted from operating within the City and
providing trash collection services. Single family residences, duplexes, multifamily residences of fewer than eight
(8) dwelling units and lodging businesses of fewer than eight (8) lodging units in one structure shall be subject to
the charges for City's refuse collection service as provided in this chapter, whether or not the City's refuse
collection service is actually utilized for the dwelling unit in any month. Industrial and commercial establishments,
multifamily residences of eight (8) or more units, lodging business of eight (8) or more lodging units and other
non-residential property owners shall not be subject to the City's refuse collection service charges provided
herein unless those property owners opt in for City services.
C. Charges for refuse collection shall commence simultaneously with charges for water, electricity and/or sewer
charges. The rates imposed by this chapter shall be the monthly minimum charges.
D. The City Manager, or designee, may promulgate rules and regulations associated with the administration of this
chapter and consistent with its purpose.
E. Extraterritorial service may be provided by the City if requested by a property owner within one mile of the City's
Municipal boundary. The City shall not be required to provide service to any property outside the Municipal
boundary. (Ord. 6-2018, 2018)
13.15.020: REFUSE CONTAINERS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 183/313
A. The City shall furnish containers to those residences and businesses receiving City-provided refuse collection
services. The City shall determine the appropriate size and number of containers for a customer and shall
assess a fee for such containers, as provided in section 13.15.040 of this chapter.
B. Upon annexation of existing residential units, and the City's compliance with Colorado Revised Statutes section
30-15-401(7.5)(b), the responsible customers shall pay the prescribed fee for such containers.
C. Each refuse container shall be assigned to the residential unit and not to the occupant of the residence. (Ord. 6-
2018, 2018)
13.15.030: REFUSE COLLECTION RATES:
A. Residential rates:
1. The minimum rate shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for one pickup per week up to three hundred sixty (360)
gallons per month or fraction thereof. For each additional gallon of trash above three hundred sixty (360)
gallons per month picked up, the rate shall be $0.01752 per gallon, rounded up to the size of the container
picked up.
2. Additional pickups shall be charged as follows: a) 90-gallon containers at a rate of six dollars fifty cents
($6.50) per container per pickup and b) 300-gallon containers at a rate of eight dollars fifty cents ($8.50) per
container per pickup.
3. Trailer courts and apartments with multiple dwelling units shall be collectively charged one monthly refuse
collection fee based upon the minimum rate as calculated by the number of dwelling units, whether the
dwelling unit is unoccupied or occupied.
4. Residences containing a home occupation shall be charged the commercial refuse collection rate.
5. Multi-family residential buildings with eight (8) or more units shall be charged the commercial refuse collection
rate.
B. Commercial rates:
1. The minimum rate shall be nineteen dollars ($19.00) for one pickup per week, up to three hundred sixty (360)
gallons per month. For each additional gallon of trash above three hundred sixty (360) gallons per month, the
rate shall be $0.00963 per gallon, rounded up to the size of the container picked up.
2. Additional pickups, beyond the customer's designated number of weekly pickups, shall be charged as follows:
a) 90-gallon containers at a rate of six dollars fifty cents ($6.50) per container per pickup and b) 300-gallon
containers at a rate of eight dollars fifty cents ($8.50) per container per pickup.
C. Extraterritorial residential rates:
1. The minimum rate shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for one pickup per week, up to three hundred sixty (360)
gallons per month. For each additional gallon of trash, the rate shall be $0.03504, rounded up to the size of
the container picked up.
2. Additional pickups shall be charged as follows: a) 90-gallon containers at a rate of thirteen dollars ($13.00) per
container per pickup and b) 300-gallon containers at a rate of seventeen dollars ($17.00) per container per
pickup.
D. Extraterritorial commercial rates:
1. The minimum rate shall be thirty eight dollars ($38.00) for one pickup per week, up to three hundred sixty
(360) gallons per month. For each additional gallon of trash, the rate shall be $0.01926, rounded up to the size
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 184/313
of the container picked up.
2. Additional pickups shall be charged as follows: a) 90-gallon containers at a rate of thirteen dollars ($13.00) per
container per pickup and b) 300-gallon containers at a rate of seventeen dollars ($17.00) per container per
pickup. (Ord. 15-2018, 2018: Ord. 6-2018, 2018)
13.15.040: RATES FOR CONTAINERS:
A. The first 90-gallon container for each residential account shall be free.
B. The first 90- or 300-gallon container for each commercial account shall be free.
C. The fee for use of any container at service address, beyond the initial container in subsections A and B of this
section, shall be five dollars ($5.00) per month per 90-gallon trash container and eight dollars ($8.00) per month
per 300-gallon trash container.
D. These rates in this section shall apply regardless of where the service is provided.
E. The customers do not own the containers provided by the City and the containers shall remain the property of the
City while used by the customer. (Ord. 6-2018, 2018)
13.15.050: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL REFUSE COLLECTION:
A. The owner or utility billing customer for every dwelling unit within any multiple-family residential building having
eight (8) or more units or commercial property within the City shall subscribe to and pay for at least weekly
refuse collection and disposal from such dwelling unit or commercial property, either through the services of the
City or a State licensed private hauler.
B. Upon presentation to the City of a contract for refuse collection by a single licensed private refuse hauler,
providing for at least weekly collection for every unit within a multi-family dwelling building having eight (8) or
more units or commercial property, the City shall relieve the responsible party of the obligation to pay for, and
shall not provide the building with City-provided refuse collection services. The City shall remove any Cityprovided
refuse containers from the premises. The City shall not return City containers unless, upon request of
the owner of the multi-family building or commercial property, it again serves the building and bills responsible
parties for City-provided refuse collection services. (Ord. 6-2018, 2018)
13.15.060: VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or otherwise disturb any refuse container, or its contents which
belong to another, without permission or a legal right to do so.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place his or her refuse for collection in containers belonging to a customer
who pays for City's refuse collection service.
C. Violations of any provision of this chapter by any person shall be unlawful and deemed a nuisance. (Ord. 6-2018,
2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 185/313
Chapter 13.16
SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
13.16.010: METER DEPOSITS:
For all classes of service an amount not to exceed twice the estimated monthly bill, but not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2-2013, 2013)
13.16.020: RESTRICTION ON SERVICES:
From and after the effective date hereof, the city will provide no further sewer taps, electrical service or water taps
on property outside of the city limits, except where the city owns the utility or service line. (Ord. 10-1974, 1974)
13.16.030: UTILITY SERVICE RATES AND FEES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
A. Utility rates and utility fees for municipal utility service provided by the city of Yuma to customers located outside
the city limits shall be as follows:
1. Water utility rates for customers located outside the city limits shall be double the rate charged to customers
located in the city limits for identical service for the initial five thousand (5,000) gallon per month usage, and
equal to the rate charged to customers located in the city limits for any additional water usage. Water utility
fees for customers located outside the city limits shall be double the fees charged to customers located in the
city limits for identical service.
2. Sewer utility rates and sewer utility fees for customers located outside the city limits shall be double the rate
and fees charged to customers located in the city limits for identical service.
3. Trash utility rates and trash utility fees for customers located outside the city limits shall be double the rate
and fee charged to customers located in the city limits for identical service. (Ord. 15-2002 §1, 2002)
Chapter 13.17
COSTS OF ANNEXATION
13.17.010: COSTS GENERALLY:
From and after the effective date hereof, all costs for future development of annexing lands to the city of Yuma,
Colorado, including, but not limited to, costs of publications, sewer, utilities, curb and gutter, and streets, shall be
borne by the developer or his successors in title. (Ord. 3-1974 §1, 1974)
13.17.020: SEWER TAPS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
From and after the effective date hereof, the city of Yuma, Colorado, will provide no further sewer taps on property
outside of the city limits of the city of Yuma, Colorado. (Ord. 3-1974 §2, 1974)
Chapter 13.20
COGENERATION AND SMALL POWER PRODUCTION
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 186/313
FACILITIES
13.20.010: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Pursuant to title 31, article 16, parts 1 and 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, as amended, there is hereby
adopted by reference the rules and regulations of the city pertaining to cogeneration and small power production
facilities, a copy of which remains on file in the office of the clerk of the city. The subject matter of the rules and
regulations of the city pertaining to cogeneration and small power production facilities relates primarily to efforts of
the city to encourage the development of cost effective cogeneration, small power production facilities, and the
means by which such facilities may be integrated with the city's electric system. The copy of these regulations on
file in the office of the clerk of the city may be inspected during regular business hours. (Ord. 1-1981 §1, 1981)
13.20.020: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all property either within or outside the corporate limits, the use of which this municipality
has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. (Ord. 1-1981 §3, 1981)
13.20.030: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the
regulations implementing section 10 of the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978. Article and section headings
of this chapter and the regulations shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope,
meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. (Ord. 1-1981 §6, 1981)
13.20.040: COPIES ON FILE:
The city clerk shall certify to the passage hereof and make not less than three (3) copies of the adopted regulations
of arrangements between electric utilities and qualifying cogeneration and small power production facilities available
for inspection by the public during regular business hours. (Ord. 1-1981 §7, 1981)
13.20.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this chapter.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1-1981 §2, 1981)
Chapter 13.30
UTILITIES ENTERPRISE
13.30.010: CITY OWNED ENTERPRISE; REVENUE BONDS:
Trash, electric, sewer and water utilities shall be considered a city owned enterprise.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 187/313
A. The trash, electric, sewer, water and ambulance service shall constitute an enterprise of the city which may, by
ordinance of the city council, acting ex officio as the board of such enterprise, issue its own revenue bonds or
other obligations (including refunding securities) on behalf of the city, which revenue bonds or other obligations
shall be payable solely from the net revenues (including special assessments) derived from the operation of the
enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations may be additionally secured by mortgages on or security
interests in any real or personal property of the city used in the operation of the enterprise. The ordinance
issuing any such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be adopted in the same manner and shall be subject
to referendum to the same extent as ordinances of the city council.
B. Any pledge of net revenues derived from the operation of the enterprise shall be subject to limitations on future
pledges thereof contained in any ordinance of the council authorizing the issuance of outstanding bonds or other
obligations of the city payable from the same source or sources. All bonds or other obligations issued by
ordinance of the city council payable from the net revenues derived from the operation of the enterprise and all
revenue bonds or other obligations issued by ordinance of the board of the enterprise payable solely from the
net revenues derived from the operation of the enterprise shall be treated as having the same obligor and as
being payable in whole or in part from the same source or sources. (Ord. 5-1994 §1, 1994: Ord. 1-1994 §2,
1994)
13.30.020: LIMITED AUTHORITY:
Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the board of the enterprise to acquire, construct or install or hold
title to or dispose of any city owned property used in the operation of the enterprise, to impose or adjust rates, fees,
tolls or charges for the use of any such property or for any service or commodity furnished by the enterprise, to levy
special assessments or to exercise any power reserved to the city council or other city officials by this chapter or
otherwise (other than the power toissue revenue bonds and other obligations). (Ord. 1-1994 §2, 1994)
13.30.030: DELEGATING POWER TO OTHERS:
Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the city council from appointing such other advisory boards or
commissions as the city council may deem appropriate and delegating to such boards or commissions the power to
recommend policies and procedures regarding the operation of the enterprise. (Ord. 1-1994 §2, 1994)
Title 14
RESERVED
Title 15
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
Chapter 15.04
BUILDING CODE
15.04.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the International Building Code, 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures in the City of
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 188/313
Yuma; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed
herein. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.04.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.04.030: AMENDMENTS:
The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments.
A. Section 101.1 of the adopted code is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 General. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Yuma, and shall be cited as
such and will be referred to herein as "this code."
B. Section 110.3.8 of the adopted code is hereby amended by the addition of a new subsection 110.3.8.1 to read as
follows:
110.3.8.1 Mid-roofing inspections. Mid-roof inspections shall be made to determine compliance with Chapter
15 of this code. These inspections are required after the base felt, flashing and the batten system have been
installed, as applicable. Inspections may be made by photographic evidence supplied to the building official
electronically or may be made in person by the building official, at the discretion of the permittee. If the
inspection is performed remotely and electronically, the photographic evidence must be sufficient for the building
official to adequately evaluate the work. Permittees undertaking such roofing work may continue with work after
supplying the photographic evidence of the work but prior to the building official's approval; however; if the
evidence is not adequate or if the building official determines that correction work may need to be made, the
permittee may be required to stop work and/or remove roofing materials as directed by the building official, in
order to comply with this requirement.
C. Section 113.1 of the adopted code is hereby amended to read as follows:
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building
official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of
appeals. The City Council of the City of Yuma shall serve as the board of appeals.
D. Section 113.3 of the adopted code is hereby amended by deleting the section in its entirety.
E. Section 1612.3 of the adopted code is hereby amended to read as follows:
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazardous areas, the applicable governing
authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum,
areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as amended or
revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
(FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and
supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 189/313
15.04.040: PENALTY:
A. Section 114.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code shall be subject to penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code.
Such violation is also deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.08
BUILDING OFFICIAL
15.08.010: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
A. The office of building official is hereby created and the executive official in charge shall be known as the building
official.
B. The building official shall be appointed by the city council. His appointment shall continue during good behavior
and satisfactory service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been
given him to be heard on specific charges.
C. During temporary absence or disability of the building official the appointing authority shall designate an acting
building official. (Prior code §7.2-1)
15.08.020: QUALIFICATIONS:
He shall be in good health and physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections. He shall
not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material process or device
entering into or used in or in connection with building construction, alterations, removal and demolition. (Prior code
§7.2-2)
15.08.030: DUTIES:
A. He shall receive applications required by this code, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall
examine the premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the
provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all provisions of
the building code. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make
investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on the same.
To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards
during construction or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or
orders as may be necessary.
B. Inspections required under the provisions of the building codeshall be made by the building official or his duly
appointed assistant. The building official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, in
writing and certified to by a responsible officer of such service.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 190/313
C. The building official shall keep comprehensive records of applications of permits issued, of certificates issued, of
inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued.
D. All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but
shall not be removed from the office of the building official without his written consent.
E. The building official shall make written reports to his immediate superior once each month, or more often if
requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated. (Prior code §7.2-3)
Chapter 15.10
RESIDENTIAL CODE
15.10.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and
multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with separate means of
egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.10.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.10.030: AMENDMENTS:
The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments.
A. Section R101.1 of the adopted code is hereby amended to read as follows:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of
City of Yuma, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code."
B. Section R105.2(1) of the adopted code is hereby amended as follows:
1. One-story detached accessory structures, provided that the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet
(11.15 m2).
C. Section R105.2(10) of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
D. Section 109.1.5 of the adopted code is hereby amended by the addition of a new subsection 109.1.5.2 to read as
follows:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 191/313
109.1.5.2 Mid-roofing inspections. Mid-roof inspections shall be made to determine compliance with Chapter 9
of this code. These inspections are required after the base felt, flashing and the batten system have been
installed, as applicable. Inspections may be made by photographic evidence supplied to the building official
electronically or may be made in person by the building official, at the discretion of the permittee. If the
inspection is performed remotely and electronically, the photographic evidence must be sufficient for the building
official to adequately evaluate the work. Permittees undertaking such roofing work may continue with work after
supplying the photographic evidence of the work but prior to the building official's approval; however; if the
evidence is not adequate or if the building official determines that correction work may need to be made, the
permittee may be required to stop work and/or remove roofing materials as directed by the building official, in
order to comply with this requirement.
E. Section R112.1 of the adopted code is hereby amended to read as follows:
R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a
board of appeals. The City Council of the City of Yuma shall serve as the board of appeals.
F. Section R.112.3 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
G. Table R301.2(1) of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
Ground
Snow Load
Wind Design
Seismic Design
Categoryg
Speede
(mph)
Topographic
Effectsk
Special
Wind Regionl
Windborne
Debris Zonem
20 115 No B
Subject To Damage From
Winter
Design
Tempf
Ice Shield
Underlayment
Requiredi
Flood
Hazardsh
Air Freezing
Indexj
Mean
Annual
Weatheringa Tempk
Frost Line
Depthb Termitec
Severe 36" Mod/heavy 1 No n/a 1000 51.8
H. Section R313 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
I. P2603.5.1 of the adopted code is hereby amended to read as follows:
P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be not less than
42 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be not less than 42
inches below grade.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.10.040: PENALTY:
A. Section R113.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 192/313
R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code.
Such violation is also deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.12
ELECTRICAL CODE
15.12.010: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted by reference the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269, or any other Electrical Code
revision approved by the State. The subject matter of this code includes comprehensive provisions and safety
standards for the electrical construction, alteration, repair, removal and demolition of equipment within buildings and
structures in the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 17-2018,
2018)
15.12.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.12.030: PENALTY:
Any person who violates a provision of the adopted code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or
who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the code official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the adopted code shall be
subject to penalties as set forth in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this Code. Such violation is also deemed a nuisance and
may be abated as such. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.16
FIRE CODE
15.16.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International
Code Council, as the Fire Code of the City of Yuma, Colorado, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances,
materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises
as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each of all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the Office of the City of Yuma are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.16.020: COPIES ON FILE:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 193/313
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.16.030: AMENDMENTS:
The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments:
A. Section 101.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of City of Yuma, hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
B. Section 108.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
108.1 Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall
be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The City Council of the City of Yuma shall serve as the board of
appeals. The fire code official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter
before the board.
C. Section 108.3 of the adopted code shall be deleted in its entirety.
D. Section 1103.5.2 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
1103.5.2 Group I-2 Condition 2. In addition to the requirements of Section 1103.5.1, existing buildings of Group
I-2 Condition 2 occupancy shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The automatic sprinkler system shall be installed upon any changes to the
building which require a building permit pursuant to the applicable code adopted by the City of Yuma.
E. Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in aboveground
tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in all zones except for I-1 and I-2 zones.
F. Section 5706.2.4.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and II liquids in
above-ground tanks is prohibited in all zones except for I-1 and I-2 zones.
G. Section 5806.2 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is
prohibited in all zones except for the I-1 and I-2 zones.
H. Section 6104.2 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Except in the I-1, I-2, C-1, and C-2 zones, the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any
one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L).
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 194/313
15.16.040: PENALTY:
A. Section 109.3 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of
this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Such violation is also
deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such.
B. Section 109.4 of the adopted code shall be deleted in its entirety.
C. Section 111.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 dollars or more than $500.00 dollars.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.20
FIRE ZONES
15.20.010: ESTABLISHED:
The fire limits of the city are established as set forth in sections 15.20.020 through 15.20.040 of this chapter. (Prior
code §7.2-7)
15.20.020: ZONE 1:
Beginning at the alley on East Fifth Avenue between Main Street and Albany Street; thence North along said alley
to East Third Avenue; thence East one-half block to Albany Street; thence North to East First Avenue; thence West
along East First Avenue one-half block; thence North to the Northeast corner of the Southernmost lot of the Geer
Addition; thence West to the West side of North Main Street; thence North to the North line of the Southernmost lot
of Block 1 of L.A. Mustain's Addition; thence West to a point which would be on the East side of North Ash Street if
the same were extended; thence South along the East side of Ash Street to the North side of West Fourth Avenue;
thence East one-half block to the alley on West Fourth Avenue between Ash Street and Main Street; thence South
along said alley to the North side of West Fifth Avenue; thence East to point of beginning.
(Prior code §7.2-7)
15.20.030: ZONE 2:
Beginning on East Fifth Avenue at the alley between South Main Street and South Albany Street; thence South
along said alley to the South line of East Seventh Avenue; thence East along the South line of East Seventh
Avenue to South Detroit Street; thence South along the West side of Detroit Street to the South line of East Ninth
Avenue; thence West along Ninth Avenue; thence West along Twelfth Avenue to South Ash Street; thence North
along South Ash Street to the South side of West Ninth Avenue; thence West along West Ninth Avenue to a point
which would be on the West side of South Date Street if the same were extended; thence North to the Southeast
corner of the intersection of Date Street and West Seventh Avenue; thence East along West Seventh Avenue to the
alley between South Ash Street and South Main Street; thenceNorth to Fifth Avenue; thence East along Fifth
Avenue to the point of beginning. Also, beginning at the intersection of East Third Avenue and South Albany Street;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 195/313
thence East along East Third Avenue to South Buffalo Street; thence North along Buffalo Street to the North side of
East Second Avenue; thence East along Second Avenue to South Detroit Street to the North line of the railroad
right-of-way; thence Westerly along said right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Block 1 of Josie Prathers Addition;
thence North to the North line of the Southernmost lot of the said Block 1; thence West along said North line to
North Albany Street; thence Westerly along the North line of Railroad Avenue to the alley between North Albany
Street and North Main Street; thence South to East First Avenue; thence East one-half block to Albany Street;
thence South along Albany Street to East Third Avenue, the point of beginning. Also, beginning at the intersection of
Ash Street and West First Avenue; thence North to the North line of the Southernmost lot of Block 1 of L. A.
Mustain's Addition; thence West to the west line of Anderson's Addition; thence South to West First Avenue; thence
East along West First Avenue to the point of beginning.
(Prior code §7.2-7)
15.20.040: ZONE 3:
All territory within the corporate limits which is not included in zone 1 or 2, as described in sections 15.20.020 and
15.20.030 of this chapter. (Prior code §7.2-7)
15.20.050: BUSINESS BUILDINGS CONFINED TO ZONES 1 AND 2:
No business building adapted or intended for business purposes shall be hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered or moved into the city unless the same is located within fire zone 1 or fire zone 2. (Prior code §7.2-8)
15.20.060: ZONE 3 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to erect or place any house or building within fire zone 3 in the city nearer than twenty
feet (20') from the property line at the end of lots facing the street and ten feet (10') from the property line at the side
of lots abutting on an adjoining street; provided, however, that where buildings are already erected in such block
with a setback less than this distance, new buildings may be erected on a line with existing buildings. (Prior code
§7.3)
Chapter 15.24
UNIFORM ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
15.24.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as
published by the International Conference of Building Officials, for the purpose of prescribing regulation governing
conditions hazardous to life and property within the City of Yuma arising from the existence of dangerous and
unsafe buildings, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-2018,
2018)
15.24.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.24.030: AMENDMENTS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 196/313
The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments:
A. Section 205.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative
to the application and interpretations of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals
consisting of City Council. The building official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to said
board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. Appeals to the board shall be processed in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section 501 of this code. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted
by the board shall be delivered to the building official, who shall make them freely accessible to the public.
B. Section 301 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified
in either this chapter or as specified in the Building Code or the Housing Code. Where terms are not defined,
they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Words used in the
singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine
and the feminine the masculine.
BUILDING CODE shall mean the building code duly adopted by the City.
DANGEROUS BUILDING shall mean any building or structure deemed to be dangerous under the provisions of
Section 302 of this code.
HOUSING CODE shall mean the housing or property maintenance code duly adopted by the City.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.24.040: PENALTY:
Any person who violates a provision of the adopted code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or
who repairs or alters or changes the occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the code official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the adopted
code shall be subject to penalties as set forth in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this Code. Such violation is also deemed a
nuisance and may be abated as such. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.28
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
15.28.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, as the Existing Building Code of the City of Yuma, Colorado, regulating and governing
the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings,
as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collections of fees therefor; with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.28.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 197/313
15.28.030: AMENDMENTS:
The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments:
A. Section 101.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of City of Yuma, hereinafter referred
to as "this code."
B. Section 112.1 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the code
official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of
appeals. The City Council of the City of Yuma shall serve as the board of appeals.
C. Section 112.3 of the adopted code is amended by deleting this section in its entirety.
D. Section 1401.2 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
1401.2. Structures existing prior to August 25, 2018, in which there is work involving addition, alterations or
changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this chapter or the provisions of
Chapters 5 through 13. The provisions of Section 1401.2.1. through 1401.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies
that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, I-2, M, R and S. These provisions shall not
apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H, I-1, I-3 or I-4.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.28.040: PENALTY:
A. Section 113.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code.
Such violation is also deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.30
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
15.30.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Yuma, Colorado, regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-
2018, 2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 198/313
15.30.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.30.030: AMENDMENTS:
A. Section 101.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Yuma hereinafter referred to as "this code."
B. Section 103 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
C. Section 111.2 of the adopted code is repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
111.2. Membership of board. The members of the board of appeals shall be comprised of the City Council of
the City of Yuma. The code official shall be an ex-officio member but shall have no vote on any matter before the
board.
D. Section 112.4 of the adopted code is hereby amended to read as follows:
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 dollars or more than $500.00 dollars.
E. Section 302.4 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
F. Section 304.14 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
304.14 Insect screens.
During the period from April 1 to November 1 every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be
supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every
screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent
fans, are employed.
G. Section 602.3 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling
units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat during the period from September 15 to June 1 to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of
the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 199/313
design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the
International Plumbing Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F
(18°C) shall be maintained.
H. Section 602.4 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces.
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September 15 to June 1 to
maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.30.040: PENALTY:
A. Section 106 of the adopted code shall be repealed and reenacted as follows:
106 Violation; penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code,
shall be subject to penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Such violation is also deemed
a nuisance and may be abated as such.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.32
PLUMBING CODE
15.32.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the most recent International Plumbing Code, adopted by the State of
Colorado, as published by the International Code Council, as the Plumbing Code of the City of Yuma, Colorado,
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.32.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.32.030: AMENDMENTS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 200/313
The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments:
A. Section 101.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Plumbing Code of the City of Yuma hereinafter referred to
as "this code."
B. Section 106.6.2 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
C. Section 106.6.3 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
D. Section 109.2 of the adopted code shall be repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
109.2 Membership of board. City Council of the City of Yuma shall serve as the board of appeals.
E. Sections 109.4, 109.5, 109.6 and 109.7 of the adopted code are hereby deleted in their entirety.
F. Section 305.4.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Private sewage systems are not permitted within the City of Yuma.
G. Section 903.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least a slope of 1/4
inches per 12 inches above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather
protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.32.040: APPLICATIONS; PERMITS:
A. Before beginning work in the City, the person installing or altering same, shall apply to the Colorado Department
of Regulatory Agencies to obtain a permit to do such work. Only those persons legally authorized to do plumbing
may be issued permits.
B. Proof of a valid and satisfactory inspection completed by the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies will
be required prior to the City turning on water service and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 17-2018,
2018)
15.32.050: STREET OPENINGS:
A. All openings made in the public streets or alleys to install plumbing must be made as carefully as possible and all
materials excavated from the trenches shall be removed or placed where the least inconvenience to the public
will be caused.
B. All openings must be backfilled by compacting soils in one foot (1') lifts or using an alternative material that is
self-compacting. All material used for backfill must be preapproved by the City. All rubbish and materials must be
removed at once, leaving the street and sidewalks clean and in perfect repair.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 201/313
C. All openings shall be marked with sufficient barriers. Flashing lights shall be maintained around the opening at
night and all other precautions shall be taken by the excavator to protect the public from damage to person or
property. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.32.060: CROSS CONNECTIONS; BACKFLOW:
A. The City Water Department and building inspector are authorized to discontinue, or cause to be discontinued, all
water service or services to any and all premises, lands, buildings or structures where it is found that an
immediate hazard exists to the purity or potability of the City water supply.
B. The City Water Department and building inspector are authorized and directed to take such steps as necessary
to determine all potential hazards to the purity or potability of the City water supply which exist. Upon
determining the potential hazards it shall be the duty of said department and said inspector to immediately cause
notice to go to the owner or such other person responsible for the premises, specifying the hazards and notifying
the person that in the event that the hazard is not corrected within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, all
water services shall be discontinued thereafter until the requirements of this code have been complied with.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.32.070: PENALTY:
A. Section 108.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any
of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this code, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Such violation is also deemed a nuisance and
may be abated as such.
B. Section 108.5 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any plumbing system that is being done
contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing
the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency
exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who
shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of
not less than $50.00 dollars or more than $500.00 dollars.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.36
MECHANICAL CODE
15.36.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code
Council, as the Mechanical Code of the City of Yuma, Colorado, regulating and governing the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 202/313
15.36.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.36.030: AMENDMENTS:
The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments:
A. Section 101.1 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Yuma hereinafter referred
to as "this code."
B. Sections 106.5.2 and 106.5.3 of the adopted code are hereby deleted in their entirety.
C. Section 109.2 of the adopted code shall be repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
109.2 Membership of board. The City Council shall serve as the board of appeals.
D. Sections 109.4, 109.5, 109.6 and 109.7 of the adopted code are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.36.040: PENALTY:
A. Section 108.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this code, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Such violation is also deemed a nuisance and may be
abated as such.
B. Section 108.5 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing
the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency
exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who
shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than
$50.00 dollars or more than $500.00 dollars.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.40
FUEL GAS CODE
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 203/313
15.40.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code
Council, as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Yuma, Colorado, regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gasfired
appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.40.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.40.030: AMENDMENTS:
A. Section 101.1 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of City of Yuma, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
B. Section 106.6.2 of the adopted code is amended to read to as follows:
The fees for permits shall be as indicated on the City fee schedule adopted by the City Council.
C. Section 106.6.3 of the adopted code is deleted in its entirety.
D. Section 109.2 of the adopted code shall be repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
109.2 Membership of board. The City Council shall serve as the board of appeals.
E. Sections 109.4, 109.5, 109.6 and 109.7 of the adopted code are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.40.040: PENALTY:
A. Section 108.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation, penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this code, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Such violation is also deemed a nuisance and may be
abated as such.
B. Section 108.5 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing
the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency
exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 204/313
shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than
$50.00 dollars or more than $500.00 dollars.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.41
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
15.41.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Yuma, Colorado, regulating and
governing energy-efficient building envelopes and installation of energy-efficient mechanical, lighting, and power
systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.41.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.41.030: AMENDMENTS:
A. Section C101.1 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code of the City of Yuma, and
shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code."
B. Section R101.1 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
R101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code of the City of Yuma, and
shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code."
C. Section C109.1 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
C109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire
code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a
board of appeals. The City Council of the City of Yuma shall serve as the board of appeals. The code official
shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board
shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to
the appellant with a duplicate copy to the code official.
D. Section C109.3 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
E. Section R109.1 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
R109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire
code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a
board of appeals. The City Council of the City of Yuma shall serve as the board of appeals. The code official
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 205/313
shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board
shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to
the appellant with a duplicate copy to the code official.
F. Section R109.3 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.41.040: PENALTY:
Any person who violates a provision of the adopted code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof
shall be subject to penalties as set forth in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense. Such violation is also deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such. (Ord. 17-
2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.42
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
15.42.010: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, as the Pool and Spa Code of the City of Yuma, Colorado, regulating and governing the
design, construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance of swimming pools,
spas, hot tubs, aquatic facilities and related equipment as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 17-
2018, 2018)
15.42.020: COPIES ON FILE:
At least one copy of the adopted code, certified to be a true copy, shall be maintained at the Office of the City Clerk
and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. The code as finally adopted shall be
available for sale to the public through the Office of the City Clerk at a moderate price. (Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.42.030: AMENDMENTS:
A. Section 101.1 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Yuma,
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
B. Section 105.6.2 of the adopted code is amended to read as follows:
The fees for permits shall be as indicated on the City fee schedule adopted by the City Council.
C. Section 105.6.3 of the adopted code is hereby deleted in its entirety.
D. Section 108.2 of the adopted code is repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
108.2 Membership of Board. The City Council of the City of Yuma shall serve as the board of appeals.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 206/313
E. Sections 108.4, 108.5, 108.6 and 108.7 of the adopted code are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
15.42.040: PENALTY:
A. Section 107.4 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
107.4 Violation, penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair a pool or spa in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this code, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in chapter 1.24 of the Yuma Municipal Code. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Such violation is also
deemed a nuisance and may be abated as such.
B. Section 107.5 of the adopted code shall be amended to read as follows:
107.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that work on any system is being done contrary to
the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing
the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency
exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who
shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than
$50.00 dollars or more than $500.00 dollars.
(Ord. 17-2018, 2018)
Chapter 15.44
RADIO AND TELEVISION ANTENNAS
15.44.010: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
It is unlawful for any person to erect, install, enlarge or alter any outdoor radio antenna or television antenna without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the city manager. Application for such permit shall be made on forms provided
for such purpose and plans and specifications shall be furnished which are sufficient to determine if the proposed
work will comply with this chapter. (Prior code §7.10-1)
15.44.020: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
A permit fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid for each antenna installation, such fee to cover one inspection. An
additional fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be paid for each additional inspection which becomes necessary. (Prior
code §7.10-2)
15.44.030: ANTENNA SUPPORT AND MAST REQUIREMENTS:
A. Metal supporting poles or masts extending above the supporting building shall be of an approved type and
permanently grounded. The grounding conductor shall not be less than a no. 12 copper or aluminum wire and
shall be carried down the outside of the building to a direct-driven ground.
B. No antenna or supporting mast shall be attached to a chimney, stock or vent pipe.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 207/313
C. All masts and supports shall be adequately guyed to prevent buckling or damage to other property in case of
mast or support failure.
D. Antenna masts or other supporting structures shall not exceed the maximum height of forty feet (40') above a
roof support or eighty feet (80') above ground support. In areas where reception may be affected by
obstructions, antennas in excess of the abovespecified height may be installed when approved by the city
council. (Prior code §7.10-3)
15.44.040: GUY AND ANCHOR REQUIREMENTS:
A. All antenna masts requiring guys shall be guyed by not less than three (3) and preferably four (4) guys evenly
spaced to support the mast in a vertical position.
B. Guys shall be of stranded steel constructed cable of at least no. 6 steel with eighteen (18) strand steel wire.
C. Anchor points for guy wires must be anchor screws or hooks secured to withstand the maximum wind and ice
loading for this area.
D. No wires, cables or guys shall cross or extend over any part of a public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way,
unless approved by the city council.
E. Guys shall not be installed at an angle of less than thirty degrees (30°) to the vertical angle to the mast or tower,
unless manufacturer's specifications recommend otherwise. (Prior code §7.10-4)
15.44.050: LIGHTNING ARRESTOR REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lightning arrestors shall be of a type approved by the Underwriters Laboratories.
B. Lightning arrestors shall be grounded to an approved water system or direct-driven ground.
C. Arrestors shall be placed on the outside of the building and as near as practicable to the entrance of the
conductors to the building, (Prior code §7.10-5)
15.44.060: GROUND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Water pipes which are connected to the city mains may be used to ground lightning arrestors.
B. Direct-driven grounds shall not be less than one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter and four feet (4') long.
C. All grounding conductors shall be made secure to grounds with approved ground fittings.
D. In no case shall a direct-driven ground used by other services be used as a common ground. (Prior code §7.10-
6)
15.44.070: INSULATOR REQUIREMENTS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 208/313
Standoff support insulators must be used at least every ten feet (10'), or closer if necessary, to keep lines clear of all
inflammable or combustible material. (Prior code §7.10-7)
15.44.080: INSTALLATIONS TO CONFORM WITH NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
All receiving and transmitting antennas constructed or installed within the city shall, so far as materials, design and
workmanship, conform with the national electrical code. (Ord. 16-1982, 1982: prior code §7.10-8)
Chapter 15.48
SIGNS
15.48.010: ADOPTED:
Certain documents which are on file in the office of the city, being marked and designated as uniform sign code,
1994 edition, and all amendments, supplements, replacements and new editions thereto hereafter published by the
International Conference of Building Officials, be and the same is hereby adopted as the code of the city, for the
regulation of the use, installation and attachment of all signs placed in any manner upon any premises, or attached
to or supported by any building in the city; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of such uniform sign code, 1994 edition, and all amendments, supplements, replacements and new editions
thereto hereafter published by the International Conference of Building Officials, on file in the office of the city, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 11-1996 §1, 1996)
15.48.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this chapter:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this chapter.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 11-1996 §3, 1996)
Chapter 15.50
FERTILIZER, PESTICIDE AND HERBICIDE REGULATION
15.50.010: DEFINITIONS:
APPURTENANCES: All valves, pumps, fittings, pipes, hoses, metering devices, mixing container and dispensing
devices which are connected to a storage container, or which are used to transfer bulk pesticide into or out of a
storage container.
BULK PESTICIDE: Any pesticide which is transported or held in an individual container in undivided quantities of
greater than thirty (30) U.S. gallons' or more liquid measure or one hundred (100) pounds' net dry weight.
BULK PESTICIDE STORAGE FACILITY: Any facility or area where agricultural chemicals are being stored in
quantities of at least five thousand (5,000) pounds each year, cumulative. Any bulk pesticide storage facility within
one hundred fifty feet (150') of another bulk pesticide storage facility shall be considered one bulk pesticide storage
facility for the purpose of determining the threshold amount of finished product of agricultural chemicals.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 209/313
DRY PESTICIDE: Any pesticide which is in solid form prior to any application or mixing for application, and includes
formulations such as dusts, wetable powders, dry flowable powders and granules.
FINISHED PRODUCT OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS: Any material, liquid or dry, that is applied either as a
pesticide or fertilizer. This may be a concentrate or diluted mix depending on the facility.
IMPERVIOUS: Means that the pad shall be maintained so that liquid pesticide, dry pesticide or water will not move
through it.
LIQUID PESTICIDE: Any pesticide in liquid form, and includes solutions, emulsions, suspensions and slurries.
LIQUID STORAGE CONTAINER: A. A container used for the storage of bulk pesticide.
B. A nurse tank, or other mobile container used for the storage of bulk pesticide.
MIXING AND LOADING AREA: A physical site where pesticides or fertilizers are transferred, loaded, unloaded,
mixed, repackaged, refilled or where pesticides or fertilizers are cleaned, washed or rinsed from containers or
application, handling, storage or transportation equipment in quantities of at least fifty five thousand (55,000)
pounds of finished product of agricultural chemicals per year, cumulative. Any mixing and loading area within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of another mixing and loading area shall be considered one mixing and loading area for the
purpose of determining the threshold amount of finished product of agricultural chemicals.
MOBILE CONTAINER: Any storage container designed for transportation.
PRIMARY CONTAINMENT: The storage of bulk liquid pesticides in storage containers at a storage facility.
SECONDARY CONTAINMENT: Any structure used to contain product spills from primary containment and prevent
runoff or leaching.
SUMP: A shallow reservoir or area at the lowest point of the bulk pesticide facility or mixing and loading area that
allows for the temporary collection and retrieval of liquid. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
15.50.015: SCOPE OF THESE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. These rules and regulations apply to:
1. All operating mixing and loading areas, commercial or private, where at least fifty five thousand (55,000)
pounds of finished product of agricultural chemicals are handled each year; and
2. All operating bulk pesticide storage facilities, commercial or private, where at least fifty five thousand (55,000)
pounds of finished product of agricultural chemicals are handled each year and the pesticide is held in an
individual container in undivided quantities of greater than thirty (30) U.S. gallons' liquid measure or one
hundred (100) pounds' net dry weight with the exception of department of transportation approved minibulk
containers with a capacity of greater than thirty (30) gallons.
B. Operation of the bulk pesticide storage facilities and mixing and loading areas are regulated by these rules.
C. Compliance with these rules and regulations is required on all new facilities. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
15.50.020: LIQUID PESTICIDES:
Secondary containment for the storage of liquid pesticides:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 210/313
A. Compliance With Requirements: All liquid pesticide containers must be stored in a facility that meets the following
requirements.
B. Capacities: The secondary containment structure shall provide at least the following capacity:
1. The capacity of the largest storage container within the secondary containment structure, plus the total
volume of discharged liquid which would be displaced by the submerged portions of all other storage
containers, appurtenances, fixtures and materials located within the secondary containment structure, if the
structure were filled to capacity with discharged liquid.
2. When unprotected from precipitation, twenty five percent (25%) of the capacity of the largest storage
container located within the secondary containment structure (total 125 percent).
3. When protected from precipitation, ten percent (10%) of the capacity of the largest container located within the
secondary containment structure (total 110 percent).
C. Recovery Of Discharges: Discharges into a secondary containment structure shall be promptly recovered such
that the capacity listed in subsection B of this section is available at all times. The facility shall have items on
hand and readily available to recover discharges to the maximum extent possible.
D. General Requirements:
1. Containment: All primary containment shall be located within a secondary containment structure.
2. Setback From Wells: Bulk pesticide storage facilities and mixing and loading areas shall be set back one
hundred feet (100') from water sources or wells.
3. Structural Materials: Structural materials and integrity shall provide secondary containment which meets or
exceeds the requirements.
4. Design Of Walls And Floors: The walls and floor of a bulk pesticide storage facility shall be designed
according to good engineering practices and shall be constructed of materials that are compatible with the
pesticide, or resist or be treated to resist corrosion due to exposure from the pesticide.
5. Construction Standards: The secondary containment structure shall be constructed to a water permeability
rate not to exceed 1 x 10 - 7 centimeters per second.
6. Impervious To Liquids: The floor and walls of the bulk pesticide storage facility shall be impervious to liquids
for the life of the structure.
7. Gravity Load: The floor of the bulk pesticide storage facility must support the gravity load of full tanks.
8. Static Resistance: Walls must resist static and hydraulic loads from the equilibrium liquid level.
9. Dynamic Hydraulic Resistance: Walls adjacent to tanks must resist dynamic hydraulic loads from liquid
gushing from a ruptured tank.
10. Sloping Floors: The floor of the bulk pesticide storage facility shall be sloped to drain liquids to a sump.
11. Drain Restrictions: The bulk pesticide storage facility shall not have an outlet or gravity drain through the wall
or floor.
12. Piping: No piping shall be installed through the floor or wall.
13. Height Of Walls: Walls of bulk pesticide storage facility shall be of such a height as to allow easy inspection
of the tank(s) from outside the containment as well as easy egress from the containment area.
14. Tank Clearance: There shall be sufficient clearance between each tank and between the tank and the wall of
the bulk pesticide storage facility wall to allow for visual inspection of tanks from all sides.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 211/313
15. Electrical Controls: Electrical controls in the bulk pesticide storage facility shall be elevated above the level of
the containment wall.
16. Prefabricated Facilities: A prefabricated secondary containment structure shall be composed of a rigid
prefabricated basin having both a base and walls constructed of steel, reinforced concrete or synthetic
materials which are resistant to corrosion, puncture or cracking. A written confirmation of compatibility and
estimate of life expectancy from the basin manufacturer shall be kept on file at the nearest local office from
which the storage structure is administered. The prefabricated facility shall be designed and installed to
withstand all foreseeable loading conditions, including the tank load. (Ord. 1-1993 §1, 1993: Ord. 7-1992,
1992)
15.50.025: MIXING AND LOADING AREAS FOR LIQUID PESTICIDES:
All mixing and loading area operations for liquid pesticides must take place on a pad that meets the following
requirements:
A. Capacity: The mixing and loading pad shall provide at least the following capacity:
1. The pad shall be of adequate size and design to contain one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the volume of the
largest container to be loaded or unloaded.
B. Discharges: Discharges onto a mixing and loading area shall be promptly recovered such that the capacity listed
in subsection A of this section is available at all times. The facility shall have items on hand and readily available
to recover discharges to the maximum extent possible.
C. General Requirements:
1. Pads for mixing and loading areas shall be constructed of liquid tight, reinforced concrete or other material so
as to form an impervious barrier between the agricultural chemical handling area and the surrounding earth.
2. The mixing and loading pad shall be designed to prevent storm water from moving onto or across the mixing
and loading pad.
3. The mixing and loading pad shall not have any outlet points.
4. Mixing and loading pads shall be sloped to drain liquids to a sump.
5. Sumps shall be drained only by operator controlled pump.
6. The pad shall be constructed to a permeability rate that does not exceed 1 x 10 - 7 centimeters per second
(0.02 inches per day).
7. The pad must be maintained as impervious for the life of the structure.
8. The pad shall be able to handle anticipated wheel loads of vehicles served on it.
9. Sumps shall be constructed of materials which resist corrosion or can be treated to resist corrosion from
agricultural chemicals.
D. Exemptions:
1. The mixing area (point of injection) of a chemigation system shall be exempt from the regulations as stated in
subsections C6 and C7 of this section so long as the chemigation system complies with title 35 article 11 of
the Colorado chemigation act and its associated rules and regulations. This exemption shall be reviewed three
(3) years after adoption of this rule. (Ord. 1-1993 §2, 1993: Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 212/313
15.50.030: OPERATION OF LIQUID PESTICIDE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY CONTAINMENT
FACILITIES AND MIXING AND LOADING AREAS:
A. General Requirements:
1. Storage containers and appurtenances shall be constructed, installed and maintained so as to prevent the
discharge of liquid pesticide.
2. Storage containers and appurtenances shall be constructed on materials which are resistant to corrosion,
puncture or cracking.
3. Materials used in the construction or repair of storage containers and appurtenances may not be of a type
which reacts chemically or electrolytically with stored pesticide in a way which may weaken the storage
container or appurtenance, create risk of discharge or adulterate the pesticide.
4. Metals used for valves, fittings and repairs on metal containers shall be compatible with the metals used in the
construction of the storage container, so that the combination of metals does not cause or increase corrosion
which may weaken the storage container or its appurtenances, or create a risk of discharge.
5. Storage containers and appurtenances shall be designed to handle all operating stresses, taking into account
static head, pressure buildup from pumps and compressors, and any other mechanical stresses to which the
storage containers and appurtenances may be subject in the foreseeable course of operations.
6. Storage containers and appurtenances, including pipes, shall be protected against reasonably foreseeable
risks of damage by trucks and other moving vehicles engaged in the loading and unloading of liquid pesticide.
7. All electrical circuits in the bulk pesticide storage facility and mixing and loading area shall be equipped with
ground fault circuit interrupters. (Refer to the national electrical code - relevant sections.)
B. Appurtenances:
1. Every storage container connection, except a safety relief connection, shall be equipped with a shutoff valve
located on the storage container or at a distance from the storage container dictated by standard engineering
practice.
2. All wetted parts inside shutoff valves, and all connections from the storage container to the shutoff valve, shall
be made of stainless steel or manufacturer approved material.
3. Pipes and fittings shall be adequately supported to prevent sagging and possible breakage of gravity and
other forces which may be encountered in the ordinary course of operations.
4. A flexible connection is required between the plumbing and the tank to reduce risk of rupture.
C. Liquid Level Gauging Device: Every storage container shall be equipped with a liquid level gauging device by
which the level of liquid in the storage container can be readily and safely determined. A liquid level gauging
device is not required if the level of liquid in a storage container can be readily and reliably measured by other
means. Liquid level gauging devices shall be secured, in a safe manner, to protect against breakage and
vandalism which may result in a discharge. External sight gauges are prohibited.
D. Prohibited Materials:
1. Storage containers and appurtenances may not be made of polyvinyl chloride.
2. A storage container may not be made of ferrous metals, unless any of the following occur:
a. The container is made of stainless steel.
b. The container has a protective lining which inhibits corrosion and which does not react chemically with the
stored pesticide.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 213/313
c. Ferrous metal is the manufacturer's recommended material.
E. Venting: Each fixed storage container used for liquid bulk pesticide shall be equipped with a conservation vent
which opens and closes within the designed pressure limits of the container, so as to relieve excess pressure,
prevent evaporative losses and keep precipitation out of the container.
F. Storage With Other Commodities: No other commodity, except liquid pesticide, pesticide diluent, empty pesticide
containers, or pesticide discharges recovered (from the bulk pesticide storage facility or the mixing and loading
area), may be stored within a liquid bulk pesticide storage facility. A liquid bulk pesticide storage facility may be
located within, or may share a wall or portion of a wall with, a liquid bulk fertilizer storage facility.
G. Labeling Of Storage Containers:
1. Every storage container shall bear a label stating, with regard to the current contents of the container:
a. The complete product label required by the United States environmental protection agency; and
b. The label required under this subsection shall be placed on the storage container so as to be visible from
outside of the secondary containment facility. The label shall be kept in readable condition. The type size
used on the label shall be that which is specified under title 40, part 162, of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
H. Abandoned Containers:
1. Storage containers used at a bulk pesticide storage facility to hold fluid bulk pesticide or pesticide rinsate are
considered abandoned if they have been out of service for more than six (6) months because of a weakness
or leak, or have been out of service for any reason for more than two (2) years.
2. Abandoned aboveground containers shall be thoroughly cleaned.
3. Wash water containing pesticide shall be utilized for the original intended purpose of the product.
I. Anchoring Of Storage Containers: Storage containers shall be anchored, as necessary, to prevent flotation or
instability which might occur as a result of liquid accumulations within the secondary containment structure.
J. Filling: Storage containers may not be filled to more than ninety five percent (95%) of capacity unless:
1. The storage container construction or location provides constant temperature control, or
2. The storage container is a minibulk pesticide container.
3. Manufacturers' specifications allow it. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
15.50.035: DRY BULK PESTICIDES:
A. Storage:
1. Dry bulk pesticide shall be stored inside a sound structure to prevent contact with precipitation.
2. The floor of the bulk pesticide storage area shall be paved with concrete or other material that will prevent the
downward movement of pesticide materials and moisture through the floor.
3. Materials used in the floors and walls must resist or be treated to resist corrosion due to exposure to the
pesticide.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 214/313
B. Mixing And Loading Area And Operations:
1. All loading, unloading, mixing and handling of dry pesticide shall be done on a mixing and loading pad.
2. The mixing and loading pad shall be of a size and design that will contain the pesticide being mixed or loaded
and allow for collection of spilled material and facilitate easy cleanup.
3. Pads for mixing and loading areas shall be constructed of reinforced concrete or other material so as to form
an impervious barrier between the agricultural chemical handling area and the surrounding earth.
4. The mixing and loading pad shall be designed to prevent storm water from moving onto or across the mixing
and loading pad.
5. The pad must be maintained as impervious for the life of the structure.
6. The pad shall be able to handle anticipated wheel loads of vehicles on it.
C. Maintenance: The facility and area shall be maintained in a good state of repair. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
15.50.040: OPERATIONS:
A. Security: All agricultural chemicals in the facilities shall be secured against access by unauthorized persons and
to provide reasonable protection against access by children and wildlife. Appurtenances shall be secured to
provide reasonable protection from vandalism or unauthorized access which may result in a discharge. Valves
on storage containers shall be locked and secured except when persons responsible for the facility security are
present at the facility. Valves on empty storage containers need not be secured.
B. Inspection And Maintenance: Every secondary containment structure, storage container, appurtenance, mixing
and loading area should be visually inspected at least once a week and maintained as necessary to assure
compliance. A log of such inspection shall be kept.
C. Precipitation Accumulations:
1. Precipitation may not be permitted to accumulate in a secondary containment structure or mixing and loading
area to the point where the accumulation may tend to:
a. Impair the adequacy of the facility for discharge containment purposes.
b. Increase the corrosion of storage containers or appurtenances.
c. Impair the stability of storage containers.
d. Degrade the facility.
D. Site Closure And Discontinuance Of Operation:
1. The city must be notified of the permanent discontinuation of operations at any bulk pesticide storage facility
or mixing and loading area within seven (7) days of closure.
2. When a bulk pesticide storage facility is closed or operations are discontinued:
a. All pesticides, rinsates, wash waters and other materials containing pesticides shall be removed from the
facility site and utilized for the original intended purpose of the product.
b. The storage containers shall be thoroughly cleaned by triple rinsing or the equivalent. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 215/313
15.50.045: SITE PLAN DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
The facility shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal building codes and zoning requirements. (Ord. 7-
1992, 1992)
15.50.050: ENGINEER'S SEAL:
A. Bulk pesticide storage facilities and mixing and loading areas must be designed and constructed so as to meet
the requirements of the rules.
B. In order to comply with this section, said design must be signed and sealed by an engineer registered in the
State. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
15.50.055: EXPERIMENTAL PRACTICES:
A. To best aid the improvement of containment technology, the City shall allow containment processes or
techniques that satisfy the requirements of these rules and regulations although an engineer will not sign or seal
them; provided, the operator provides proof that the process or technique has a reasonable substantial chance
for success.
B. The experimental process or technique may continue for a maximum of two (2) years with an annual review by
the City. After two (2) years the process or technique must be signed and sealed by an engineer or discontinued.
C. If the technique or procedure fails or if during or at the conclusion of the two (2) years the experimental process
or technique is deemed unacceptable by the City (engineer), it shall be discontinued, and the operation must be
in compliance with these rules and regulations within two (2) years. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
15.50.060: EMERGENCY AND DISCHARGE RESPONSE PLAN:
Reference SARA title III. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
15.50.065: CONNECTIONS TO WATER SUPPLIES:
An air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed in the water
supply line that serves the facility. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
15.50.070: TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS:
Transportation of hazardous chemicals as defined by the Department of Transportation including anhydrous
ammonia and liquid pesticides and herbicides shall be limited to routes designated by the Office of the City Manager
of the City. Suppliers who are regulated by the provisions of this chapter shall be supplied with a map of such routes
and the City police for the City shall be charged with the enforcement of those routes. A party is deemed in violation
if he transports liquid fertilizers including anhydrous ammonia and liquid fertilizers and herbicides over any route not
authorized by the Office of the City Manager of the City. Any party in violation of this provision shall receive a
warning upon the first violation, and upon the second violation and any successive violation shall be fined the sum
of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 216/313
15.50.075: CONSTRUCTION OF NEW FACILITIES AND/OR REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING
FACILITIES WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS:
Any replacement of any facility within the City limits shall be done with compliance with these rules and regulations
and further, any replacement which shall be a larger operation than the previously existing operation shall be done
only upon prior approval by the City Council. Any new facility constructed within the City limits where no prior facility
existed shall be done only upon prior approval by the City Council regardless of the zoning status of the area upon
which said facility is to be placed. Such factors as the location of hospitals, schools, residential areas, convalescent
care homes, etc., shall be taken into consideration by the City Council in determining whether or not a larger facility
shall be placed where a prior facility existed or for the approval of a new facility. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
15.50.076: IMPLEMENTATION AND COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE:
A. All existing facilities which are governed by this title shall comply with the terms of this chapter within the
following time compliance schedule:
1. Liquid pesticides secondary containment by March 1, 1996.
2. Liquid pesticides mixing and loading areas by March 1, 1996.
3. Liquid fertilizer secondary containment by March 1, 1998.
4. Liquid fertilizer mixing and loading areas by March 1, 1998.
5. Dry pesticides storage/mixing and loading areas by March 1, 2000.
6. Dry fertilizer/mixing and loading areas by March 1, 2000.
7. Liquid fertilizer secondary containment for tanks equal to or greater than one hundred thousand (100,000)
gallons by March 1, 20031.
B. New facilities, modification of existing facilities or replacement of existing facilities, within the city limits shall
comply with all regulations contained within this chapter governing the designation of routes and the use of said
routes for the transportation of chemicals governed by this chapter shall not fall within the scope of this
compliance schedule but were effective upon the passing of ordinance 7 of series of 1992. All transportation
requirements contained within this chapter fall within this compliance schedule and are currently in effect.
C. These regulations do not apply to residential uses of fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides that do not require a
pesticide, herbicide applicator license to purchase. (Ord. 1-1993 §3, 1993)
15.50.080: APPEAL:
A person who is refused permission under this chapter shall be granted all rights of appeal pursuant to chapter
15.52 of this title. (Ord. 7-1992, 1992)
Chapter 15.51
VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS
15.51.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the procedures necessary to implement the provisions of article 68 of title
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 217/313
24, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. (Ord. 10-1999 §1, 1999)
15.51.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN: For all developments, the final approval step, irrespective of its title, which
occurs prior to building permit application; provided, however, that if the landowner wishes said approval to have the
effect of creating vested rights pursuant to article 68 of title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, the
landowner must so request at least ten (10) days prior to the date said approval is to be considered. Failure to so
request renders the approval not a "site specific development plan", and no vested rights shall be deemed to have
been created.
The city council may by agreement with the developer designate an approval other than those described
above to serve as the site specific development plan approval for a specific project.
VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT: The right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the
terms and conditions of a site specific development plan. (Ord. 10-1999 §1, 1999)
15.51.030: NOTICE AND HEARING:
No site specific development plan shall be approved until after a public hearing, preceded by written notice of such
hearing. Such notice may, at the city's option, be combined with the notice required by section 31-23-304, Colorado
Revised Statutes, as amended, for zoning regulations, or with any other requirednotice. At such hearing interested
persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 10-1999 §1, 1999)
15.51.040: APPROVAL; EFFECTIVE DATE; AMENDMENTS:
A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the city council approval
action relating thereto, as set forth in section 15.51.020 of this chapter. In the event amendments to a site specific
development are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a
vested property right, shall be the date of the approval of the original site specific development plan, unless the city
council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. (Ord. 10-
1999 §1, 1999)
15.51.050: NOTICE OF APPROVAL:
Each map, plat, or site plan or other document constituting a site specific development plan shall contain the
following language: "Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to article 68 of title 24,
Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended." Failure to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the
vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the specific
parcel or parcels of property affected and stating that a vested property right has been created shall be published
once, not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the site specific development plan, in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city. (Ord. 10-1999 §1, 1999)
15.51.060: PAYMENT OF COSTS:
In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this code, the applicant for approval of a site specific
development plan shall pay all costs occasioned to the city as a result of the site specific development plan review,
including publication of notices, public hearing and review costs. At the option of the city, these costs may be
imposed as a flat fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 10-1999 §1, 1999)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 218/313
15.51.070: OTHER PROVISIONS UNAFFECTED:
Approval of a site specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions
of this code pertaining to the development and use of property. (Ord. 10-1999 §1, 1999)
15.51.080: LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any vested propertyright, but only to implement the provisions of article
68 of title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. In the event of the repeal of said article or a judicial
determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, this chapter shall be deemed to be repealed, and the
provisions hereof no longer effective. (Ord. 10-1999 §1, 1999)
Title 16
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Chapter 16.01
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
16.01.010: PURPOSE:
A. In order to foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past, and in order to create eligibility for
State or Federal grant funds for the restoration, stabilization, and preservation of landmarks within the City of
Yuma that reflect outstanding elements of the City's cultural, artistic, social, economic, political, architectural,
historic or other heritage, a procedure for designating historic local landmarks within the City is needed.
B. The intent of this chapter is to create a reasonable balance between private property rights and the public interest
in preserving the City's unique historic character and culture. The intent is to provide incentives to preserve
historic and architecturally significant sites, buildings, structures, neighborhoods and districts by providing
guidelines for the appropriate use of land and the moving, demolition, reconstruction, restoration, or alteration of
such buildings, sites, and structures that comply with State and Federal historic preservation laws, thereby
making certain tax credits available to private property owners and making other benefits and incentives
available for preservation projects. (Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the
same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ALTERATION: Any proposed modification to a designated historic site or structure, which could have an effect on
the character of the historic resources relative to the criteria by which it was designated. Examples of alterations for
structures may include additions, any exterior modifications, including signage to be affixed to the facade.
ALTERATION CERTIFICATE: A certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission indicating its approval of
plans for the alteration, construction, restoration, removal or demolition of a designed structure or site.
CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION: A certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission authorizing
alteration, construction, restoration, removal or demolition of a structure even though an Alteration Certificate has
previously been denied.
COMMISSION: The Yuma Historic Preservation Commission.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 219/313
COMMISSIONER: A member of the Historic Preservation Commission.
COMPATIBLE: Consistent with, harmonious with and/or enhances the mixture of complementary architectural styles
either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures.
CONSTRUCTION: The act or process of adding an addition to an existing structure, the remodeling of an existing
structure, or the erection of a new structure.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a structure or site.
DESIGN GUIDELINES: A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the historic character of a structure or
site.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: The architectural style, design, general arrangement and components of
the outer surfaces of a structure, including but not limited to the color, texture, materials, type, size and style of all
windows, doors, roofs, lights, siding, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to the structure.
SITE: A location of a significant event, historic occupation or activity where the location itself maintains historical or
architectural value and significance to the community regardless of the value of any existing building or structure.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or near permanent location on
or in the ground, or attachment to something having permanent location on the ground. (Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.030: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
A. There is hereby created a Historic Preservation Commission, which shall have the principal responsibility for
matters involving historic structures, sites and districts as set forth in this chapter.
B. The commission shall consist of seven (7) regular members appointed by the City Council. To stagger the terms
of membership, the initial terms of membership shall consist of four (4) members to serve four (4) year terms
and three (3) members and the alternates to serve two (2) year terms. After the initial terms have expired, all
members shall serve four (4) year terms. The commission shall be composed of both professional and lay
members, and at least three (3) members shall be professionals in preservation-related disciplines, such as
architecture, landscape architecture, architectural history, archaeology, history, planning, or related disciplines
such as building trades, real estate, law, cultural geography, or cultural anthropology. If the required number of
professional members cannot be found to serve on the commission, this requirement may be waived until the
next vacancy occurs, at which time the City shall again diligently seek professional representation. In the case of
a lack of professional appointees, the commission may, with Council approval, be allowed to retain professional
consultants to advise the commission as necessary to fulfill its duties. Commission members shall be residents
of Yuma County or property owners within City of Yuma limits.
C. At its first meeting of each calendar year, the commission shall elect one Commissioner to serve as Chair to
preside over the meetings, and one Commissioner to serve as Vice-Chair. The Commissioners so designated
shall serve in these capacities for terms of one year, and may serve successive terms.
D. Commissioners may be removed for cause by the City Council.
E. The commission shall, by majority vote, elect an individual to serve as Secretary. The Secretary shall take
minutes of each meeting, be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the minutes, reports, and
decisions of the commission to its members, and give notice as provided by law of all public hearings conducted
by the commission. The Secretary shall also be responsible for transmitting minutes and any other required
reporting to the State Historic Preservation Office. (Ord. 1-2019, 2019: Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.040: MEETINGS OF THE COMMISSION:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 220/313
A. The commission shall meet at least quarterly, unless applications or other requests for action are pending, in
which case the commission shall meet at least monthly.
B. A majority of the number of currently appointed regular board members shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is
not present, then the Chair of the commission may set a new date for a special hearing, or the matters
scheduled for that hearing shall be heard on the next regularly scheduled hearing date.
C. The commission shall act only at properly noticed meetings.
D. No Commissioner shall vote on any matter that may materially or apparently affect the property, income, or
business interest of that Commissioner.
E. The Chair, and in his absence the Vice-Chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
F. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. Minutes shall be kept of all commission proceedings,
and sent to the State Historic Preservation Office upon approval.
G. The commission may adopt bylaws and other administrative guidelines to govern the conduct of its meetings,
which shall be made available to the public.
H. At least one commission member must attend a History Colorado approved educational or training event each
year. (Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.050: POWERS OF THE COMMISSION:
A. To propose for adoption criteria for review of historic resources and for review of proposals to alter, demolish, or
move designated resources, that are in addition to and consistent with the criteria set forth in this chapter.
B. To adopt its own procedural regulations.
C. To conduct an ongoing survey to identify properties, structures and areas that are culturally, architecturally and/or
historically significant to the City, County, State or Nation.
D. To keep a register of all properties, structures, and areas that have been designated as structures or sites.
E. To hold public hearings for reviewing applications for construction, alteration, restoration, removal or demolition
affecting proposed or designated structures or sites.
F. To issue or deny Alteration Certificates and Certificates of Exemption.
G. To adopt criteria and specific design guidelines for review of historic resources and for review of proposals to
alter, restore, demolish or move designated structures and/or resources.
H. To review structures, resources and areas nominated for designation as a structure or site.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 221/313
I. To encourage the registration with the State Register of Historic Properties.
J. To advise and assist owners of designated structures or sites on physical and financial aspects of preservation,
renovation, restoration and rehabilitation, including nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.
K. To develop and assist in public education programs, including but not limited to walking tours, brochures, lectures
and conferences.
L. To advise the City Council on matters related to preserving the overall historic character of the City.
M. To actively pursue financial assistance for historic preservation programs.
N. To testify before all boards and commissions, including the Board of Adjustment, on any matter affecting a
designated structure or site.
O. To prepare an annual report of the commission's activities for the State Historic Preservation Office, including at
a minimum the number and types of cases reviewed and their dispositions, new designations made, progress on
survey activities, education activities, and credentials of new commission members and staff, if any.
P. To fulfill any other duties required by State and Federal law in order to qualify the City as a certified local
government (CLG). (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.060: PROCEDURES:
A. Nominations for designations shall be made to the City on forms provided by the City and may be submitted by
the commission or a citizen. Nominations for historic structures or sites must contain the written approval of all
current owners of record. Nominations for historic districts shall have written approval of at least seventy five
percent (75%) of property owners within the proposed boundaries of the district.
B. Once the nomination is deemed completed by City staff, the commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposal no more than sixty (60) days after the determination of completeness.
C. Notice of the public hearing before the commission shall be published and posted on the property subject to the
nomination fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. Posting for a historic district nomination shall be at street
intersections within the boundaries of the proposed district. Further, for district nominations, written notice shall
be sent by first class mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to all property owners whose property is
contained within the proposed district.
D. The commission may continue the hearing from time to time as necessary to gather all relevant evidence to
make its recommendation. The commission shall consider the subject property's conformance with the
purposes, standards, and criteria of this chapter.
E. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the commission, by resolution, shall either
approve, modify and approve, or deny the nomination and shall issue written findings in accordance with and
after considering the criteria as set forth in this chapter. The resolution may also indicate alterations that would
have a significant impact upon, or be potentially detrimental to, the historic structure, site or district. The owner
or owners of the property nominated or included in the district shall be notified of the commission's decision.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 222/313
F. The resolution, approving or modifying and approving a nomination, shall be recorded with the Yuma County
Clerk and Recorder no sooner than thirty (30) days from the effective date of the resolution. As soon as possible,
the staff shall send a copy of the recorded resolution to all property owners in a designated district or the owner
of the designated structure or site. Resolutions denying a nomination need not be recorded.
G. A structure or site designated as historic or a structure located within a historic district shall retain that
designation in perpetuity, unless the structure or site has lost its historic character or the designation has been
otherwise revoked pursuant this chapter.
H. A decision of the commission may be appealed to the City Council in writing within twenty (20) days of the date
of the commission's decision. If an appeal is timely received, the commission's resolution as described in
subsection F of this section, shall not be recorded until City Council has rendered a decision on the appeal.
Appeals to City Council shall be processed as provided for in section 16.01.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 1-2018,
2018)
16.01.070: CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION - STRUCTURES AND SITES:
A. The commission will consider the following criteria in reviewing nominations of structures and sites for historic
designation:
1. Properties receiving historic designations shall be at least fifty (50) years old, except as otherwise provided
herein, and possess architectural, social, or geographical/environmental importance by meeting at least one or
more of the following:
a. Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period;
b. Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, Statewide,
regionally, or locally;
c. Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value;
d. Represents an innovation in construction, materials, or design;
e. Represents a style particularly associated with the City of Yuma/Yuma County area;
f. Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history;
g. Represents a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one of the above criteria;
h. Is the site of a historic event that had an effect upon society;
i. Exemplifies cultural, political, economic, or social heritage of the community;
j. Represents an association with a notable person or the work of a notable person;
k. Represents a typical example/association with a particular ethnic group;
l. Represents a unique example of an event in Yuma's history;
m. Enhances sense of identity of the community;
n. Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community;
o. Properties that have yielded or may be likely to yield, information important in history or prehistory; or
p. If the property is less than fifty (50) years old, must demonstrate overwhelming historic significance.
B. Any site listed on the State or National Register of Historic Places shall be deemed to qualify for local designation
under this chapter, but shall not be locally designated until an application for nomination is filed and processed
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 223/313
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.080: CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION - DISTRICTS:
A. Historic districts must comply with the criteria in section 16.01.070 of this chapter and be related by a pattern of
either physical elements or social activities. Significance is determined by applying criteria in this chapter to the
patterns and unifying elements.
B. Properties that do not contribute to the significance of the historic district may be included within the boundaries,
as long as the noncontributing elements do not noticeably detract from the district's sense of time, place, and
historic development. Noncontributing elements will be evaluated for their magnitude of impact by considering
their size, scale, design, location, or information potential. (Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.090: ALTERATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
A. No Changes Without Certificate: No persons shall cause or permit to be caused on a designated structure or
feature, any construction, alteration, restoration, removal or demolition of a structure or other designated feature
without first obtaining an Alteration Certificate for the proposed work from the commission.
B. No Building Permits Issued Without Certificate: The Building Department shall not issue a building permit for
work on designated structures or features until an Alteration Certificate or Exemption Certificate has been
obtained by the property owner.
C. Filing An Application: An application for any construction, alteration, or demolition of a structure or other
designated feature of a site must be filed with the commission on a form provided by the commission.
D. Application Review: The commission shall consider the application and determine whether the proposal
preserves the criteria for which the structure or site was designated, or adds to the architectural, cultural or
historical significance of the structure or site. The commission shall make its review pursuant to the procedures
in section 16.01.070 of this chapter.
E. Criteria To Review Alteration Certificate Application: In reviewing a proposed alteration, the commission shall
consider the project in terms such as design, finish, material, scale, mass and height and if the alteration is
compatible with the designation. The commission will use the following criteria to determine compatibility of a
proposed alteration:
1. The effect upon the general historical and architectural character of the structure and property;
2. The architectural style, arrangement, texture and material used on the existing and proposed structures and
their relation and compatibility with other structures;
3. The size of the structure, its setbacks, its site, location and the appropriateness thereof, when compared to
the existing structure and the site;
4. The compatibility of accessory structures and fences with the main structure on the site, and with other
structures;
5. The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying, or otherwise impacting the exterior
architectural features of the structure upon which such work is done;
6. The condition of existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to public health and safety;
7. The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of the property;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 224/313
8. The ability to comply with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines of
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, a section of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation
Projects, of the Department of the Interior Regulations (36 CFR part 67, Historic Preservation Certificates), as
may be amended from time to time; and
9. Guidance provided by the National Park Service Historic Preservation Briefs, as the same may exist from time
to time.
F. Alteration Certificate Approved: If an Alteration Certificate is approved, the designated property will retain its
historic designation.
G. Alteration Certificate Denied: If an Alteration Certificate is denied, the affected property owner may appeal the
commission's decision by filing a written appeal with the City Council within twenty (20) days of the commission's
decision and pursuant to the procedures in section 16.01.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.100: CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION:
A. If an Alteration Certification is denied or the property owner cannot comply with the recommendations from the
commission for changes necessary for the issuance of an Alteration Certificate, the owner may make application
for a Certificate of Exemption.
B. Application for a Certificate of Exemption shall be made on a form prepared by the commission. The commission
shall schedule a public hearing and provide notice as outlined in subsection 16.01.060C of this chapter.
C. The commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a Certificate of Exemption:
1. The cost of the proposed construction, alteration, restoration, or demolition, and the estimated additional cost,
if any, of complying with the recommendations of the commission for changes necessary for the issuance of
an Alteration Certificate;
2. A report from a licensed engineer or architect concerning the structural soundness of any structures on the
property and their suitability for rehabilitation;
3. The estimated market value of the property in its current condition, after completion of the proposed work,
after any changes in the proposed work recommended by the commission, and in the case of a demolition,
after renovation of the property for other uses;
4. The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, the party from whom the property was purchased, and
the relationship, if any, between the applicant and the person from whom the property was purchased;
5. If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income and itemized operating and maintenance
expenses from the property for the previous two (2) years;
6. The remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property;
7. Any appraisals of property value obtained by the applicant or property owner within the previous two (2) years;
8. Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, during the previous two (2)
years;
9. The Real Estate Taxes on the property for the previous two (2) years; and
10. Any other information that may be relevant for the commission's consideration of the application.
D. The commission shall review the evidence and testimony presented and issue written findings and conclusions
within forty five (45) days of receipt of the application. If a Certificate of Exemption is granted, the applicant may
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 225/313
proceed with the construction, alteration, restoration, removal or demolition without further delay imposed by this
chapter.
E. If a Certificate of Exemption is denied, the affected property owner may appeal the commission's decision by
filing a written appeal with the City Council within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of the commission's
decision. (Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.110: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
A. Filing Written Notice Of Appeal: Any person may appeal to the City Council any final decision of the commission
in relation to this chapter, by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The notice of appeal shall be
filed with the City Clerk no later than twenty (20) days after the decision from which appeal is taken. Upon
receipt of the notice of appeal required by subsection B of this section, the City Clerk shall schedule the item for
a City Council meeting. Publication and posting shall be required per subsection 16.01.060C of this chapter. The
City Council shall hold a public hearing on appeals from the commission upon the date so scheduled.
B. Submittal Requirements For Review Of An Appeal Of A Historic Preservation Commission Decision: In the
written notice, the appellant must substantiate the following:
1. Identify the explicit code provisions which are in dispute; and
2. Explanation of why the Historic Preservation Commission decision is incorrect based on the criteria applicable
to the nomination.
C. Criteria For Review Of An Appeal Of A Historic Preservation Commission Decision:
1. Code was interpreted or applied erroneously; and
2. Granting the appeal is not a detriment to public health, safety or welfare.
D. Stays Of Historic Preservation Commission Decisions: A perfected appeal shall operate as a stay of the
commission's decision unless determined otherwise by City Council.
E. City Council Powers On Appeals: The City Council shall have the power to affirm, reverse or modify the action of
the commission. The City Council shall limit its consideration to matters raised on appeal, and shall hear no
substantial new evidence from that presented to the commission. If the City Council determines additional
evidence is needed, it shall remand the matter back to the commission for further hearing and consideration.
F. City Council Decision: If City Council affirms the decision of the commission, the resolution passed by the
commission shall be recorded, pursuant to subsection 16.01.060F of this chapter, no earlier than thirty (30) days
after Council's decision. If City Council reverses the decision of the commission, City Council shall adopt a
resolution in conformity with subsection 16.01.060E of this chapter. Such resolution shall be recorded, as
applicable, pursuant to subsection 16.01.060F of this chapter. (Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
16.01.120: REVOCATION OF DESIGNATION:
A. If a structure or special feature on a designated site has been altered in such a way so as to negate the features
necessary to retain designation, the owner may apply to the commission for a revocation of the designation. The
commission, by resolution, shall approve, modify and approve, or deny the application under the procedures
outlined in section 16.01.060 of this chapter. The resolution shall be recorded with the Yuma County Clerk and
Recorder no sooner than thirty (30) days after the decision.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 226/313
B. Revocation of the designation shall be the only enforcement and penalty recourse for a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1-2018, 2018)
Title 17
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.01.101: TITLE:
An ordinance and map establishing zoning districts in Yuma, Colorado, regulating the location, height, bulk and size
of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot which may be occupied; the size of lots, courts and other
open space; the density and distribution of population; and the location and use of land for residential, trade,
industrial, recreational or other purposes. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.01.102: SHORT TITLE:
For the purpose of brevity, this title and map shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF YUMA and may be
so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.01.103: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This title is necessary, designed, and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City by lessening congestion in the streets and roads; securing
safety from fire and other damages; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding
undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks and other public requirements; fostering the City's industries; and protecting urban and rural development.
(Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.01.104: AUTHORITY:
This title is authorized by Colorado Revised Statutes article 23, chapter 31 and article II, section 2.2 of the Charter
of the City, and is hereby declared to be in accordance with all provisions of these statutes and this charter. (Ord. 4-
1995 §2, 1995)
17.01.105: SCOPE AND JURISDICTION:
This title applies within the territorial jurisdiction of the City as now and hereinafter established, according to the
following conditions:
A. The provisions of this title shall be uniformly interpreted and applied as the minimum requirements for the
protection of the public health, morals, safety, and general welfare;
B. This title does not repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with any building permit, certificate of
occupancy, variance, or other lawful permit issued and in full force and effect on the effective date of this title.
Further, this title shall not affect any lawfully created easement, covenant, or private agreement;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 227/313
C. Any approved site plan and attendant terms, covenants, and conditions applicable to such plans as of the
effective date of this title shall continue to apply and control the use or occupation of such land. However, any
proposed change or modification in the use or occupation of such land or in the approved site plan shall be
made in accordance with the standards and procedures of this title. (Ord. 20-1996 §15, 1996: Ord. 4-1995 §2,
1995)
17.01.106: APPLICATION AND COMPLIANCE:
Except as provided for in this title, the following provisions shall apply:
A. Conformity With District Regulations: No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with all
the regulations applicable to the district in which it is to be located; nor shall a yard, lot, parcel, or open space be
reduced in dimensions or area to an amount less than the minimum requirements of the applicable districts
herein set forth;
B. Meeting Requirements: No part of a lot area, open space, off street parking area, parcel, or yard required by or in
connection with any building, structure, or use for the purpose of complying with this title may be included in
whole or as a part of meeting similar requirements for any other building, structure, or use;
C. Permit Required: An approved zoning compliance permit must be presented at the time a building permit is
requested in order to verify that the minimum bulk, use, and dimensional requirements of the district in which the
building permit is sought are being met. The listing of uses allowed and regulations governing the various
districts established herein may be amended by the City Council pursuant to chapter 17.04 of this title;
D. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this title. Each day that a violation
of this title continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be unlawful and punishable as
such;
E. Legal Action: In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, maintained or used or any land is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this title or any
amendment thereof, the City Council, the City Attorney, or any owner of real estate within the City, in addition to
other remedies provided by law, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
maintenance or use. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.01.107: CONFLICT:
Whenever these requirements are at variance with the requirements of any other legally adopted rules, regulations,
statutes, resolutions, or ordinances covering any of the same subject matter, the one which is the most restrictive or
which requires higher standards shall apply. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.01.108: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this title is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to that provision or provisions which are expressly stated to be invalid. All other
provisions of this title shall remain in full force and effect.
If the application of any provision of this title to any lot, building, other structure or tract of land is declared to be
invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the effect of such decision shall be limited to that lot,
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 228/313
building, other structure or tract of land immediately involved in the action or proceeding in which the judgment or
decree of invalidity was rendered. Such decision shall not affect, impair, or nullify this title or the application of any
provision thereof to any other lot, building, other structure or tract of land. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.01.109: FEES:
Any application for an amendment, conditional use, permit, or any other application or certificate within the scope of
this title shall be accompanied by a fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by the City Council. (Ord. 20-2018,
2018)
17.01.110: PUBLIC INSPECTION OF ORDINANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
17.01.111: REPEALER:
All ordinances or other codes of the City inconsistent herewith to the extent of the inconsistency, and no further, are
hereby repealed. The repeal of the above mentioned ordinances or codes does not revive any other ordinance or
code. Such repeals shall not affect or prevent the prosecution and punishment of any person for violation of any
ordinance or code repealed hereby for any offense committed prior to the repeal. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
Chapter 17.02
ZONING DISTRICTS
17.02.201: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The location and boundaries of the districts established in this title are shown upon the official zoning map of Yuma
which is incorporated into this title. The zoning map and all subsequent amendments shall be as much a part of this
title as if fully set forth and described herein. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.02.202: ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The district boundary lines on the zoning map are intended to follow lot lines or centerlines of streets, alleys,
railroads or other natural barriers. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.02.203: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
Regarding the boundaries of any use district shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed
to follow such centerlines;
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed to follow such lines;
C. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to follow the midpoint of the railroad right-ofway;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 229/313
D. Boundaries indicated as following the Municipal limits shall be construed as following Municipal limits;
E. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
F. Where existing physical features conflict with features shown on the official zoning map, or in circumstances not
covered in subsections A through E of this section, the City Council shall interpret the boundaries;
G. Where a lot is divided by a zoning district boundary line at the time of enactment of this title, the less restrictive
zoning requirements may be extended within the lot with the more restrictive zoning requirements for a distance
of not more than twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.02.204: CHANGES TO THE ZONING MAP:
Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance and shall be reflected on the official zoning
map. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.02.205: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the intent, purpose and provisions of this title, the City is hereby divided into the following
zoning districts:
A-1 Agricultural District
R-1 Residential Single-Family District
R-2 Residential Single-Family and Two-Family District
R-3 Residential District
C-1 Commercial Central Business District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
I-1 Industrial Park District
I-2 Wholesale Warehouse District
AID Airport Influence District
MH Mobile Home Parks
(Ord. 1-2001 §1, 2001: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
Chapter 17.03
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
17.03.301: RULES:
The following rules shall apply in interpreting this title unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 230/313
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular, and
words in the present tense shall include the past.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is discretionary and not mandatory.
D. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and "parcel".
E. The word "building" shall include all structures of every kind.
F. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied
for".
G. The word "council" is the mayor and the council. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.03.302: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE: A building or use which: a) is subordinate to and separate from and serves a
principal building or principal use; b) is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or use served;
c) is located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or use. Accessory uses or buildings include, but are
not limited to, the following:
A. Home occupations;
B. Household pets;
C. Satellite dishes;
D. Private swimming pools;
E. Greenhouses;
F. Storage sheds;
G. Garages, automobile parking;
H. Storage of trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, snow vehicles, and other similar recreational vehicles
located in rear yard.
ADDITION: An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
ADULT BUSINESS: A commercial establishment having as a principal activity an adult business. "Principal activity"
is a use accounting for twenty percent (20%) or more of the business's stock in trade, display space, floor space or
movie display time per month for adult activities characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to the following exposed bodily parts: buttocks, genitals, pubic area or female breasts. Intended to include
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 231/313
massage parlors as defined by state statute.
ADULT DAYCARE: Both health and social services provided on a regularly scheduled basis (less than 24 hours) in
an environment to ensure optimal functioning of the client. Adult daycare is further defined as follows:
A. Maintenance Model: One which provides services in health monitoring and individual and group therapeutic
and psychological activities which serve as an alternative to long term nursing care.
B. Restorative Model: One which provides intensive health supportive services prescribed to serve as an
alternative to rehabilitation hospitalization.
Note: State rules and regulations governing adult daycare facilities may be amended from time to time and
must be complied with before a facility shall be licensed.
ADVERTISING SIGN: See definition of Sign.
ALLEY: A minor public way which is used primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the rear of or side of
properties otherwise abutting a street.
ALTERATION: See definition of Structural Alteration.
ARCADE: A commercial establishment having as a principal activity electronic games, pinball machines and video
games. "Principal activity" is a use accounting for twenty percent (20%) or more of the business's floor space for
electronic games, pinball machines and video games.
ASSISTED LIVING: A facility which provides room and board, personal care, and homemaker, social and health
services to the aged or infirm.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: See definition of Gasoline ServiceStation.
AWNINGS: A structure which may overhang a public or private pedestrian walkway to provide protection from the
elements.
BLOCK: A piece of land usually bounded on all sides by streets or other transportation routes such as railroad lines,
or by physical barriers such as water bodies or public open space and not traversed by a through street.
BOARDING, LODGING, ROOMING, OR TOURIST HOME: A dwelling other than a motel or hotel in which
accommodations with or without meals are provided for not more than four (4) guests, exclusive of the occupant's
family, for compensation.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The amount of land covered or permitted to be covered by a building usually measured in
terms of percentage of lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the established grade elevation to the highest point of the coping of
a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped
roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of the
structure:
A. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five foot (5') horizontal distance of
the exterior wall of the structure when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet (10') above
lowest grade;
B. An elevation ten feet (10') higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in
subsection A of this definition is more than ten feet (10') above lowest grade. The height of a stepped or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 232/313
terraced structure is the maximum height of any segment of the structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A structure which contains the main or principal use of the lot and which does not meet the
definition of "accessory structure or use".
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: A structure not permanently attached to a foundation during the construction of a
permanent structure on the same site for a period not exceeding one year.
BULK: The term used to indicate size, setback, and location of structures with respect to each other on a single
zoning lot, including the following specifications:
A. Size of structures;
B. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or other structures;
C. Gross floor area of structures in relation to a lot area;
D. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
CAMPER: See definition of travel trailer.
CAMPER TRAILER: See definition of travel trailer.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Official certification that a premises conforms to provisions of this title, Building
Code and all other applicable City ordinances, and may be used or occupied. Such a certificate is granted for new
construction or for alteration or additions to existing structures. Unless such a certificate is issued, a structure
cannot be occupied.
CLINIC: An institution associated with a hospital or medical school that deals mainly with outpatients or a medical
institution run by several specialists working cooperatively.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons which owns or leases a building, or portion
thereof, and uses such structures by members and their guests only.
COMMERCIAL ZONES: Zoning districts designated for commercial uses including C-1 and C-2 on the Yuma zoning
map.
COMMON WALL: A wall which physically binds together two (2) or more units or spaces within the same building
which are owned or occupied by separate interests.
COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN: A document approved by the City Council and which may include, among
other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, parks, playgrounds, airports, and other public
spaces; the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned; the
general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and the extent and
layout of the replanning of blighted areas.
CONDITIONAL USE: The use of land, structure, or both that may be allowed with conditions deemed necessary
upon approval of the City Council.
CONDOMINIUM: An individual air space unit together with the interest in the common elements appurtenant to
such unit.
CONSTRUCTION, NEW: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
this title.
CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street terminating in a vehicular turnaround area.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 233/313
DENSITY: A measure of the number of dwelling units or principal buildings per acre allowed in each zone district.
"Gross density" is the maximum allowable density in each zone and is calculated by dividing the total number of
dwellings or buildings by the overall site acreage, not including streets or public ways.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or to unimproved real estate including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial establishment arranged so that traffic circulates on site, and some or all
patrons may remain in their vehicles.
DWELLING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering human habitation.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME, SPECIAL PURPOSE: A mobile home of any class, which is used to support the use
of certain property for schools, churches, hospitals, and nursing homes. For the purpose of this definition, the
mobile home shall not be considered an additional principal building as pertains to section 17.06.607.3 of this title.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building used exclusively for three (3) or more families living independently in separate
dwelling units with common walls but not including motels, hotels, and resorts.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building used exclusively for one family and containing one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A building used exclusively for two (2) families and containing two (2)
separate dwelling units separated by a common wall on a single lot.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms connected together which may be in the same building but which constitute a
physically separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental, or lease; but not
including hotels, motels, structures not attached to permanent foundations, or units not constructed in full
compliance with the Building Code as adopted by the City of Yuma.
EASEMENT: A right given by the owner of land to another party for specific limited use of that land.
EXTENSION: An increase in the amount of existing use within an existing building or an increase in one area of
land occupied or developed to a use.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or a group of not
more than four (4) persons who are not related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, living together in a dwelling
unit.
FENCE: A structure of fencing material and/or plants used to enclose any lot or part of a lot with the purpose and
intent of preventing passage or causing privacy.
FIFTY FOOT LINE OF SIGHT CLEARANCE: The triangular area formed by: a) the lines extending from any corner
of a corner lot adjacent to two (2) intersecting public roadways to a distance of fifty feet (50') along both curb lines
from the corner (constituting 2 sides); and b) the diagonal connecting such lines (constituting the third side).
FINAL PLAT: A map or chart of the subdivision, which shows boundaries of said lots, tracts or parcels and original
parcel from which they were created, as a result of a monumented land survey.
FLEA MARKET: The sale of merchandise by several businesses as part of an open market operation. Approved as
a conditional use only.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waves and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOR AREA, MINIMUM: The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof,
exclusive of vent shafts, courts, basement and additional floors, but including garages. The floor area of a structure,
or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal
projection of the roof or floor above.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 234/313
GARAGE, MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR AND SERVICE: A business establishment used for repair, rebuilding,
reconstruction, painting, inside storage, and/or servicing of vehicles which includes towing and wrecker service, but
which does not include the storage or dismantling of wrecked motor vehicles or storage of junk.
GARAGE SALE: A retail sale conducted by the occupant of a single-family residence, or mobile home, or the
owner/manager of a multi-family residence, or several families together. No garage sale shall be held longer than a
seventy two (72) hour period and no property shall be the site of a garage sale more than one time per month.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION: A structure or property on or in which the principal use is the retail sale of
gasoline, oil or other fuel for motor vehicles and which may include, as an incidental use, the retail sale and
installation of vehicle accessories, the making of minor repairs, and facilities for washing and servicing of not more
than three (3) vehicles if completely enclosed in a structure.
GRADE: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground paving or sidewalk within the area
between the structure and the property line, or when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building
between the structure and a line five feet (5') from the structure.
GROUP HOME: No more than eight (8) nonrelated persons living together in a dwelling unit with an adult(s) acting
as surrogate parent(s), guardian(s), or caretaker residing on the premises.
HOME OCCUPATION: An activity for gain conducted within a dwelling (or building or structure), carried on by the
inhabitants of said dwelling and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes. Additional regulations governing home occupations are located in chapter 17.06 of this title.
HOSPITAL: A building used for the diagnosis, treatment and care of human ailments, but not including medical
clinics, rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and retirement homes.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building or group of buildings containing guestrooms designed to be rented for temporary
occupancy on a transient basis for compensation but not meeting the definition of Boarding, Lodging, Rooming, Or
Tourist Home.
INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS: For purposes of further defining industrial and business
operations, the following terms have the following meanings:
Extraction: Removal of physical matter in a solid, liquid, or gaseous state from its naturally occurring location;
the initial step in the utilization of a natural resource.
Manufacture/Fabrication: Change in the physical shape of matter; the final step in the utilization of a natural
resource.
Material: The substance or substances out of which a thing is or may be constructed or manufactured.
Processing: Change in the physical state or chemical composition of matter; the second step in the utilization
of a natural resource.
Repair: Restoration of a damaged or nonoperating object to its original physical shape or operational function.
Storage: The retention and safekeeping of goods in a warehouse or depository, including open storage.
INDUSTRIAL ZONES: Zoning districts designated for industrial uses including I-1 and I-2 on the Yuma zoning map.
JUNKYARD AND RECYCLING FACILITIES: An area where scrap metal, paper, rags, tires and/or used materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, disassembled or handled, orwhere machinery or motor
vehicles not in running condition are collected, dismantled, stored, or sold for parts. Any use conducted entirely
within an enclosed building is not a junkyard.
KENNEL: Any building, structure, or open space devoted wholly or partly to the raising, breeding, or harboring of
four (4) or more animals that are more than four (4) months old.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 235/313
LIVESTOCK: Any goat, sheep, swine, cattle, buffalo, cattalo, horse, mule, ass, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens,
domestic fowl, or alternative livestock as defined in section 35-41.5-102(1), Colorado Revised Statutes, as
amended.
LOADING BERTH: A space for truck traffic to maneuver on private property to utilize the loading dock.
LOT: Any continuous parcel of land legally defined by survey abutting a dedicated public way, except that a lot in a
residential district need not abut a dedicated public way where access is provided by reservation, deed, covenant,
or contract. Types of lots:
Corner Lot: A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street
and where, in either case, the interior angle formed by the intersection of street lines does not exceed one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with one frontage on a street other than the alley.
Reversed Corner Lot: A corner lot having its side street line substantially a continuation of the front lot line of
the first lot to its rear.
Through Lot: A lot which has public streets adjoining both front and back lot lines.
LOT AREA: The horizontal area of the lot exclusive of any area in a street or recorded way open to public use. The
lot area required for zoning compliance shall be land other than that under any water body or wetland. Lot area shall
be calculated on a square footage basis with an acre equaling forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560)
square feet.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of total lot area covered by structures, roofs, and/or used for vehicular access
and storage.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot fronting upon and providing rights of access to a dedicated street. Lot
frontage shall be measured continuously along only one street.
LOT LINE: The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
Front Lot Line: The line separating the lot from the street on the narrow side.
Rear Lot Line: The line opposite the front lot line.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot for which a recorded plat or deed shows that it was owned separately and individually from
adjoining tracts of land at a time when the recording of a lot of such area, depth and width in the same location
would not have been prohibited by the ordinance in effect at the time.
LOT WIDTH: The distance parallel to the front lot line measured between side lot lines through that part of the
building or structure where the lot is narrowest.
MANUFACTURED HOME: See definition of mobile home: mobile home, Class A.
MOBILE HOME: For the purposes of construction inspection and certification, a structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is eight feet (8') or more in width and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling without permanent foundation when connected to required utilities and has the plumbing,
heating, and electrical systems contained therein.
Mobile Home, Class A: New mobile homes certified as meeting the manufactured home construction and
safety standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and approved as meeting
"acceptable similarity" appearance standards.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 236/313
"Acceptable similarity" defined:
A. Is partially or entirely manufactured in a factory.
B. Is not less than twenty eight feet (28') in width and forty feet (40') in length.
C. Is installed on an engineered permanent foundation.
D. Has brick, wood, or cosmetically equivalent exterior siding.
E. Has a minimum roof pitch of four to twelve (4:12).
F. Is certified pursuant to the "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974", 42 USC 5401 et seq., as amended.
The standards for acceptable similarity will be enforced by the City Manager or designee.
Mobile Home, Class B: New mobile homes certified as meeting HUD manufactured home construction and
safety standards, but not approved as meeting "acceptable similarity" appearance standards. Must be a
minimum of twenty four feet (24') in width and thirty six feet (36') in length.
Mobile Home, Class C: New mobile homes certified as meeting acceptable prior code or codes, or used
mobile homes certified as meeting either the HUD standards specified above or such prior code, found on
inspection to be safe and fit for residential occupancy. Must be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in width and
thirty six feet (36') in length.
Mobile Home, Class D, E: Used mobile homes, whether or not certified as meeting HUD or prior codes, found
on inspection to be safe and fit for residential occupancy.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land which has been planned, designated and developed for long term
residential use and intended for rent or lease exclusively for mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME PARK PERMIT: A permit granted under this title by the City Council, after review by the City
Manager; authorizing the operation, establishment, installation, or expansion of a mobile home park. This permit is
in addition to and not in lieu of building permits that may be required for construction, alteration or expansion of a
mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME, PERMANENT ADDITION: Any structural extension from any portion of a mobile home, not
including temporary canvas or aluminum awning.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A parcel of ground within a mobile home park designed for accommodation of a mobile
home dwelling together with accessory structures.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A parcel of land which has been subdivided into lots, designated and developed for
long term residential use and intended for sale where the residences are comprised of mobile homes.
MODULAR HOME: A manufactured, factory or site assembled structure designed as a dwelling unit or units to be
placed upon a permanent foundation constructed in accordance with the building code adopted by the city of Yuma,
Colorado, and meeting acceptable similarity standards.
MOTOR HOME: See definition of Travel Trailer.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: Includes any legally existing structure which does not conform to the applicable
regulations of the zoning district in which such "nonconforming building" is located, either at the effective date of this
title or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this title.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A legally created lot not conforming to current lot areas or requirements resulting from
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 237/313
subsequent adoption or amendment of such requirements.
NONCONFORMING USE: Includes any legally existing use whether within a structure or on a tract of land which
does not conform to the use regulations of this title for the zoning district in which such nonconforming use is
located either at the effective date of this title or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated
into this title.
NURSING HOME; CONVALESCENT HOME: An establishment with continuous day and night facilities providing
room and board, personal service, and nursing care for the aged or infirm.
OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.
OFF STREET PARKING: Any parking area surfaced with gravel, concrete or asphalt located wholly within the limits
of one or more lots.
OPEN SPACE: Land that is intentionally left free of development for recreation, resource protection, amenities,
aesthetics, hazard avoidance, or buffering purposes and that is protected by the provisions of this and/or other
ordinances to ensure that such lands remain in such uses. Any development which is necessary to or customarily
associated with open space uses shall be permitted only upon compliance with the provisions of this and other
governing ordinances.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The storage of materials, equipment, or commodities exterior of a walled structure. Such
materials, equipment or commodities shall not include operable vehicles such as those stored as part of a new or
used car lot or a parking lot.
PARK: Land retained in an open condition for recreational use which may be improved with facilities associated with
outdoor recreational activities. All facilities shall be built and maintained by either a unit of government, by a
nonprofit corporation, or by private interest(s) as a part of a larger subdivision or development of land for use by the
inhabitants thereof. Ownership of the land may be deeded or reserved to a property owners' association or it may
be dedicated to the public.
PETROLEUM AND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT FUEL PRODUCTION, DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE: The
production of fuel from petroleum and agricultural sources, to include the manufacturing, storage and distribution of
ingredients, products and byproducts.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The map of a proposed subdivision and specified supporting materials, drawn and submitted
in accordance with the requirements of adopted regulations, to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed
engineering and design.
PRESCHOOL: Educational facilities for any children not old enough to be in kindergarten.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: An office for professions, such as physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers,
artists, designers, teachers, musicians, accountants, and others, who through training are qualified to perform
services of a professional nature and where no storage or sales of merchandise exists.
PROJECTIONS (Into Yards): Parts of structures such as architectural features which are exempted to a specified
amount from the "yard" requirements of the zoning ordinance. This refers to bay windows, eaves, uncovered
porches, and chimneys.
PUBLIC BUILDING OR USE: Any structure open to the general use, participation, or enjoyment of the public and
used by the Municipality, County, State, or Federal government, or any subdivision thereof.
PUBLIC NOTICE: A legal notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and/or mailed to property owners
and interested parties which informs the public of the date, time, place, items of discussion and their location, where
pertinent, which are to be acted upon in a public hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Those facilities customarily utilized by a public utility corporation, municipality, or municipal
authority such as substations, pumping stations, reservoirs and transmission lines.
REPLAT: The platting of a previously platted subdivision where lot lines are adjusted but where easements and
public dedicated property lines remain unaltered.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 238/313
RESIDENTIAL ZONES: Zoning districts designated for residential uses, including R-1, R-2, and R-3 on the Yuma
zoning map.
RETIREMENT HOME: An establishment used as a multiple dwelling residence for retired persons in separate
dwelling units with limited accessory services such as recreation and other common facilities, but not including
nursing or hospital care.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Land set aside for use as a street, alley, or space for utility lines.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured
and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or
receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to
include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, satellite dishes, and satellite
microwave antennas.
SCHOOLS, COLLEGES: A public or private institution of higher learning (beyond grade 12) providing courses as
approved by the Colorado Department of Education or licensed by any agency of the State of Colorado.
SCHOOLS, COMMERCIAL: A building or group of buildings where instruction is given to pupils in arts, crafts, or
trades, and operated as a commercial enterprise as distinguished from schools endowed and/or supported by
taxation.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC, PRIVATE, AND PAROCHIAL: A school for any grades between kindergarten and twelfth
teaching accredited courses of instruction as approved by the Colorado department of education.
SETBACK: The distance between any property line and wall or support of structure not to include projections;
however, no projection shall be over a property line. Setbacks are not applicable for fences except where
specifically indicated.
SIGN: Any device for visual communication which is intended to, or in fact does, direct attention of the public
whether by means of words, letters, trademarks, pictures, designs, objects, or by any other means.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse, sludge of sewage disposal plants, and other discarded solid materials resulting
from industrial, commercial, and community activities, but does not include agricultural waste.
STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT: Regulations pertaining to the physical development of a site including
requirements pertaining to yards, heights, lot area, fences, walls, landscaping area, open space, access, parking,
signs, setbacks, and other physical requirements.
STREET: Any public or private right of way used for or intended to be used for passage or travel by motor vehicles
and affording a principal means of access to abutting property. "Street" shall include such terms as highway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A limited access street of great continuity, existing or planned which serves as a principal
trafficway carrying traffic volumes from one side of the city to the other.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street carrying traffic from local streets to arterial streets within the community.
STREET, LOCAL: A street of very limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve a small number of dwelling
units.
STREET PLAN: A part of the extraterritorial agreement with Yuma County showing location and dimensions of
principal streets.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, addition, or modification in construction.
STRUCTURE: A purposeful combination of materials fixed to the ground, or to some other structure. Structures
include buildings, towers, masts, sheds, roofed storage areas, mechanical equipment, and signs. Structures do not
include fences, walls, driveways, walkways, other paved areas or public utility lines and cables.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 239/313
STRUCTURE, PERMANENT: A structure which is built of such materials and in such a way that it would commonly
be expected to last and remain useful for an indefinite period of time given proper maintenance and repair.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: A structure which is built of such materials and in such a way that it would commonly
be expected to have a relatively short, useful life, or is intended to be used for a short term only.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, group or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to
divide land so as to constitute a "subdivision" as defined in this section.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of
land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development.
TOWER (Radio And TV): The structure on which transmitting and/or receiving antennas are located.
TRAILER: Any wheeled vehicle, without motive power, which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to
carry its cargo load wholly upon its own structure and which is generally and commonly used to carry and transport
property over the public highways.
TRAILER PARK: An area clearly defined and separate from a mobile home park area, with individual parking lots,
which may or may not have facilities for temporary connection with electrical and plumbing outlets to travel trailers,
campers and motor homes.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle portable structure built on a chassis (other than a "mobile home" as defined in this
section) designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use and equipped for the
road. It may be a self-propelled motor home or designed to be towed or carried by a separate vehicle, and may be
self-contained with bath and toilet facilities or classified as a dependent type without bath and toilet facilities. Except
as otherwise specifically provided, the provisions of this definition will also apply to campers mounted on a truck
chassis, tent type trailers, and all such vehicles and equipment shall be considered to fall within the definition of
travel trailer.
TWENTY FOOT LINE OF SIGHT CLEARANCE: The triangular area formed by: a) the lines extending from any
corner of a corner lot adjacent to two (2) intersecting public roadways to a distance of twenty feet (20') along both
curb lines from the corner (constituting 2 sides); and b) the diagonal connecting such lines (constituting the third
side).
USE: Goal, object, purpose or activity of property allowed to be carried on under the zoning regulations in that
particular district.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: A building used for the diagnosis, treatment and care of animals or pets, including the
boarding of animals for limited periods of time. It may include outdoor runs and pens.
YARD: An open, unoccupied space, other than court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where
specifically provided by this title, on the lot on which a structure is situated.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the nearest line or
point of the structure.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest line or point
of the principal building.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the line created by the
front walls of the principal building, not to include on ground projections.
ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT: An official finding that a planned use of a property, as indicated by an application,
complies with the requirements of the zoning ordinance or meets special requirements of a conditional use permit.
ZONING LOT: Is either: a) a lot of record existing on the effective date of this title or any applicable subsequent
amendment thereto, or b) a tract of land either unsubdivided or consisting of two (2) or more contiguous lots of
record which, on the effective date of this title or any applicable subsequent amendment thereto, was in single
ownership, or c) a tract of land, located within a single block, which at the time of filing for a building permit (or if no
building permit is required, at the time of filing for a zoning compliance permit), is designated by its owner or
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 240/313
developer as a tract all of which is to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit under single ownership.
ZONING YARD: A setback concerning parking spaces to keep cars from protruding beyond parking lots into public
right-of-way or street. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 12-2010, 2010: Ord. 21-2006 §1, 2006: Ord.
16-2005 §2, 2006: Ord. 4-2003 §1, 2003: Ord. 5-1999 §1, 1999: Ord. 7-1997 §§1, 15, 1997: Ord. 3-1997 §1, 1997:
Ord. 2-1997 §1, 1997: Ord. 20-1996 §§2, 13, 1996: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
Chapter 17.04
USE REGULATIONS
17.04.401: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
The following use regulations and review categories are intended to apply to all existing and future parcels of land
within the incorporated area of Yuma. Except as otherwise provided for by law or in this title, no building, structure,
or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes permitted and in the zoning districts allowed. (Ord. 4-1995
§2, 1995)
17.04.402: SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES:
The following charts list the uses permitted in each zoning district. Applicants shall refer to these charts when
making requests for land use activities. Uses by right are denoted by the letter "X"; conditional uses are denoted by
the letter "C"; temporary uses are denoted by the letter "T"; uses not permitted are denoted by a blank space.
X = Use by right T = Temporary use
C = Conditional use Blank = Not permitted
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
C-
1
C-
2
I-
1
I-
2
A-
1
MH
Accessory building and uses1 X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Adult business1 X
Adult daycare C
X
X
X
X
Agricultural equipment sales and service X
X
X
X
Animal confinement (pounds) X
X
Appliance sales and repair X
X
X
X
Arcades1 X
X
X
X
Assembly halls or auditoriums X
X
Assisted living C C X X
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 241/313
Auctioneering1 T
T
T
X
X
X
X
Automobile accessory stores X
X
X
X
Automobile body shops X
X
X
X
Automobile parking lots (commercial) X
X
X
X
Automobile sales and service X
X
X
X
Automobile service stations, repair garages, and gas stations C
X
X
X
Automobile wash and polish X
X
X
X
Truck wash and polish X
X
Bakeries X
X
Beauty and barber shops X
X
Boarding houses and rooming houses C
C
C
X
X
C
Bottling works X
X
Bowling alleys X
X
X
X
Builders' supply yards, sale of cement and concrete products and
lumberyards
X
X
X
X
Cabinetmaking and carpenter shops X
X
X
X
Carnivals, circuses, bazaars, fairs T
T
T
T
T
T
Cement or cinder block concrete or lime or plaster manufacture C
X
Cement or cinder block outside storage X
Charitable, civic, youth, social, fraternal organizations X
X
Christmas tree lots1 T
T
T
T
T
Churches and other places of worship X
X
X
X
X
Cleaning and dyeing establishments:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 242/313
Commercial X
X
X
X
Industrial X
X
Clothing and apparel stores X
X
X
X
Commercial kitchen, catering lunchroom C
C
X
X
Community buildings C
X
X
Condominiums C
C
X
Construction office and yards incidental to construction on the
premises
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
Construction yards enclosed by a fence C
C
X
X
Convenience grocery store of not more than 1,500 square feet C
X
X
X
X
Dairy plants:
Distribution X
X
Processing X
X
Dance halls X
X
Daycare facility, home based1 X
X
X
X
X
Intermediate daycare facility1 X
X
X
X
Large daycare facility1 X
X
X
Preschool1 C
X
X
X
X
Department stores X
X
Drive-in establishments1 X
X
X
Driving range X
Drugstores, pharmacy X
X
Dwelling, duplex X
X
C
C
C
X X X C
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 243/313
Dwelling, mobile homes class A1
Dwelling, mobile homes class B1 X
X
C
Dwelling, mobile homes class C1 X
C
Dwelling, mobile homes classes D, E1 C
X
Dwelling, mobile homes, special purposes T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
Dwelling, multiple C
X
Dwelling, single-family X
X
X
C
C
C
Eating and drinking establishments X
X
Equipment rental establishments X
X
X
X
Exterminating service X
X
X
X
Farm supply sales (including feed and fertilizer) X
X
X
X
Financial institutions X
X
Fire stations X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Flea markets C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Florist X
X
Frozen food locker X
X
X
X
Fuel, oil, gasoline, natural gas and petroleum products bulk storage X
X
Funeral parlors, undertaking establishments X
X
Furniture manufacturing C
C
X
X
Furniture stores X
X
Garage sales X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Glass repair X
X
X
X
Golf courses C C C X X X X X
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 244/313
Grain elevator operation X
X
Greenhouses, commercial X
X
X
X
Grocery stores X
X
Group home X
X
X
X
X
Gun and ammunition sales (explosives) C
C
Gymnasium, exercise, recreation center C
C
X
X
Harboring of livestock, fowl, swine1 X
Hardware, appliance, electrical supplies retail X
X
X
X
Heating, plumbing and electrical contractor:
Offices X
X
X
X
Shops C
C
X
X
Home appliance stores X
X
Home occupations1 X
X
X
Hospitals, clinics C
C
C
X
X
Hotels, motels X
X
Ice - manufacture, storage and sales X
X
X
X
Interior decorating shops X
X
Janitor service C
C
X
X
Jewelry stores X
X
Junkyards X
Kennels X
X
Laboratories for research and test X
X
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 245/313
Laundromat, self-service/coin operated X
X
X
Leather goods and luggage stores X
X
Libraries X
X
X
X
X
Light manufacturing or processing, otherwise not named herein,
provided no operations are carried on which will create smoke,
fumes, odor, vibration or dust, or which will be detrimental to the
health, safety, or general welfare of the community
X
X
Liquor stores X
X
Live bait stores X
X
Livestock grazing C
C
C
X
Machine shops X
X
X
Marine sales and service C
X
X
Meat processing, pack and slaughter X
X
Mobile home park X
Mobile home sales and service X
X
Mobile home storage X
X
X
Motorcycle sales and service X
X
X
X
Moving and transfer company X
X
X
Music stores X
X
Newsstands X
X
Novelty, curio, antique, and souvenir shops X
X
X
X
Nursing homes C
C
C
X
X
Office buildings C
C
X
X
C
C
Office equipment, supplies, storage and service stores C
C
X
X
X
Office space, modular (must meet mobile home class A or B X X X X
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 246/313
requirements)
Office space, modular (must meet mobile home class C, D or E
requirements)
C
C
Optical and scientific instrument, jewelry, clock, musical instrument
manufacture
X
X
Outdoor storage1 X
X
X
Paint and body shop X
X
X
Paint, retail X
X
X
X
Parking for authorized temporary uses1 T
T
T
T
T
T
T
Parks and open space X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Pet shop and small animal stores X
X
X
X
Petroleum and agricultural product fuel production, distribution and
storage
X
X
Photographic equipment and supply sales, retail X
X
X
X
Photographic studio X
X
Pipe storage X
X
Police stations X
X
X
X
X
X
Post office C
C
X
X
X
X
X
Printing establishments X
X
X
X
Professional offices C
C
X
X
X
X
X
Public buildings X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Public utility offices X
X
X
X
Public utility storage yards and service installments X
X
Radiator shops X
X
X
X
Radio and TV broadcasting stations X
X
X
X
Railroad yards (together with related buildings) C C C C
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 247/313
Rodeos or equine facilities with related events and facilities C
X
X
C
Satellite dishes/TV antennas1 X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Schools:
College or university C
C
C
X
X
Public, private, parochial X
X
X
Sheet metal shops X
X
X
X
Shoe repair and sales X
X
X
Shooting range, commercial C
C
C
Shopping malls or centers X
X
Sign manufacturing, repair or maintenance X
X
X
X
Skating rinks X
X
X
Sport goods stores X
X
Storage warehouses X
X
X
Studios X
X
X
X
Theaters X
X
Towers, radio and television1 C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Towers, radio and television in excess of 75 feet1 C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Trailer parks C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Transmission shop X
X
X
Travel agencies and ticket sales X
X
Truck stops X
X
X
Truck terminals X
X
X
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 248/313
Upholstery shops C
C
X
X
Used car lots C
X
Veterinary clinics and hospitals X
X
X
Warehousing and wholesaling X
X
X
Note:
1. See chapter 17.06 of this title.
(Ord. 4-2014, 2014: Ord. 16-2005 §1, 2006: Ord. 9-2005 §§1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 2005: Ord. 3-2005 §1, 2005: Ord. 4-2003
§2, 2003: Ord. 4-2001 §§1, 2, 2001: Ord. 4-2000 §1, 2000: Ord. 5-1999 §2, 1999: Ord. 3-1997 §§2, 3, 4, 1997: Ord.
2-1997 §2, 1997: Ord. 1-1997 §§1, 2, 1997: Ord. 20-1996 §§3, 4, 5, 6, 14, 1996: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.04.403: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
In order to carry out the intent, purpose, and provisions of this title, the following charts contain the area and bulk
regulations for uses within a particular zoning district. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.04.403.1: RESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS:

Bulk And Area Regulations 
Zoning District R-1 R-2 R-3 MH1
Minimum lot area Per dwelling (in square feet):
7,000
7,000
7,000
6,000
Minimum lot area Per dwelling unit n/a 3,500
1,000
1,000
Minimum lot width:
Interior lot 60' 60' 60' 50'
Corner lot 70' 70' 70' 60'
Minimum building setback2:
A. Front:
From principal building 30' 25' 20' 20'
From accessory building 45' 45' 45' 45'
Projection from principal building 36" 36" 36" 36"
Projection from accessory building 24" 24" 24" 24"
B. Side3:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 249/313
From principal building 5' 5' 5' 5'
From detached accessory building 3' 3' 3' 3'
C. Rear:
From principal building 20' 20' 20' 20'
From accessory building 0' 0' 0' 0'
D. Corner lot (street and avenue sides):
From principal building 25' 25' 20' 20'
From accessory building 20' 20' 15' 15'
20' line of sight must be observed on all alleys
50' line of sight must be observed on all streets
and avenues
(See section 17.04.408 of this chapter and section 17.06.607.7 of this title.)
Maximum building height:
Principal building 35' 35' 50' 25'
Accessory building: All accessory buildings located in R-1, R-2, R-3 and MH
shall have no sidewall higher than 10 feet 6 inches in height. All accessory
building roofs shall have no less than a 3:12 roof pitch. There shall be no roof
pitch requirements for any accessory building which does not require a
building permit.
All carports shall be considered accessory buildings and must comply with all
regulations regarding accessory structures and uses except that for the
purpose of this section, all carports shall comply with the front yard minimum
building setback limitations as pertain to principal buildings.
Minimum floor area (in square feet):
Per dwelling 1,200
800 800 650
Per dwelling unit n/a 700 700 n/a
Maximum accessory building floor area for all structures located in R-1, R-2, R-3 and MH shall be no greater
than 15 percent of the total lot size. In calculating the maximum accessory floor area, the floor area of all
accessory buildings which would require a building permit will be added to determine if the area is in excess
of 15 percent.
Notes:
1.For mobile homes on individual platted lots. For mobile home park requirements, see section 17.06.606 of this
title.
2.See definition of "setback", section 17.03.302 of this title.
3.See subsection 17.06.607.7E of this title.
(Ord. 12-2010, 2010: Ord. 9-2005 §6, 2005: Ord. 4-2003 §§3, 4, 2003: Ord. 4-2001 §§3, 4, 2001: Ord. 1-2001 §2,
2001: Ord. 7-1997 §§2, 3, 1997: Ord. 3-1997 §5, 1997: Ord. 17-1996 §1, 1996: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.04.403.2: COMMERCIAL REGULATIONS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 250/313
Zoning District
Bulk And Area Regulations C-1 C-2
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 50 feet 50 feet
Minimum front yard setback Property line Property line
Minimum rear yard setback Property line Property line
Minimum side yard setback Property line Property line
Maximum building height 50 feet 50 feet
(Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.04.403.3: INDUSTRIAL REGULATIONS:
Zoning District
Bulk And Area Regulations I-1 I-2
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet 20,000 square feet
Minimum front yard setback Property line Property line
Minimum rear yard setback Property line Property line
Minimum side yard setback Property line Property line
Maximum building height 50 feet 50 feet
(Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.04.404: USES NOT PERMITTED:
In each zoning district, any use category not expressly permitted shall be deemed excluded. If a question arises as
to whether a specific use does or does not come within the expressed use categories, any person may apply to the
City Manager for a determination as to whether or not a specific use is expressly permitted. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.04.405: USES NOT ITEMIZED:
A. In any zoning district where a building, structure or use is enumerated, any other building, structure or use which
is similar to those enumerated and not more obnoxious or detrimental to the area in which it is located shall be
permitted.
B. Upon application or upon its own initiative, the City may, by ordinance, add to the uses listed for a zoning district
and describe by which procedure the use may be allowed provided the use conforms to the conditions set forth
in the following findings:
1. Such use is appropriate in the use group to which it is added;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 251/313
2. Such use conforms to the basic characteristics of the use group to which it is added;
3. Such use does not create any more offensive effects, objectionable influences, or traffic hazards than the
minimum amount normally resulting from other uses listed in the use group to which it is added;
4. Such use is consistent with and further implements the stated intent and purposes of this title and the
comprehensive master plan in effect; and
5. Such use is determined to be one which fills an existing or anticipated need within the City which cannot
otherwise be accommodated through the provisions of this title. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.04.406: CHANGES IN USE:
Any person seeking a change in use in any zoning district shall first present such proposed change to the City
Manager or designee for determination as to which procedure shall be followed. A change in use shall require that
the person proposing such change be issued a zoning compliance permit prior to initiating the change and/or
receiving a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
17.04.407: COMBINED LOTS USAGE:
Two (2) or more contiguous land tracts/lots of record, having the same identical ownership, may be used for a
use/structure and/or to satisfy required setback(s), provided the owner submits to the City Manager an executed,
but unrecorded document committing attachment of such contiguous tracts/lots in order to create the desired or
required parcel size for the use/structure and/or its setback(s), for the Manager's approval. Following approval of
such document and final completion of other zoning ordinance requirements, the Manager shall cause the recording
of such document in the Office of the Clerk and Recorder of Yuma County, retain a copy of such recorded document
for City file records, and mail the original of such recorded document, certified, return receipt requested, to the
owner(s). If said contiguous land tracts/lots are not in the same zoning district, the owner(s) must establish one
zoning district for said contiguous land tracts/lots as provided for in map amendments of chapter 17.02 of this title. If
any one of the said contiguous land tracts/lots contain a conditional use, the owner must comply with section
17.05.507 of this title. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.04.408: EXCEPTIONS; CORNER LOT SETBACKS:
A. City Manager Authority: The City Manager may, after finding the circumstances meet the following criteria: 1) that
the adjacent property owner will not be adversely affected; 2) that motorists' view of oncoming traffic and
pedestrians will not be hampered; and 3) that principal buildings line up with existing buildings on the block
sufficiently, to ensure present and future harmony and aesthetic value of the area, in his sole discretion let a
property owner build or add on closer to the property line than is indicated in section 17.04.403.1 of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
Chapter 17.05
CONDITIONAL USES AND VARIANCES
17.05.501: PURPOSE:
The conditional use process recognizes that there are a number of uses which may or may not be appropriate in a
particular zoning district depending upon all the circumstances of the individual case. It is the intent of this chapter
to provide a comprehensive review of such uses so that the City is assured that these uses are compatible with their
locations and surrounding land uses. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 252/313
17.05.502: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
All applications for conditional uses shall be acted upon by the City Council, after a duly-noticed public hearing. At
least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the City and mailed to property owners within three hundred feet (300'). (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.05.503: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Applicants requesting a conditional use shall submit ten (10) copies of the following required material to the City.
Such application may be filed by a person or persons owning or having an interest in the property in question and
shall be accompanied with the written concurrence of all owners of record of the property. The application shall be
filed in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to a regularly scheduled City Council meeting and shall include:
A. A current list of the names and addresses of property owners within three hundred feet (300'), as shown by the
records of the Yuma County Assessor;
B. A list of any easements, encumbrances, or right-of-way internal to the property, and protective covenants;
C. A statement of intent for the proposal;
D. A complete site plan showing the major details of the proposed development, including existing adjacent land
uses, locations of buildings and structures both existing and proposed, off street parking and loading areas,
access to and from the property, signs, pedestrian and open space area, and any natural or manmade features
on the property which could or would affect the development;
E. A time schedule for development;
F. Written and/or graphic material documenting compliance with the special regulations of chapter 17.06 of this title,
where appropriate to proposal;
G. Such other information as required by written rule of the City Council;
H. Any additional information the applicant reasonably believes will support the request. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord.
20-2018, 2018: Ord. 7-2012, 2012: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.05.504: FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
17.05.505: APPROVAL CRITERIA AND PUBLIC HEARING:
In compliance with the requirements for public notification, the City Council shall consider the request and public
comments at a public hearing. The City Council shall then render a final decision of approval, conditional approval,
or denial. The reasons for its decision shall be stated in the official minutes of the hearing and shall be mailed to the
applicant. In rendering its decision, the City Council shall consider the following:
A. The proposed use and intensity of such use;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 253/313
B. The desirability and need for such use in the specific area of the City;
C. The compatibility of such use under the site development plan as it relates to the character and use of the
surrounding area;
D. The compliance of such use with the requirements of this chapter and the intent and purpose of this title;
E. The compliance of such use with the Comprehensive Master Plan;
F. The potential environmental and objectional impacts of such use; and
G. The availability of public utilities and services. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.05.506: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
The City Council may impose modifications or conditions upon the approval of the requested use. Examples of
conditions or modifications that the City Council may impose, include, but are not limited to:
A. Requiring compliance with a specific condition of this title, or any other applicable City, County, State, or Federal
regulation; or
B. Any condition which is deemed necessary to ensure:
1. That the proposed conditional use will not substantially injure or detract from the use of neighboring property
or from the character of the neighborhood.
2. That the conditional use will serve to protect the best interests of the City and the public health, safety, and
welfare.
3. That the effect of the conditional use will facilitate the logical, efficient, and economic extension of public
services and facilities. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.05.507: MODIFICATION OF APPROVED CONDITIONAL USES:
No approved conditional use may be changed, modified, expanded, or enlarged unless the same is amended and
approved in accordance with the procedures applicable to initial approval of a conditional use. (Ord. 4-1995 §2,
1995)
17.05.508: DENIAL OF CONDITIONAL USES:
When a conditional use has been denied by the City Council, no request for that particular use may be refiled with
the City. The only exception to this provision shall be if the landowner or his agent can show a change of
circumstances regarding the property which would warrant reexamination of the conditional use request. Such
showing of changed circumstances shall be submitted in writing, along with a conditional use application, to the City.
(Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.05.509: REVOCATION:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 254/313
The City Council may revoke approval of a conditional use whenever the applicant has failed to complete the project
substantially in accordance with the time schedule submitted with the application, or with the conditions placed on
the approval. Before any such revocation is issued, the Council shall first notify the applicant of the pending action
and provide the applicant an opportunity to appear before the Council to contest the pending action. (Ord. 4-1995
§2, 1995)
17.05.510: VARIANCES:
Variances are deviations from the dimensional requirements, design or performance standards and other provisions
of this title, not related to use of the property, that would not be contrary to public interest when, owing to special
circumstances or conditions, the literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would result in undue and
unnecessary hardship. Variances shall only be granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2-2016,
2016)
17.05.511: PROCEDURE:
An applicant requesting variance approval shall follow the procedures outlined below:
A. Submit Application: The applicant shall submit a complete application on forms supplied by the City with all
application fees and containing the following materials:
1. A site plan, showing the major details of the proposed development; and
2. Other information to show compliance with section 17.05.512 of this chapter.
B. Staff Review: Staff will review the application and notify the applicant of completeness within fifteen (15) days of
submittal. Completed applications will be reviewed by Board within forty five (45) days of staff's determination of
completeness. Additional review time will be required for applications requiring professional review.
C. Public Notice: Public notice that the Board of Adjustment will conduct a public hearing to consider the application
for a variance shall be posted at City Hall fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and published once not less than
twelve (12) days prior to the hearing. A sign shall be posted by City staff in a conspicuous place on said
premises not less than five (5) days before said hearing. Applicant shall bear the cost of publication.
D. Conduct Of Hearing:
1. At the public hearing, the applicant and other interested parties may appear and present such evidence and
testimony as they may desire. The Board may limit testimony and evidence that is merely cumulative and is
not required to follow any set procedure during the hearing, nor strictly follow the Rules of Evidence as applied
by the courts. However, the City may adopt any rules of procedure it deems necessary. The hearing may be
tape recorded or otherwise electronically recorded. The applicant, or other interested party may, if they desire,
have the hearing recorded by a court reporter, at their expense.
2. The hearing may be continued from time to time as necessary.
3. The Board of Adjustment shall not take action on an application if there was a failure to give notice, by
publication or to post notice on the property. Upon notification of such a failure, Board of Adjustment may, at
its discretion, continue the public hearing to an appropriate date. (Ord. 2-2016, 2016)
17.05.512: ACTION BY BOARD:
The Board may approve with conditions or deny the application, continue the public hearing, or remand it to the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 255/313
applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action. The Board may approve a variance if it
finds that all of the following criteria are met:
A. The grant of variance will be generally consistent with the purposes, goals, objectives and policies of the City's
Master Plan and this title;
B. The grant of variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the parcel, building
or structure; and
C. Literal interpretation and enforcement of the terms and provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other parcels in the same zoning district and would cause the applicant unnecessary
hardship, as distinguished from mere inconvenience. In determining whether an applicant's rights would be
deprived, the Board shall consider whether either of the following conditions apply:
1. There are special conditions and circumstances that are unique to the parcel, building or structure, that are
not applicable to other parcels, structures or buildings in the same zone district and that do not result from the
actions of the applicant; or
2. Granting the variance will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege denied by the City's Master Plan
and the terms of this title to other parcels, buildings or structures, in the same zone district.
D. The burden shall be on the applicant to show that these criteria have been met. If the Board determines that such
criteria have not been met, the application shall be denied. The application may be approved upon conditions or
limitations which the Board determines are necessary in order to ensure that the applicable criteria are met.
Such conditions or limitations shall be provided to the applicant and interested parties, in writing, as part of the
decision.
E. No variance shall be granted with less than four (4) concurring votes of the Board.
F. The Board shall announce its decision within thirty (30) days of the completion of the hearing. Any decision on a
variance application shall be in writing by resolution. The decision of the Board with respect to an application for
a variance shall be final, subject only to review by certiorari in the courts. The City shall also have the right to
appeal any such decision to the courts. Upon the filing of an appeal or request for review in the courts, the City
shall cause a transcript of any tape recording of the hearing to be made and certified to the court, and the party
filing such appeal or such review shall pay the City the reasonable cost incurred in producing such transcript,
unless such party has a transcript produced by a court reporter at his expense. (Ord. 2-2016, 2016)
17.05.513: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF VARIANCES:
A. Expiration: All variances shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance if no building permit has been
issued to establish the variation authorized, or if the variation does not require a building permit, unless the
variation is established, ongoing, and in operation. Such time period shall not be altered by transfer of
ownership.
B. Extension: Upon written request, the Board may grant an extension of the variance for a period not to exceed six
(6) months for good cause shown. No request for an extension shall be considered unless a written application
requesting the extension is submitted to the City prior to the date the variance is to expire. The variance shall be
deemed extended until the Board has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for
an extension within the time limits established in this section shall render the variance null and void. In
considering an extension to a variance, the Board shall follow the procedure herein for approving an initial
application. (Ord. 2-2016, 2016)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 256/313
Chapter 17.06
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
17.06.601: PURPOSE:
Each use proposed within a zone district, whether by right, conditional use, or otherwise, will have actual and
potential effects on the site, surrounding area, and the city. The degree of effect depends in large part on the type of
use proposed and its location. This chapter, therefore, lists certain regulations which it may be necessary to
address, depending upon the use proposed. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.602: COMPLIANCE:
In the event that a special regulation is denoted on the schedule of permitted uses, the applicant shall, with the
assistance of city staff, address all applicable regulations for the proposal and submit such information along with
other required material in conformance with the application requirements attendant to the provisions of the use
procedure being pursued. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.603: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
Accessory buildings or uses include, but are not limited to, the following:
Garages, automobile parking.
Greenhouses.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Private swimming pools.
Satellite dishes.
Storage sheds.
Trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, snow vehicles, and other similar recreational vehicles stored in rear yard.
No accessory buildings intended for agricultural use shall be allowed in R-1, R-2, R-3 and MH. (Ord. 4-2003 §5,
2003: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.603.1: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
In order to fairly regulate home occupations, the following requirements are established:
A. Application And Approval Required: Home occupations commencing after the adoption of this title must file an
application for said home occupation with the City Council. The City Council shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny an application for home occupation, after a duly noticed public hearing. At least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing, notices of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners whose property is within one
hundred feet (100') of the proposed home occupation and shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within Yuma. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall issue a decision in writing. If
approved by the City Council, the applicant shall receive a one-year permit. The permit must be reviewed by the
City Manager and renewed annually, subject to the payment renewal fee.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 257/313
B. Conditions: A home occupation shall be allowed as an accessory use, provided that all of the following conditions
are met:
1. Such use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling or structure;
2. Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall
not change the character thereof;
3. The total area used for such purposes shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the first floor area of the user's
dwelling unit;
4. There shall be no signs associated with the home occupation on the premises;
5. There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material used in the home occupation nor of any highly
explosive or combustible material;
6. There shall be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the
property line;
7. A home occupation, including studios or rooms for instruction, shall provide additional off street parking
adequate to accommodate the needs created by the home occupation subject to approval of the City;
8. The operation shall have no more than one employee or regular assistant who does not use the dwelling unit
as their principal residence;
9. A home occupation shall be required to have a home occupation permit from the City and shall pay
commercial utility rates; and
10. There shall be no retailing or wholesaling of merchandise, supplies or products conducted on or adjacent to
the premises.
C. Home Occupations Not Permitted: Home occupations do not include the following list:
Animal hospital.
Clinic.
Marijuana cultivation facilities.
Marijuana product manufacturing facilities.
Marijuana testing facilities.
Medical marijuana dispensary/medical marijuana center.
Medical marijuana infused products manufacturing business.
Medical marijuana optional premises cultivation operation business.
Nursing home.
Restaurant.
Retail marijuana stores.
For the purposes of this Code, any business located in a residential structure, existing in a nonconforming use
on a nonresidential lot shall be considered a home occupancy.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 258/313
D. Exceptions: Family childcare homes and daycare centers may be deemed home occupations for the purposes of
this section. However, provided that licensed family childcare homes and daycare centers are in compliance with
all State regulations pertaining to said entity, they will be exempt from the language contained in this section.
(Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 1-2013, 2013: Ord. 11-2010, 2010: Ord. 1-2001 §5, 2001: Ord. 7-
1997 §§4, 5, 1997: Ord. 17-1996 §2, 1996: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.603.2: HOUSEHOLD PETS:
Pets, such as dogs and cats but not livestock, which are generally kept within a dwelling, shall be considered as a
permitted accessory use, provided not more than three (3) animals (more than 4 months old) are kept in any one
dwelling. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.603.3: SATELLITE DISHES:
A. Residential Zoning Districts: Ground mounted satellite dish antennas up to twelve feet (12') in diameter may be
permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. All installations must comply with all accessory use, yard, height, bulk, and setback requirements specified
within the district.
2. All installations shall employ (to the extent possible) materials and colors that blend with the surroundings.
3. All installations shall be located to prevent obstruction of the antenna's reception window from potential
permitted development on adjoining properties.
4. All satellite dishes larger than four feet (4') in diameter must have a building permit. All provisions of the
Building Code, as may pertain to satellite dishes, shall be met.
5. Satellite dishes four feet (4') and over in diameter will be treated as an accessory building.
Roof mounted satellite dishes four feet (4') in diameter or less may be permitted. Larger roof mounted satellite
dishes may be permitted in an R-3 Zone as part of the conditional use provision for uses permitted in an R-3
Zone as a conditional use, such as hospitals and nursing homes.
B. Commercial Or Industrial Zoning Districts: Ground mounted or roof mounted satellite dish antennas up to twelve
feet (12') in diameter may be permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. All primary use installations or accessory use installations that abut land zoned for residential purposes shall
comply with the principal setback requirements specified within the underlying district. All accessory use
installations not abutting residentially zoned land shall comply with the district's accessory use setbacks.
2. All installations shall comply with the maximum height restrictions imposed on primary uses for primary use
installations, and accessory uses for accessory use installations.
3. All installations shall be located to prevent obstruction of the antenna's reception window from potential
permitted development on adjoining properties.
4. All satellite development must have a building permit. All provisions of the Building Code, as may pertain to
satellite dishes, shall be met. (Ord. 7-1997 §6, 1997: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.603.4: RADIO AND TV TOWERS:
A. Construction Requirements: Each radio or television tower which is twenty feet (20') or more above the ground
including antenna hereinafter constructed, erected, enlarged or altered shall meet the following requirements:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 259/313
1. All towers must have a building permit and shall be accompanied by plans which are sufficient to determine
compliance with the construction requirements herein.
2. FCC licensed commercial and amateur radio communication towers, including antenna, shall not exceed the
maximum height of seventy five feet (75'). This shall not apply to 911 emergency communication towers and
antenna which may exceed seventy five feet (75').
3. Residential towers including antenna shall not exceed the maximum height of thirty five feet (35'), except for
amateur radio antennas and supporting towers erected in conformity to the Building Code to heights
reasonably needed for a licensed amateur's reasonable uses subject to the Federal preemption of the Federal
Communications Commission.
4. Every tower and guywire must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning with a
ground wire as specified in the Electrical Code.
5. In no case shall a tower of twenty feet (20') in height or more be installed nearer to a street or sidewalk than
the height of the tower including antenna, unless said tower is certified by a licensed engineer that is
structurally sound in excess of local structural loads for snow, wind and other elements, and will not pose a
risk to surrounding buildings, streets, alleys and sidewalks.
6. No wires, cables or guywires shall cross or extend over any part of a public street or sidewalk.
B. Exceptions: The City Council may provide exceptions to this section for towers in excess of seventy five feet (75')
by approving a conditional use as provided in chapters 17.04 and 17.05 of this title. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 3-
2005 §§2, 3, 2005: Ord. 10-2004 §1, 2004: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.603.5: SWIMMING POOLS:
Swimming pools may be permitted in any district as an accessory use subject to the following additional
requirements:
A. No public or private pool may be located in any required front or side yard abutting a street.
B. Every pool must be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than six feet (6') in height, with no
openings large enough to permit children to pass through other than self-closing, self-latching gates or doors
which can protect against entry. Such doors or gates shall be closed at all times when not in actual use. (Ord. 4-
1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.603.6: TRAVEL TRAILERS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
A. All regulations as set forth in title 10, chapter 10.10 of this Code shall apply in all trailer parks.
B. The applicant for a trailer park shall submit formal park plans for consideration to the City Council, no less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing scheduled to be held by the City Council for the conditional use.
C. The City Council may approve the conditional use if the following criteria are met:
1. Any fencing must meet the requirements of this Code or as imposed by the City Council;
2. The existence of adequate entrances and exits to the trailer park;
3. Adequate lighting for the trailer park, including lighted entrance and exit signs;
4. Dedication of certain lots to be for pull through parking only;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 260/313
5. Establishment of right-of-way and utility easements necessary to provide the City with adequate means to
provide access and utility service to the trailer park;
6. Compliance with title 10, chapter 10.10 of this Code.
D. The City Council shall, prior to any hearing regarding approval of a conditional use for a trailer park, forward the
application and plans for the trailer park to the Yuma Fire Department and Yuma Police Department, requesting
their input and recommendations regarding matters of public health, safety and welfare. Representatives of the
Yuma Fire Department and Yuma Police Department may be heard during the public hearing regarding said
conditional use.
E. The following regulations shall apply in all Residential Districts to the storage, parking, and use of self-contained
trailers, campers, motor homes, recreational vehicles, boats, snow vehicles, and other similar recreational
vehicles:
1. Such equipment shall not be stored or parked closer than twenty four inches (24") to any proposed or existing
public sidewalk on privately owned property.
2. On corner lots, any such vehicular equipment shall not be placed in the fifty foot (50') line of sight on streets
and avenues nor in the twenty foot (20') line of sight on the alleys.
3. Such equipment shall not be used for living or housekeeping purposes except when located in an approved
trailer park or in a campground providing adequate sanitation facilities, or on a temporary basis not to exceed
seven (7) days.
4. No business shall be conducted within any such equipment in a Residential District. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord.
21-2006 §2, 2006: Ord. 7-1997 §7, 1997: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.604: ADULT BUSINESS:
In order to minimize the adverse effects that the operation of an adult business may have on a neighborhood or
area in which it is located, the following regulations are established. Adult businesses may be permitted only in the
I-2 zone, subject to the following conditions:
A. No such business shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of the nearest point of a lot on which is located
a religious and/or educational institution, a public park or recreation facility;
B. No such business shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of any lot on which another adult business is
located;
C. No such business shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of any state highway.
For the purpose of this title, "adult business" shall be a commercial establishment having as a principal activity
an adult business. "Principal activity" is a use accounting for twenty percent (20%) or more of a business's stock
in trade, display space, floor space or movie display time per month for adult activities characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to the following exposed bodily parts: buttocks, genitals,
pubic area or female breasts. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.605: ARCADES:
In order to minimize adverse effects that arcades and electronic games may have on the neighborhood or area in
which it is located, the following regulations are established. Arcades may be permitted only in the C-1, C-2, I-1 and
I-2 zones, subject to the following conditions:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 261/313
A. No arcade shall be permitted within five hundred feet (500') of the nearest point of a lot on which is located a
religious and/or educational institution, a public park or recreation facility;
B. Adult supervision (18 years or older) shall be provided on the premises during all hours of operation and shall be
stationed so as to have direct visibility over all machines;
C. A minimum of one bicycle parking stall per video game machine shall be provided within twenty five feet (25') of
the arcade in a safe, convenient location with bicycle racks to accommodate said bicycles;
D. All gambling on site is prohibited;
E. The operation of machines shall be permitted in all commercial zones provided their operation is accessory to the
use of the building and said use does not materially alter the principal use of the structure. (Ord. 7-1997 §15,
1997: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.606: MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT:
The R-3 district is comprised of residential areas which allow mobile homes and is further divided into the following:
A. Mobile Homes On Platted Lots: Residential development where primarily mobile homes placed on individual lots
create a low density, quiet, single-family environment. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.606.1: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
A. Existing Mobile Home Parks: All existing mobile home parks located within the city at the time of adoption of this
title, regardless of the zone district in which they are located, shall comply with the requirements and regulations
of the following sections and shall be exempt from compliance with the remaining provisions:
1. Section 17.06.606.2, "Mobile Home Requirements And Construction Standards", of this chapter;
2. Section 17.06.606.3, "Mobile Home Park Permit Procedures", of this chapter;
3. Section 17.06.606.4, "Mobile Home Park Requirements", of this chapter;
4. Section 17.06.606.5, "Responsibilities Of Mobile Home Park Owner", of this chapter.
B. Future Mobile Home Parks: Applicants to establish a mobile home park within the boundaries of the city on or
after the date of adoption of this title shall comply with all rules, regulations, and requirements set forth herein.
C. Existing Mobile Homes On Individual Platted Lots: All existing mobile homes on platted lots within the boundaries
of the city at the time of adoption of this title, regardless of the zone district in which they are located, shall
comply with the requirements and regulations of the following sections and shall be exempt from compliance
with the remaining provisions:
1. Section 17.06.606.2, "Mobile Home Requirements And Construction Standards", of this chapter;
2. Section 17.06.606.5, "Responsibilities Of Mobile Home Park Owner", of this chapter.
D. Future Mobile Homes On Individual Platted Lots: All mobile homes established on individual lots within the
boundaries of the city on or after the date of adoption of this title shall comply with the following sections:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 262/313
1. Section 17.06.606.2, "Mobile Home Requirements And Construction Standards", of this chapter;
2. Section 17.06.606.5, "Responsibilities Of Mobile Home Park Owner", of this chapter;
3. Section 17.04.403.1, "Residential Regulations", of this title (for the applicable zone district in which the mobile
home is located). (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.606.2: MOBILE HOME REQUIREMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Every conventional structure shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the uniform building code, adopted by the city.
B. Every mobile home in existing mobile home parks or on individually platted lots shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of federal and state construction and safety standards applicable
at the time of construction.
C. Each mobile home shall be properly and separately serviced with the necessary utilities and services to include:
water supply, sewage disposal, electrical and/or gas supply.
D. Permanent additions to the mobile home or freestanding structures built on the mobile home lot shall meet the
applicable provisions of correct federal, state, and city codes, and a permit for such construction shall be
obtained from the city.
E. All mobile homes shall meet the following requirements for tie downs and anchors:
Length Of Mobile Home Tie Down Sets Number Of Anchors
Up to 50 feet 2 4
50 feet to 60 feet 3 6
61 feet to 70 feet 4 8
Each tie down component must be able to withstand a vertical load of four thousand seven hundred fifty (4,750)
pounds without pullout, continuous creep, or ultimate mechanical failure. Anchors must be capable of withstanding a
load of five thousand seven hundred (5,700) pounds without failure. All expandable pullout additions to mobile
homes shall be secured with tie downs and anchors.
F. All mobile home stands shall provide adequate support for the placement of the mobile homes.
G. All mobile home stands shall be provided with anchors and tie downs such as cast in place concrete "deadmen",
eyelets embedded in concrete slabs or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices to be used
to stabilize the mobile home.
H. Within sixty (60) days of entering a park or moving into a platted lot, skirting shall be installed which completely
encloses the space beneath the mobile home. Readily openable access panels or doors shall be installed to
permit entrance for servicing utility connections. The skirting shall, at a minimum, be constructed of materials
which are the same or similar in design, texture and color as the exterior material used in construction of the
mobile home. The skirting shall not be permanently attached to the ground or used to anchor the mobile home to
its pad.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 263/313
I. Any electrical repairs, alterations, or installation of equipment, conductors, connections, etc., within or on a mobile
home or conventional building, shall be performed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the current
national electrical code and current federal construction and safety standards.
J. Any fuel gas line equipment repairs, alterations, or installations within a conventional building or a mobile home
shall comply with the applicable portions of the current local, state and federal gas piping, oil piping, ventilation,
and appliance standards.
K. Any plumbing equipment repairs, alterations, or installations within or on a conventional building or a mobile
home shall comply with the applicable provisions of the current Colorado state plumbing code, the currently
adopted edition of the uniform building code, federal construction and safety standards and applicable
regulations of the city. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.606.3: MOBILE HOME PARK PERMIT PROCEDURES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, establish, begin, or continue operation of a mobile home
park within the City unless such person first has been granted a mobile home park permit from the City Council
as hereinafter provided.
B. All applications for a mobile home park permit shall include a mobile home park plan and shall set forth the
following information unless the City Manager waives those requirements not applicable to an applicant for a
mobile home park permit for an existing mobile home park.
1. The location, legal description, area, and dimension of the tract of land to be occupied by the park.
2. Entrances to and exits from the mobile home park.
3. The number, location, and size of all mobile home spaces.
4. The location and width of all roadways and sidewalks.
5. The location of service buildings, recreational facilities, laundry facilities, storage facilities and paved off street
parking.
6. Location, widths and other dimensions of all easements.
7. Provisions for stormwater drainage.
8. Fencing, landscaping and screen planting.
9. Lighting of roadways, driveways and pedestrian walks.
10. The location, plans and specifications for any permanent structures.
11. The name under which the mobile home park shall be known.
12. The location and description of all utility services including water supply, sewage disposal, electrical and/or
gas supply.
C. All applications for a mobile home park permit or a permit for an expansion of an existing mobile home park shall
be accompanied by a fee as determined by City Council. The mobile home park permit fee shall be required in
addition to, and not in lieu of, other applicable fees for various subdivisions or rezoning applied for in conjunction
with the permit.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 264/313
D. Upon receipt of a completed application for a mobile home park permit the administrative staff shall consult with
any other agencies necessary to determine the conformity of the site of the proposed mobile home park with the
requirements of this title, its compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, and the conformity with the
planned development and land uses of the area.
E. Upon completion of the review by the City Manager, the application for the mobile home park permit shall be
referred to the City Council which shall proceed to hold a public hearing after due public notice.
F. A mobile home park permit may be granted by City Council upon finding:
1. That the proposed location of the mobile home park is consistent with and further implements the purposes of
the comprehensive master plan and design for development of the area.
2. That the proposed location of the mobile home park would not be injurious to the general health, safety and
welfare of the public.
3. That the requirements of this section are provided for in the application for the mobile home park permit.
G. Upon acceptance of the application and final approval being granted for the issuance of the mobile home park
permit, the specifications and data contained in the application and plan shall be binding upon the owners, their
heirs, successors and assigns, and changes of lot sizes, location of facilities, roadways, or any other matter
designated in the application and plan may not be made without approval by the City Council. (Ord. 2-2019,
2019: Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.606.4: MOBILE HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS:
A. General Requirements: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the requirements of the City for
obtaining a building permit. It shall be necessary to provide two (2) copies of a plan of the mobile home space to
be built upon, drawn to scale, showing its shape and dimensions, and the shape, size, and location of the mobile
home and other structures existing in the said space. The plan shall be of sufficient detail to enable the City
Manager to ascertain whether the proposed construction, erection or emplacement is in uniformity with the
ordinances of the City.
B. Location: The mobile home park shall be located only within MH Zoning Districts. The park shall be such that it is
compatible with adjacent and surrounding land uses and in conformance with the comprehensive master plan.
C. Area: The minimum area of the mobile home park shall also be no less than two (2) acres, shall have a minimum
frontage of two hundred eighty feet (280'), and shall be large enough to accommodate:
1. The number of mobile home spaces designated on the application for a mobile home park permit.
2. Necessary roadways and streets.
3. Parking areas for motor vehicles.
4. Service, utility and recreational areas.
D. Space Requirements:
1. New Mobile Home Parks:
a. Minimum lot area shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet.
b. Maximum height of all principal buildings and accessory buildings shall be set forth by section 17.04.403.1
of this title.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 265/313
c. "Minimum front yard setback of a mobile home" shall mean the commonly used front entry side of the
mobile home. The minimum front yard setback of the mobile home shall be twenty feet (20') from the front
lot line.
d. "Minimum rear yard setback of the mobile home" shall mean that portion of the yard opposite the front yard.
Minimum rear yard setback for all structures shall be ten feet (10').
e. Minimum side yard setback (all structures) from a street shall be ten feet (10') and from an interior lot line
shall be three feet (3').
f. There shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') between mobile homes.
g. Minimum width of a mobile home site shall be forty feet (40').
2. Replacement Units Within Existing Mobile Home Parks:
a. A replacement mobile home unit shall maintain the following setbacks pursuant to the National Fire Code:
(1) Set back a minimum distance of ten feet (10') from the side of a mobile home to the side of an adjoining
mobile home unit and/or conventional structure.
(2) Set back a minimum distance of ten feet (10') from the end of a mobile home to the end of an adjoining
mobile home.
(3) Set back a minimum distance of ten feet (10') from the side of a mobile home to the end of an adjoining
mobile home.
(4) Notwithstanding subsections D2a(1) through D2a(3) of this section, a minimum setback of five feet (5')
shall be maintained between the mobile home unit and the mobile home park property line.
b. The City Manager or designee shall make an interpretation of the setback provisions as they apply to
irregular lots and irregular configuration of mobile home units.
E. Park Street System:
1. General Requirements: All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe vehicular access from abutting
public streets to each mobile home space. All streets shall meet the requirements of the City's engineering
specifications. Street plans shall be submitted to the City prior to issuance of any building permits.
2. Access: Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance
or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. Entrance and exit roadways shall connect the
mobile home park streets with a public street.
3. Internal Streets: All streets within the park shall be built to the City's engineering specifications and shall
include curb and gutter. No lot shall be laid out so as to permit direct access to any public street or highway.
Street plans shall be submitted to and approved by the City prior to issuance of any building permits.
4. Road Signs: All construction and installation of road signs shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
City.
F. Walkways: All parks shall be provided with safe all season pedestrian access for intended use between individual
mobile homes, the park streets, and all community facilities provided for park residents.
1. All roadway sidewalks shall meet the City's engineering specifications.
2. A common walk system shall be provided and maintained. Such common walks shall have a minimum width
of three feet (3').
3. All mobile home sites shall be connected to common walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or
parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall be a minimum of two feet (2') wide.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 266/313
G. Nonresidential Uses: No part of any mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except for
common use facilities available to all park residents.
H. Area Lights: Streetlights shall be provided and maintained in such number and intensity as to ensure safe
movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. A light shall be located at each outside entrance of the service
buildings and at all entrances and exits of the park.
I. Mobile Home Park Signs: Each mobile home park shall provide a sign at the main entrance thereto, to include the
name of the park and the street address, subject to the sign requirements in chapter 17.08 of this title. (Ord. 20-
2018, 2018: Ord. 1-2001 §4, 2001: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.606.5: RESPONSIBILITIES OF MOBILE HOME PARK OWNER:
A. The mobile home park owner shall operate the park in compliance with this section.
B. The mobile home park owner or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this section.
C. The mobile home park owner shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home site which
includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections.
D. It shall be the duty of the park owner to:
1. Pay promptly to the City all fees required by the City.
2. Report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of this section.
3. See that no mobile home is occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a mobile home site
and complies with all the requirements of this section. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.607: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
17.06.607.1: STRUCTURE HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
The height limitations of this title shall not apply to schools or portions of structures or buildings not used for human
occupancy or activities, provided that such exceptions will not impose a negative material impact on the use, safety,
or access of light and air to adjacent properties, for the intent and purposes of this title. Applicants requesting
exceptions to the height limitations for buildings or structures shall only be approved by the City Council upon
written finding that the applicant has satisfactorily addressed the following:
A. Adequacy of light and air for adjacent properties;
B. Minimization of visual impacts upon adjacent or neighboring properties;
C. Adequacy for firefighting and emergency responses.
D. The following list of uses may be excepted from the maximum height requirements provided the above
mentioned conditions are met:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 267/313
Chimneys, cupolas, vanes.
Church steeples.
Grain elevator enclosures.
Manufacturing steam towers.
Monuments.
Public utility poles.
Water tanks. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 16-2005 §3, 2006: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.607.2: BUILDING, MULTIPLE USES:
Multiple uses allowed by right shall be allowed in the same principal building for the zoning district in which the
structure is located. Uses allowed by right mixed with uses allowed by conditional use shall be allowed in the same
principal building for the zoning district in which the building is located if the conditional uses have been approved
as conditional uses pursuant to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 7-1997 §15, 1997: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.607.3: BUILDING, SAME LOT:
Only one principal building shall be permitted on any lot in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts. Two (2) or more principal
buildings on any lot in C-1 and C-2 Districts shall be permitted only upon approval by the City Manager. (Ord. 20-
2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.607.4: BUILDING, USE CHANGE:
Any change in use of an existing building shall conform to the requirements and review procedures of the district
within which it is located. For changes in uses in nonconforming buildings, refer to chapter 17.11 of this title. (Ord. 4-
1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.607.5: DRIVE-IN/DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
The applicant must satisfactorily demonstrate that the traffic circulation on the street adjacent to the site conforms to
the following criteria:
A. Arranged so that the drive-through lane is off the public street, alley or right-of-way; and
B. Arranged so that internal pedestrian traffic and vehicular movements are compatible and traffic hazards are
minimized; and
C. Arranged so as to avoid hazardous or adverse effects on adjacent sites and streets. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.607.6: MINIMUM TITLE REQUIREMENTS:
No lot area, yard or other open space, or required off street parking or loading area existing on or after the effective
date of this title shall be reduced in area, dimension or size below the minimum required by this title, nor shall any
lot area, yard or other open space or off street parking or loading area which is required by this title for one use be
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 268/313
used as the lot area, yard or other open space or off street parking or loading area requirement for any other use.
(Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.607.7: SUPPLEMENTARY YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. On lots extending from one street to another paralleling street, both streets shall be considered as front streets
for purposes of calculating front yard setbacks.
B. On lots bordered on two (2) contiguous sides by streets, the required front yard setback shall be the narrow side.
C. For purposes of setback calculation, a two-family dwelling or an attached multiple-family dwelling shall be
construed as one building occupying one lot.
D. On a vacant lot bordered on two (2) sides by previously constructed structures which do not meet the required
front yard setback for the zoning district, the required front yard setback for the vacant lot shall be established as
the average front yard setback of the two (2) adjacent structures. Where a vacant lot is bordered on only one
side by a previously constructed structure which does not meet the required front yard setback, the front yard for
the vacant lot shall be established as the average of the front yard setback for the adjacent structure and the
minimum front yard setback for the zoning district.
E. Side setback for accessory structures shall be three feet (3'), however an accessory structure shall stay away
from a residential building on an adjoining lot by ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1-2001 §6, 2001: Ord. 7-1997 §§8, 15,
1997: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.607.8: UTILITIES:
Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent the construction or installation of public utilities or transmission
facilities, including mains or distribution lines in any zone district. Substations for a public utility, storage,
maintenance facilities and business offices shall be restricted to their appropriate zone district. Location of power
transmission lines with a capacity of one hundred (100) kV or more shall be subject to approval by City Council.
(Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.06.607.9: PUBLIC PROJECTS:
All projects from any governmental agency must go before the City Council in order to mitigate pending problems
such as traffic, parking, access. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.06.608: VETERINARY CLINICS AND HOSPITALS:
In order to minimize adverse effects that the operation of an animal veterinary clinic or hospital may have on an
area in which it is located, the following regulations apply. Animal veterinary clinics or hospitals may be permitted in
the I-1, I-2 and A-1 Zones, subject to the following conditions:
A. All facilities of an animal veterinary clinic or hospital, including all treatment rooms, cages, pens, kennels and
exercise runs, shall be maintained within a completely enclosed, soundproof building.
B. All such veterinary clinics and hospitals shall be designed and constructed in a manner that shall eliminate any
emission of odor offensive to persons in the area of such clinics or hospitals.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 269/313
C. All such veterinary clinics and hospitals shall be designed and constructed in a manner that shall reduce the
sound coming from any such clinic or hospital to the level of sixty five (65) decibels at any given adjacent
property line.
D. No more than twenty five (25) head of animals shall be allowed for more than twenty four (24) hours. No more
than five (5) head of animals shall be allowed for longer than seven (7) days. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.609: ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Where otherwise not provided for in this title, applicants for new construction or reconstruction of existing structures
for other than single-family residential purposes shall demonstrate that the proposal satisfactorily addresses such
factors as:
A. Drainage and storm water runoff;
B. Natural hazards where affecting the site;
C. Erosion controls during and after construction;
D. Reclamation and/or revegetation and landscaping;
E. Preservation of unique natural features;
F. Visual impacts on adjacent properties;
G. Disposition of any historic features or structures; and
H. Adequacy of public improvements to serve the proposed use. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.610: INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any application for an industrial use shall comply with applicable State and Federal regulations as required by law
and administered by the Environmental Protection Agency, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
Colorado Department of Health, and others which govern or establish guidelines for controls on the following:
A. Noise and sound volume in decibels;
B. Odor;
C. Glare in foot-candles;
D. Vibration generated in cycles/second or hertz;
E. Visible and nonvisible emissions including vapors, particulate matter, dust, and degree of opacity;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 270/313
F. Types and volumes of wastes generated and proposed storage/disposal methods;
G. Storage and use of flammable/explosive materials;
H. Discharged water quality levels and site drainage;
I. Any other factors such as heat, humidity, or electromagnetic radiation which may reduce adverse impacts.
Where not otherwise specified by a governing regulation, the determination of compliance with these items shall be
based upon measurements taken at the boundaries of the property in which such uses are proposed or at the
boundaries of residentially zoned districts adjacent to or across any street from such proposed uses.
Upon receipt of an application for an industrial use, the City shall send referrals to appropriate County, State, and/or
Federal agencies to solicit responses to the adequacy of the information as submitted and the most appropriate
methods and time schedules for monitoring compliance with any imposed standards if a proposal is approved. (Ord.
4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.611: LIVESTOCK:
A. Livestock Harboring: Harboring of livestock shall be limited to the Yuma County Fairgrounds, veterinary clinics,
meat processing, pack and slaughterhouses; rodeo and equine facilities; and livestock auction facilities.
B. Livestock Density: For the purposes of this chapter, "animal unit" shall mean a unit of measurement used to
determine the animal capacity of animals grazing and/or confined in the City of Yuma. The animal unit capacity
is determined by multiplying the number of animals of each species by the appropriate equivalency factor listed
in subsection B1 of this section, and summing the resulting totals for all animal species contained in the
operation.
1. The animal unit equivalency factors are as follows:
Animal Species Equivalency Factor
All cattle, buffalo, cattalo, horses, mules and asses:
Under the age of 9 months 0.25
Over the age of 9 months 1.0
Swine:
Under 55 pounds 0.1
55 pounds and over 0.4
Sheep, goats 0.4
Turkeys, chickens, ducks, and domestic fowl 0.1
Alternative livestock 1.0
2. If livestock grazing or confinement is allowed by this Code, the animal density shall not be greater than one
animal unit per acre, except as follows:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 271/313
a. Property registered for a nonconforming use to permit grazing or confinement at a rate greater than one
animal per acre pursuant to section 17.09.905 of this title.
b. Livestock located at the Yuma County Fairgrounds, or any lawful business requiring the confinement of
livestock at a rate greater than one animal per acre, including, but not limited to, veterinary clinics; meat
processing, pack and slaughterhouses; rodeo and equine facilities; and livestock auction facilities. (Ord. 4-
2003 §6, 2003: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.06.612: DWELLING; MOBILE HOMES, SPECIAL PURPOSES:
Applications for a temporary permit under this category shall be submitted to the City on such forms required by the
City, along with appropriate fees, as determined by resolution of the City Council.
A. A temporary permit shall be granted upon approval of the City Council by resolution, provided that the City
Council has determined at a public hearing that:
1. The proposed temporary structure will be compatible with the zoning district in which it is located;
2. The proposed temporary structure will not substantially injure or detract from the use of neighboring property,
or from the character of the neighborhood, taking into account the aesthetic qualities of the structure and
neighborhood;
3. There are adequate and available public utilities and services for the proposed temporary structure and it will
facilitate logical, efficient and economic extensions of public services and facilities;
4. The proposed temporary structure is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this title, this Code, and the
Yuma comprehensive master plan;
5. The proposed temporary structure will serve to protect the best interest of the City and the health, safety and
welfare of the public;
6. The proposed temporary structure will not be used for residential purposes.
B. Notices of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners whose property adjoins the proposed location for the
temporary structure. Notice of the said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
Yuma, at least four (4) days prior to the hearing date.
C. The City Council shall determine the term of the temporary permit. In no event shall the term of the permit be
granted for a period greater than two (2) years. Upon conclusion of the term, the applicant must remove the
temporary structure from the property.
D. The temporary permit shall not be assignable.
E. If use of the temporary structure is discontinued for a period exceeding six (6) months, the temporary permit shall
be deemed abandoned, and shall expire. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 5-1999 §3, 1999)
17.06.613: PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
A. No person shall park, or knowingly permit to be parked, any motor vehicle in the front yard of a lot on which
exists a single-family or two-family dwelling for any purpose except the washing of such vehicle; delivering items
to said house; retrieving items from said house; or storing vehicles used in construction or demolition on the
property. The parking of a motor vehicle in violation of this section is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance
and danger to the public health, safety and welfare and is prohibited, unless such motor vehicle is parked on an
improved area having a surface of asphalt, concrete, rock, gravel, or other similar inorganic material, or organic
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 272/313
material specifically intended for a parking surface area, and such improved area has a permanent border. This
prohibition shall apply to side yards only if such side yards abut a public street other than an alley. For the
purposes of this section, the terms "yard", "front yard" and "side yard" shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in section 17.03.302 of this title. No area of a yard governed by this section that is improved after February 6,
2004, to allow for the parking of motor vehicles shall constitute more than forty percent (40%) of any front or side
yard unless said improved area abuts only a collector or arterial street upon which parking is prohibited.
B. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine up to and including three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation, but no jail sentence or other form of imprisonment may be imposed, a fine being the exclusive
punishment, however, failure to pay a fine may result in imprisonment pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes,
section 13-10-113, as amended. (Ord. 1-2004 §1, 2004)
17.06.615: MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES:
A. Intent, Authority And Applicability:
1. Intent: It is the intent of this section to prohibit certain land uses related to medical marijuana in the City, and in
furtherance of its intent, the City Council makes the following findings:
a. The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code clarifies Colorado law regarding the scope and extent of article
XVIII, section 14 of the Colorado Constitution.
b. The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code specifically authorizes the governing body of a municipality to "vote
to prohibit the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical
marijuana infused products manufacturers' licenses".
c. The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code specifically authorizes a municipality "to prohibit the operation of
medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana infused
products manufacturers' licenses ...based on local government zoning, health, safety, and public welfare
laws for the distribution of medical marijuana".
d. Based on careful consideration of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, article XVIII, section 14 of the
Colorado Constitution, and the potential secondary effects of the cultivation and dispensing of medical
marijuana, and the retail sale, distribution, and manufacturing of medical marijuana infused products, such
land uses have an adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants.
2. Authority: The City's authority to adopt this section is found in: the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code,
Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-11-101 et seq.; the Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act,
Colorado Revised Statutes section 29-20-101 et seq.; Colorado Revised Statutes section 31-23-101 et seq.
(municipal zoning powers); Colorado Revised Statutes sections 31-15-103 and 31-15-401 (municipal police
powers); Colorado Revised Statutes section 31-15-501 (municipal authority to regulate businesses); and the
Yuma Home Rule Charter.
3. Applicability: This section shall apply to all property within the City.
B. Definitions: As used in this section, the words and terms shall have the same meaning as provided under State
law.
C. Prohibited: Medical marijuana dispensaries, medical marijuana centers, medical marijuana infused products
manufacturers, and optional premises cultivation operations are prohibited within the City of Yuma.
D. May Not Be Operated: Medical marijuana dispensaries, medical marijuana centers, medical marijuana infused
products manufacturers, and optional premises cultivation operations may not be operated as a use by right,
conditional use, temporary use, primary land use, incidental activity to another lawful land use, or as a home
occupation.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 273/313
E. Caregivers: Caregivers within the City of Yuma are authorized to engage in only those activities regarding
medical marijuana which are set forth in section 14 of article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution as defined and
limited by section 25-1.5-106 of the Colorado Revised Statutes (CRS). Caregivers within the City of Yuma are
subject to any and all restrictions, limitations, and prohibitions regarding the possession, consumption, transfer
and cultivation of medical marijuana as set forth in section 25-1.5-106 of the Colorado Revised Statutes (CRS)
and all administrative rules and regulations promulgated by Colorado State agencies.
F. Patients: Patients within the City of Yuma are authorized to engage in only those activities regarding medical
marijuana which are set forth in section 14 of article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution as defined and limited by
section 25-1.5-106 of the Colorado Revised Statutes (CRS). Patients within the City of Yuma are subject to any
and all restrictions, limitations, and prohibitions regarding the possession, consumption, transfer and cultivation
of medical marijuana as set forth in section 25-1.5-106 of the Colorado Revised Statutes (CRS) and all
administrative rules and regulations promulgated by Colorado State agencies. (Ord. 18-2018, 2018: Ord. 11-
2010, 2010)
17.06.616: MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. Intent, Authority And Applicability:
1. Intent: It is the intent of this section to prohibit certain land uses related to marijuana in the City, and in
furtherance of its intent, the City Council makes the following findings:
a. Article XVIII, section 16 of the Colorado Constitution specifically authorizes that a "locality may prohibit the
operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing
facilities, or retail marijuana stores through the enactment of an ordinance..."; and
b. Section 2(e) of section 16, article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution defines "locality" to include a
"municipality" and the City of Yuma is a municipality.
c. Based on careful consideration of article XVIII, section 16 of the Colorado Constitution and Federal law, City
Council has determined to follow Federal law regarding the possession, use and cultivation of marijuana,
and has determined as an exercise of its local Land Use Authority that such marijuana establishments,
defined as marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing
facilities, and retail marijuana stores, shall not be located within the corporate limits of the City.
2. Authority: The City's authority to adopt this section is found in: article XVIII, section 16 of the Colorado
Constitution; the Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Colorado Revised Statutes 29-20-101 et
seq.; 31-23-101 et seq. (municipal zoning powers); sections 31-15-103, 31-15-401 (municipal police powers);
section 31-15-501 (municipal authority to regulate businesses); and the Yuma Home Rule Charter.
3. Applicability: This section shall apply to all property within the City.
B. Definitions: As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, any terms used herein shall
have the same meanings as provided in article XVIII, section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. These definitions
include, but are not limited to, the following:
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES: Any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human
body.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY: An entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell
marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and other marijuana
cultivation facilities, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: A marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product
manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana store.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 274/313
MARIJUANA OR MARIHUANA: All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marihuana concentrate. "Marijuana" or
"marihuana" does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake
made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of
any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other
product.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY: An entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture,
prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana
product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of
marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible
products, ointments, and tinctures.
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY: An entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CENTER: An entity licensed by a state agency to sell marijuana products pursuant to
section 14 of this article and the Colorado medical marijuana code.
RETAIL MARIJUANA STORE: An entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and
marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana products
to consumers.
C. Facilities Prohibited: Marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing
facilities, and retail marijuana stores are prohibited within the city of Yuma.
D. Operation As Use Or Home Occupation Prohibited: Marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product
manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities, and retail marijuana stores may not be operated as a use by
right, conditional use, temporary use, primary land use, incidental activity to another lawful land use, or as a
home occupation. (Ord. 1-2013, 2013)
Chapter 17.07
FENCE REGULATIONS
17.07.701: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate all fences so as to protect the character of various areas of the City and to
protect the health, safety, and public welfare of the citizens. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.702: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall construct or replace any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge without obtaining
a fence permit through the City Manager. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.703: PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application for a fence permit as described in section 17.07.702 of this chapter shall be made upon forms
provided by the City. Required information shall include an accurate drawing showing all property lines, sidewalks,
streets, alleys, easements and improvements. The drawing should also include a sketch of the proposed fence,
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 275/313
wall, or hedge and a description of the materials to be used. No application shall be approved unless each structure
is properly designed in compliance with the currently adopted Building Code. Permit fee shall be determined by City
Council and shall be paid upon application. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
17.07.704: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. No person shall erect or replace any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall which extends beyond the
property lines except as allowed under section 17.07.710 of this chapter.
B. No person shall plant the trunk of any hedge closer than two feet (2') within any property line, except as allowed
under section 17.07.710 of this chapter. Such hedge shall be maintained under the allowed height as set forth in
other sections of this chapter.
C. No person shall erect or replace any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge or any combination
thereof in excess of six feet (6') in height in any district except as allowed under section 17.07.710 of this
chapter.
D. Any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge proposed in a lot having a residential use in a C-1,
C-2, I-1 and I-2 District shall conform with the residential zoning (R-1, R-2, R-3) regulations of this chapter.
E. If, in the sole discretion of the City Manager, any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge is
permitted on any public easement, in flood control areas or across ditches, they must be designed and
constructed so as to allow the ingress and egress of respective utility companies; avoid obstruction of drainage,
not impede the flow of floodwaters, nor accumulate debris; and be subject to being easily moved. If any such
fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge is required to be moved for maintenance or any other
purpose, said removal shall be the responsibility of and at the sole expense of the property owner without any
liability to the City. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.705: LOCATION; R-1, R-2, R-3 AND MH DISTRICTS:
A. Any solid fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge not over thirty six inches (36") in height and
fences at least eighty percent (80%) open and not over forty two inches (42") in height may be erected or
replaced anywhere on a lot in R-1, R-2, R-3 and MH Districts except as limited in other sections of this chapter.
B. Any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge not over six feet (6') in height in R-1, R-2, and R-3
Districts may be erected or replaced anywhere on a lot except in a front yard and "line of sight clearance area"
as defined below:
"Line of sight clearance area" is defined as the triangular area formed by: 1) the lines extending from any corner
of a corner lot adjacent to two (2) intersecting streets to a distance of fifty feet (50') along both curb lines from
the corner (constituting 2 sides); and 2) the diagonal connecting such lines (constituting the third side). (Ord. 3-
1997 §8, 1997: Ord. 20-1996 §10, 1996: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.706: LOCATION; C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2 AND A-1 DISTRICTS:
A. Any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge not over six feet (6') in height may be erected or
replaced anywhere on a lot in C-1, C-2, I-1, or I-2 Districts, except as follows:
1. Any property located in C-1, C-2, I-1, or I-2 which has an approved and valid nonconforming R-1, R-2, R-3, or
MH use must comply with section 17.07.705 of this chapter;
2. Any additional limitations as expressed elsewhere in this chapter.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 276/313
B. Any fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge proposed in an A-1 District may be allowed, but only
for recreational or security purposes and at the discretion of the City Manager. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 7-1997
§10, 1997: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.707: FENCES NOT PERMITTED:
A. No aboveground electrically charged fences will be permitted in any zoning district. No person shall erect or
replace any device or system for electrically charging any fence, wall or partition within the City.
B. No person shall erect, repair or maintain any barbed wire fence in the City, with the following exception:
No more than four (4) horizontal strands of barbed wire may be strung on the top of a chainlink fence for
industrial or commercial uses located in any industrial or commercial zone for security purposes. The lowest
strand of barbed wire shall be a minimum of six feet (6') above the ground. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.708: TEMPORARY FENCES:
Land under development may be surrounded by a temporary chainlink fence up to six feet (6') in height and allowed
for a specified time as a temporary fence at the discretion of the City Manager, upon application. Gates into the
fence enclosure may be provided as needed. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.709: FENCES REQUIRED:
A. All outdoor swimming pools of five thousand (5,000) gallon capacity, or more, shall be enclosed by a fence or
wall six feet (6') in height.
B. In the event the City Council deems it necessary for the general health, safety, welfare and enjoyment of property
by citizens, or for environmental and aesthetic values, it may require up to an eight foot (8') fence made of
materials suitable to the circumstances to separate the various Residential Zoning Districts from one another
and from Commercial and Industrial Districts, or to surround junkyards, lumberyards, salvage yards, and similar
uses. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.710: EXCEPTIONS; LOCATION AND HEIGHT:
The City Manager may, after finding the circumstances meet the following criteria: a) that the adjacent property
owner will not be adversely affected, b) that pedestrian access will not be hampered, and c) the line of sight
clearance area will be clear, consider the following as exceptions to the location and height requirements of a fence,
and in his sole discretion, grant a fence permit:
A. For location exceptions:
1. Where a fence, divisional, retaining or freestanding wall or hedge is requested to extend over the right-of-way
line toward a public street.
2. On a through lot.
B. For height exceptions:
1. Recreational fences and walls:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 277/313
a. Tennis courts.
b. Baseball fields.
c. Other similar recreational uses.
2. Commercial and industrial zones:
a. Fences for security purposes.
b. Fences necessary for and used in conducting a particular business. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2,
1995)
17.07.711: VIOLATIONS:
Existing fences in violation of this chapter and erected prior to its amendment, except those fences hampering
pedestrian access or those fences in the line of sight clearance area, may be permitted to remain; however, once
destroyed or removed, fences must be replaced to conform to this chapter. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.07.712: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Authority: The City Manager will be responsible for enforcing compliances with this chapter.
B. Noncomplying Fences, Notice Of Violation: Notice of violation shall be given to the property owner of such fence
to be removed or brought into compliance within fifteen (15) days, except in cases when, upon request by the
property owner, the City Manager has granted a reasonable extension of time for compliance.
C. Removal Order: The City Manager may, in order to protect the health, safety, welfare and property enjoyment of
the citizens and inhabitants of the City, order that fences, divisional, retaining or freestanding walls, hedges and
other plantings which cause traffic hazards or which are dilapidated, unsightly or dangerous, be removed within
a specific time period, depending upon the severity of the hazard.
D. Noncomplying Fences, Failures To Comply With Notice: Any person who fails to comply with any such order by
the City Manager shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
Chapter 17.08
SIGN REGULATIONS
17.08.801: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose and scope of this chapter is to regulate all exterior signs so as to protect property values, to protect the
character of various areas of the City, and to protect the health, safety and public welfare of the citizens. This
chapter is not intended to regulate official traffic or government signs; window displays; product dispensers;
scoreboards on athletic fields; flags of any nation, government, or noncommercial organizations; gravestones;
religious symbols; commemorative plaques; or any display or construction not defined as a sign. (Ord. 3-1997 §9,
1997)
17.08.802: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner,
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 278/313
product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found.
ADMINISTRATOR: The City Manager or his designated representative.
AREA: See definition of sign, area of.
AWNING SIGN: A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
BANNER SIGN: A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing framework.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (Automatic): A sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or
through mechanical means; e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (Manual): A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field; e.g., reader boards
with changeable letters.
CITY: Unless the context clearly discloses a contrary intent, the word "city" shall mean the City of Yuma.
CLEARANCE (Of A Sign): The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the closest adjacent street or street
curb and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor, and/or material
supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located.
COPY: The wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter form.
DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATIONAL SIGN: An on premises sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information
and which may contain the name or logo of an establishment but no advertising copy; e.g., parking or exit and
entrance signs.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER: See definition of Changeable Copy Sign (Automatic).
FACE OF SIGN: The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
FLAT WALL SIGN: A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than six inches (6") from the wall of a
building. This definition includes painted wall, individual letter, and cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building.
GOVERNMENT SIGN: Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state, or
federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or
public service property or facility.
HEIGHT (Of A Sign): The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, including decorative
embellishments, to the grade of the closest adjacent street.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building, institution, or person
and/or to the activity or occupation being identified.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of
illuminating the sign.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on
the premises; e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign which was erected legally but which does not comply with subsequently
enacted restrictions and regulations.
MAINTENANCE: For the purposes of this chapter, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of
a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 279/313
MANSARD: A sloped roof or roof like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall.
MARQUEE: A permanent roof like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the
facade of a building.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure.
MULTIFACED SIGN: A sign with more than one face.
NAMEPLATE: A nonelectric on premises identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an
occupant or group of occupants.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment,
which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which said sign is located; e.g.,
"billboards" or "outdoor advertising".
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located.
OWNER: A person recorded as such, as shown by the records of the Yuma County Assessor. For the purposes of
this chapter, the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless facts to
the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the Administrator; e.g., a sign leased from
a sign company.
PAINTED WALL SIGN: Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. See also
definition of flat wall sign.
PERSON: For the purposes of this chapter, any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, or similarly
defined dispenser.
POINT OF PURCHASE DISPLAY: Advertising of a retail item accompanying its display; e.g., an advertisement on a
product dispenser.
POLITICAL SIGN: For the purposes of this chapter, a temporary sign used in connection with a local, State, or
national election or referendum.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a
structure or building.
PREMISES: A parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be
regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate.
PROJECTING WALL SIGN: A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a building wall
or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent,
lease, or sale.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected over any roofline, or on the roof of a building to which it is attached.
ROOFLINE: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons,
chimneys, or minor projections.
SIGN, AREA OF: The area of a sign is the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or
rectangles which enclose the extreme limits of the advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration,
display, illustration, insignia, surface or space of a similar nature, together with any frame or other material, color, or
condition which forms an integral part of the display and is used to differentiate such sign from the wall or
background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed.
Further, where a sign consists only of individual letters, numerals, symbols, or other similar components and is
painted on or attached flat against the wall of a building, and where such individual components are without
integrated background definition and are not within a circumscribed frame area, the total area of the sign shall be
the sum of the areas of the squares or rectangles surrounding each individual sign component.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 280/313
SNIPE SIGN: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, etc.
SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A freestanding or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision,
condominium complex, or residential development.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign not constructed or intended for longer than one month per year.
UNDER CANOPY SIGN: A sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign installed or painted on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. (Ord. 20-
2018, 2018: Ord. 7-2012, 2012: Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.803: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all signs shall require building permits and payment of fees and Use Tax.
No permit is required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on painted, printed, or changeable copy
signs. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.804: PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application for a sign permit, as described in section 17.08.803 of this chapter, shall be made upon forms
provided by the City. Required information shall include an accurate drawing showing all property lines, sidewalks,
streets, alleys, easements and improvements. The drawing should also include a sketch of the proposed sign and a
description of the materials to be used. No application shall be approved unless each structure is properly designed
in compliance with the currently adopted Building Code. Permit fee shall be determined by City Council and shall be
paid upon application. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
17.08.805: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to erect, place, or maintain a sign in the City except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.805.1: SIGNS PROHIBITED:
The following types of signs are prohibited in all districts:
A. Abandoned signs that are a blight or nuisance;
B. Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals;
C. Snipe signs attached to trees, telephone poles, streetlights, or placed on any public property or public right-ofway;
D. Signs placed on vehicles or semitrailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose of advertising a
service or product other than said vehicle or semitrailer. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.805.2: UNREGULATED SIGNS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 281/313
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Construction signs of thirty two (32) square feet or less.
B. Directional/informational signs of five (5) square feet or less.
C. Nameplates and identification signs of three (3) square feet or less.
D. Political signs.
E. Public signs or notices, or any sign related to an emergency.
F. Real estate signs of sixteen (16) square feet or less.
G. Window signs.
H. Incidental signs.
I. Point of purchase display signs.
J. Subdivision identification signs of thirty two (32) square feet or less.
K. Any sign which is located completely within an enclosed building and which is not visible from outside the
building, and any sign which is so located that it is not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which
it is located or from any public thoroughfare.
L. Any grave marker, headstone, memorial statue, or other similar remembrances that are noncommercial in nature.
M. Names and addresses on postal boxes.
N. Residential address numbers.
O. Names of newspapers and similar publications on their delivery boxes.
P. The posting of privately owned land and/or buildings or structures against trespass, hunting, fishing, swimming or
any other activity, and/or the warning of any person against any danger, hazard or condition pertaining to such
land and/or buildings and structures.
Q. Cornerstones, memorial tablets, and similar markers made of masonry, bronze and other incombustible and
durable material and used to indicate, without advertising matter, information relating to the development of the
facility on which they are located such as those involved in planning, financing and construction of buildings.
R. Historical signs and markers designating places of historical significance.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 282/313
S. City entry identification signs designating entry points to the City.
T. City facilities identification and direction signs.
U. Flags, pennants or insignia of nations or an organization of nations, states or cities, except when such flags are
used in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device.
V. Window displays incorporating placards, pennants, merchandise, pictures or models of products or services.
W. Works of fine art which in no way identify a product or business and which are not displayed in conjunction with a
commercial enterprise, which enterprise may benefit or realize direct commercial gain from such display.
X. Temporary decorations or displays clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with national, local
or religious holiday celebrations or special events.
Y. Traffic and other official signs of any public or governmental agency.
Z. Signs over gas pumps which indicate gas prices, provided that such signs shall be limited to one per pump island
and shall be no larger than four (4) square feet per face.
AA. Bus benches and/or shelters within any City rights-of-way displaying advertisements pursuant to an agreement
between the City and the owner, provided that such agreement regulates the size, content, placement, design
and materials used for construction of said bus bench and/or shelter sign.
BB. Bus benches and/or shelters on private property displaying advertisements, upon approval by City Council.
(Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.805.3: LINE OF SIGHT CLEARANCE AREA:
Any sign proposed in a line of sight clearance area of a lot shall have the sign height less than three feet (3') or its
sign clearance at least seven feet (7'). "Line of sight clearance area" is defined as the triangular area formed by: a)
the lines extending from any corner of a corner lot adjacent to two (2) intersecting streets to a distance of fifty feet
(50') along both curb lines from the corner (constituting 2 sides); and b) the diagonal connecting such lines
(constituting the third side). (Ord. 4-2001 §7, 2001: Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.805.4: SIGN CLEARANCE:
All signs proposed to overhang any public sidewalk shall have a clearance of at least seven feet (7') except for
projecting signs which shall have a clearance of at least nine feet (9'). (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.805.5: CHANGEABLE COPY:
Any sign herein allowed may use manual or automatic changeable copy. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.805.6: SIGN CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 283/313
No person or group or persons may engage in the business of erecting, altering, relocating, constructing, or
maintaining signs requiring a permit under this chapter without a valid contractor's license and all required State and
Federal licenses. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.805.7: INDEMNIFICATION:
All persons involved in the maintenance, installation, alteration, or relocation of signs near or upon any public rightof-
way or property shall agree to save and hold harmless and indemnify the City, its officers, agents, and
employees, against any and all claims of negligence resulting from such work. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.806: REQUIREMENTS BY ZONE:
The sign requirements for various types of signs for each zoning district are given in table 8.1 of this section. All
requirements apply to each individual use of that property. For instance, for two (2) uses of a property, the number
of signs allowed doubles.
TABLE 8.1
R-1, R-2, R-3,
MH6
Freestanding 25 2 6 1 0 No No
Flat wall 25 n/a TOW3 1 0 No No
Under canopy
10 n/a n/a 1 0 No No
Awning 10 n/a n/a 1 0 No No
Marquee 25 n/a n/a 1 2 No No
Portable 25 PL4 6 1 0 No No
Banner 25 5 10 1 0 No No
Projecting wall
25 n/a n/a 1 0 No No
0-39
mph
40+
mph5
0-39
mph
40+
mph
0-39
mph
40+
mph
0-39
mph
40+
mph
C-1, C-2
Sign
Classification
By Zoning
District
Maximum
Area In
Square Feet
Minimum
Setback
In Feet
Maximum
Height In
Feet
Number
Allowed Of
Sign Type
Number
Allowed
Total
Illumination
Allowed
Off
Premises
Allowed
Sign
Classification
By Zoning
District
Maximum
Area In
Square
Feet
Minimum
Setback
In Feet
Maximum
Height In
Feet
Number
Allowed Of
Sign Type
Number
Allowed
Total
Illumination
Allowed
Off
Premises
Allowed
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 284/313
Freestanding 2/LF
4/LF2
2 2 35 50 1/ST
1/ST1
0 Yes Yes
Flat wall 2/LF
4/LF n/a n/a TOW
TOW
2/ST
2/ST
0 Yes Yes
Under canopy
25 50 n/a n/a n/a n/a 1/ST
1/ST
0 Yes No
Awning 25 50 n/a n/a n/a n/a 1/ST
1/ST
0 Yes No
Marquee 50 50 n/a n/a n/a n/a 1 1 4 Yes No
Portable 25 50 PL PL 10 10 1 1 0 Yes No
Banner 30 50 3 3 10 10 1 1 0 Yes No
Projecting wall
30 100 n/a n/a n/a n/a 2/ST
2/ST
0 Yes Yes
Rooftop 2/LF
4/LF n/a n/a 35 50 1 1 0 Yes No
I-1, I-2
Freestanding 2/LF
4/LF 2 2 35 50 1 1 0 Yes Yes
Flat wall 2/LF
4/LF n/a n/a TOW
TOW
2/ST
2/ST
0 Yes Yes
Under canopy
25 50 n/a n/a n/a n/a 1/ST
1/ST
0 Yes No
Awning 25 50 n/a n/a n/a n/a 1/ST
1/ST
0 Yes No
Marquee 50 50 n/a n/a n/a n/a 1 1 4 Yes No
Portable 25 50 PL PL 10 10 1 1 0 Yes No
Banner 30 50 3 3 10 10 1 1 0 Yes No
Projecting wall
50 100 n/a n/a n/a n/a 2/ST
2/ST
0 Yes Yes
Notes:
1. 1/ST = one sign per street front allowed.
2. 2/LF = 2 square feet per linear foot of structure frontage.
3. TOW = top of wall.
4. PL = property line.
5. Regulations according to posted speed limit of street or highway adjacent to sign.
6. See section 17.08.806.1 of this chapter for other restrictions.
Sign
Classification
By Zoning
District
Maximum
Area In
Square
Feet
Minimum
Setback
In Feet
Maximum
Height In
Feet
Number
Allowed Of
Sign Type
Number
Allowed
Total
Illumination
Allowed
Off
Premises
Allowed
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 285/313
Signs on corner lots must also comply with section 17.08.805.3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.806.1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH districts, signs are allowed as an accessory use to legal nonresidential uses only, such as
churches, hospitals, schools, legal nonconforming uses, and signs described in section 17.08.805.2 of this chapter.
(Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.807: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
17.08.807.1: COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING CODE:
All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the currently adopted uniform building code
and all applicable state or federal codes. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.807.2: ANCHORING:
No sign shall be suspended by nonrigid attachments that will allow the sign to swing in a wind, and all freestanding
signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on or permanently attached to concrete foundations. (Ord. 3-
1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.807.3: WIND LOADS:
Solid signs, other than flat wall signs, shall be designed to withstand a wind load of thirty five (35) pounds per
square foot on any face up to a sign height of thirty five feet (35'), and forty (40) pounds per square foot for signs in
excess of thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.808: ENFORCEMENT:
17.08.808.1: INSPECTION AUTHORITY:
All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the director of public works or designee.
(Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.808.2: REINSPECTION AUTHORITY:
All signs may be reinspected at the discretion of the director of public works or designee. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.808.3: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
All signs shall be maintained in such a manner so as not to be distracting, unattractive or a public nuisance, and
shall be kept in good repair and effectively serve the purpose for which they are intended. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 286/313
17.08.808.4: NONCOMPLYING SIGNS, NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Notice of violation shall be given by the director of public works or designee to the owner of the real property on
which the sign is or is to be located, and if it has been brought to the attention of the director of public works or
designee that the owner and/or user of the sign is different than the owner of the real property, notice of violation
shall also be given to the owner and/or user of the sign. Such notice shall state specifically the sign to be removed
or brought into compliance, with details of action to be taken to bring into compliance in accordance with this
chapter. Removal or compliance shall be completed within the time frame specified in the notice, which time frame
shall be determined by the director of public works or designee, based upon the size of the sign, the complexity of
compliance and other factors, as determined by the director of public works or designee in setting the time frame for
removal or compliance. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
17.08.808.5: NONCOMPLYING SIGNS, FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE:
Failure to remove or bring the sign(s) into compliance in accordance with notice given according to section
17.08.808.4 of this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter and subject to penalties of such ordinance 1, series of
1965, section 22. (Ord. 3-1997 §9, 1997)
Chapter 17.09
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
17.09.901: PURPOSE:
Certain existing uses of lots or structures and locations of such uses, or sizes and dimensional requirements of lots
and structures, may not be in conformance with the provisions and requirements of this title or subsequent
amendments.
This chapter recognizes these situations, permits the restricted use and maintenance of such nonconformities, and
offers provisions for their possible replacement, expansion, and alteration. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.902: CONTINUANCE:
A nonconforming use, structure, or lot may continue, if legally in existence on July 24, 1995, subject to other
provisions in this chapter. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.903: CONFORMING STRUCTURE AND LOT:
Once changed to a conforming condition, no structure or lot shall be reverted to a nonconforming condition. (Ord. 7-
1997 §9, 1997: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.904: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
Whenever a nonconforming use, structure or lot is transferred or sold to a new owner, the existing nonconformity
may be utilized by the new owner. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.905: REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 287/313
Nonconforming uses, structures and lots must be registered with the City by the property owner and a zoning
compliance permit, listing such nonconformity as legal, shall be issued by the City following inspection of such
registered nonconformity and such other nonconformity as may be found upon inspection by the City. (Ord. 20-
2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.906: NONCONFORMING USES:
17.09.906.1: ABANDONMENT:
If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding six (6) months, the nonconforming use shall not be
reestablished nor shall it be replaced by another nonconforming use unless as approved under section 17.09.906.4
of this chapter. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.906.2: CHANGE IN USE:
Nonconforming uses shall not be changed to other nonconforming uses, unless as approved under section
17.09.906.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.906.3: EXPANSION:
Nonconforming uses may be expanded within a structure or lot after approval by the City Council by resolution,
provided City Council has determined, subsequent to a public hearing, that:
A. The increase or expansion is confined to the same structure and/or lot and does not encroach upon any other
structure or lot subsequently added to the original; or
B. If the proposed increase or expansion will not be confined to the same structure or lot, the City Council shall
consider one or more of the following in making its determination:
1. Compatibility with surrounding areas.
2. Harmony with the character of the area.
3. Its effect upon the immediate area.
4. Its effect on the future development of the area.
5. The health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the area and of the City.
C. The existence of the nonconforming use has not had, and proposed expansion or increase will not have, an
adverse or incompatible effect of impact on abutting properties and the neighborhood (i.e., visual, noise, or air
pollution, traffic volumes, and on street parking) and does not change the existing character and purpose of the
district within which located.
Notices of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners whose property adjoins the proposed reestablishment,
change or expansion of nonconforming use. Notice of the said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within Yuma, at least four (4) days prior to the hearing date. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 7-1997 §11, 1997:
Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.906.4: REESTABLISHMENT AND REPLACEMENT:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 288/313
Nonconforming uses may be reestablished after abandonment as stated in section 17.09.906.1 of this chapter or
may be replaced with another nonconforming use after approval of the City Council by resolution, provided the
Council has determined subsequent to a public hearing that:
A. The proposed nonconforming use which replaces an existing nonconforming use is more compatible with the
zoning district in which it is located than the existing nonconforming use.
B. The proposed nonconforming use will not substantially injure or detract from the use of neighboring property, or
from the character of the neighborhood.
C. The proposed nonconforming use will not have an adverse effect upon the future development of the area.
D. There are adequate and available public utilities and services for the proposed nonconforming use and it will
facilitate logical, efficient and economic extensions of public services and facilities.
E. The proposed nonconforming use will have no potential for environmental or objectionable impacts.
F. The proposed nonconforming use is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this title and the comprehensive
master plan.
G. The proposed nonconforming use will serve to protect the best interests of the City and the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
H. The proposed nonconforming use will not create any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
Notices of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners whose property adjoins the proposed reestablishment,
change or expansion of nonconforming use. Notice of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within Yuma, at least four (4) days prior to the hearing date. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 7-1997 §12, 1997:
Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.906.5: APPLICATION:
Application for expansion under section 17.09.906.3 of this chapter or reestablishment or replacement under section
17.09.906.4 of this chapter, all of nonconforming uses, shall be filed with the City, along with appropriate fees, as
determined by resolution of City Council. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
17.09.907: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
17.09.907.1: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
Repairs and maintenance to nonconforming structures may be made or required by the City which would reduce the
degree of nonconformity. Any other proposals which would expand or alter the structure shall comply with section
17.09.907.2 of this chapter. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.907.2: EXPANSION OR ALTERATION:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 289/313
Nonconforming structures may be expanded or altered after review and approval of the City Manager provided the
expansion or alteration does not increase the extent of the nonconformity existing and remains within the other
minimum requirements of the district within which it is located. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.09.908: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
A. Nonconforming lots which are vacant may be used after review and approval of the City Manager provided the
following situations are met:
1. Nonconforming lots can be shown to have been legally created and all the owners of interest certify that the
use proposed has their authorization;
2. The use proposed on the lot conforms to the uses allowed by this title within the district in which the lot is
located;
3. The use proposed complies, as nearly as possible, with the bulk, setback, and the dimensional requirements
of the district within which it is located, or the setbacks in feet from the front, side, and rear yard are equal in
proportion to the setbacks required on a conforming lot in the same district or are consistent with existing
historic setbacks of adjacent land uses;
4. The use proposed can be served by public water, sewer and utilities; and
5. The Fire Department, after reviewing the proposed use, approves the use to be in accordance with the Fire
Code standards.
B. Lots which are nonconforming because they have two (2) or more principal structures (including parts of a
specific structure) in a single lot for residential use may be altered in dimensions by virtue of a subdivision
provided the following situations are met:
1. The alteration is for the sole purpose of creating additional lots so that no single lot contains more than one
principal residential structure.
2. Each principal residential structure has independent access to Municipal utilities.
3. The new lots and residential structures within the new lots comply, as nearly as possible, with the bulk,
setback, and the dimensional requirements of the district within which it is located, or the setbacks in feet from
the front, side, and rear yard are equal in proportion to the setbacks required on a conforming lot in the same
district or are consistent with existing historic setbacks of adjacent land uses.
4. All new structures proposed on the property must strictly comply with the rules and regulations of the City of
Yuma, Colorado.
5. The residential use proposed on the lot conforms to the uses allowed by this title within the district in which
the lot is located.
6. In the event the newly proposed lots create a situation where the lot size, or setback limitations of the existing
structures fail to comply with section 17.04.403 of this title, the lot owner must seek approval of the proposed
alternative lot size, and/or setback limitations from the City Council. The City Council may give approval;
provided: a) the circumstances giving rise to two (2) or more principal residential structures occurred prior to
July 24, 1995; and b) the City Council finds the proposed alternative lot size, and/or setback limitations will
have no adverse effect on community services, neighborhood, and surrounding areas. Under no
circumstances may the landowner build additional structures which do not meet the requirements of section
17.04.403 of this title. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 5-2008 §1, 2008: Ord. 1-2000 §1, 2000:
Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
Chapter 17.10
AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 290/313
17.10.1001: PURPOSE:
For the purposes of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development or redevelopment within
the City, the rezoning of land and consequent amendment to the text, zoning map, or both shall be allowed only
under the procedures as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.10.1002: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
The City Council may, from time to time, amend the number, shape, boundaries, or areas of any district, and the
regulations or any other provisions of this title. Amendments to this title may be initiated by City Council or by
application from any citizen, group of citizens, firm, or corporation having interest in the subject property, with the
record property owner's consent and signature. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.10.1003: APPLICATION:
Application for an amendment to the text, map, or both of this title shall be filed with the City on such forms as
provided by the City, along with the appropriate fees. Upon staff review, the applicant shall be notified as to whether
the application is sufficiently complete to forward to the City Council. It is the applicant's responsibility to provide the
City with a current list of names and mailing addresses of all property owners, as shown by the records of the Yuma
County Assessor, of property both internal to and within three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the area
proposed for change. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.10.1004: AMENDMENT FEE:
For proposed amendments to the zoning text or map, a nonrefundable fee as set by the City Council shall be paid
by the applicant and applicant shall be responsible for all the actual costs of providing notice as required herein.
(Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.10.1005: REVIEW AND ACTION:
The following procedures shall be followed in reviewing and acting upon any zone amendment request:
A. After review by City staff and upon determination of completeness, the application shall be forwarded to the City
Council. The City Council shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application, hold a public hearing on the
matter. A notice of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Yuma and, if the
proposal is for a map amendment, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to owners of the affected
property and all property owners within three hundred feet (300'). Both the public and written notices shall be
made at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Failure to mail such notice to every owner shall not affect
the validity of any proceeding before the City Council;
B. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall approve, conditionally approval, or deny the application
within seven (7) days of the hearing. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.10.1006: TEXT AMENDMENT:
No request for text amendments shall be considered by the City Council unless it has determined that:
A. The amendment is consistent with and in furtherance of the stated intent and purposes of this title;
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 291/313
B. The existing text needs amending;
C. Where the amendment would include a map change, the provisions governing adoption of a map amendment
have been met as provided for in section 17.10.1007 of this chapter;
D. Where the amendment would add to the uses listed for a zoning district that the provisions of section 17.04.405,
"Uses Not Itemized", of this title, have been met; and
E. The amendment complies with the comprehensive master plan. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.10.1007: MAP AMENDMENTS:
No request for text amendments shall be considered by the City Council unless it has determined that there was an
error in the original zoning, considering the impropriety of spot zoning, or:
A. There have been significant changes in the area such that it is in the public interest to encourage a
redevelopment of the area or to recognize the changed character of the area;
B. The amendment is consistent with and in furtherance of the general intent and purposes of this title;
C. The amendment complies with the comprehensive master plan;
D. There is adequate justification for the rezoning;
E. The subject property is the correct site for the rezoning and is a reasonable parcel of land for such
reclassification;
F. The rezoning will not have an adverse impact on community services and the surrounding area;
G. The rezoning will not result in undue traffic congestion or traffic hazards;
H. The subject property, if rezoned, can be provided with public utilities to handle new uses;
I. The rezoning or map amendment will not result in significant environmental problems or pollution and that any
environmental constraints on the site can be reasonably overcome; and
J. The rezoning or map amendment will not result in the creation of a substantial number of nonconformities. (Ord.
2-2019, 2019)
17.10.1008: ANNEXATION:
Pursuant to the provisions of the Colorado Annexation Law, zoning of land in the process of annexation shall be
done in accordance with the procedure and notice requirements of this chapter. The proposed zoning shall not be
acted upon by the City Council prior to the time when the annexation ordinance is acted upon. If the zoning process
is commenced prior to the effective date of the annexation ordinance, the legal protest area for rezoning shall be
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 292/313
determined solely on geographic location, irrespective of whether the land in such protest area is within or without
the City limits.
Any area annexed shall be brought under the provisions of this title and the map thereunder within ninety (90) days
from the effective date of the annexation ordinance, irrespective of any legal review which may be instituted
challenging the annexation. During such ninety (90) day period or such portion thereof as is required to zone the
territory, the City shall refuse to issue any building permit or certificate of occupancy for any portion or all of the
newly annexed area. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.10.1009: REVERSION OF AMENDMENTS:
At the time the City Council considers a rezoning request, and/or any amendments to the zoning map, the applicant
shall be advised that a building permit must be obtained and construction must have commenced within a time
specified by the City Council in their action on the amendments. In the event these provisions have not been met,
the City shall notify the property owner to show cause why the City Council, at their sole and exclusive option,
should not review the zoning classification and initiate proceedings to rezone the land to its prior classification or to
such other classification as may be deemed to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
Chapter 17.11
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
17.11.1101: ADMINISTRATION:
The provisions of this title shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager or designee or authorized
representative, and he shall be vested with the following powers and duties:
A. To receive, review, process and issue all building permits, zoning compliance permits and certificates of
occupancy.
B. To receive applications for appeals and exceptions from chapter 17.07 of this title and forward them to the City
Council.
C. To review with City staff applications for amendments to this title.
D. To conduct inspections to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this title.
E. To issue stop, cease and desist orders and/or in writing correction of any and all conditions found to be in
violation of the provisions of all applicable City ordinances.
F. To institute, in the name of the City, any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent or bring to a halt any activity
in violation of this title.
G. To register nonconforming uses, structures, and lots in accordance with the provisions of chapter 17.09 of this
title.
H. To create and maintain the files required to carry out and maintain records of all actions pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 293/313
17.11.1102: CITY COUNCIL REVIEW:
The City Council shall review all applications for conditional uses, amendments, rezonings, alterations, changes, or
expansions to nonconforming uses, structures or lots.
In addition, the City Council is hereby authorized to review and make recommendation on any other request for a
use or a change of use governed by this title if formally requested to do so by the City Manager. In such instances,
the applicant shall be notified in writing that such a request has been made and the reasons behind the request.
The City Council may act on any item placed on the agenda provided a quorum of the membership is present. An
affirmative action by the City Council pursuant to any vote as required by this title, shall require the affirmative vote
of a majority of the members present. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.11.1103: CITY COUNCIL:
(Rep. by Ord. 2-2019, 2019)
17.11.1104: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this title shall be enforced by the City Manager or authorized representative or by use of the
following methods:
A. Requirements Of Zoning Compliance, Building And Occupancy Permits:
1. Zoning Compliance Permits: Hereinafter, no uses listed in this title may be established or changed; no
structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or removed; and no building or land shall be
used, occupied, or changed in use or occupation until a zoning compliance permit has been secured from the
City Manager. No permit will be considered until the City Manager has noted on the permit that the work,
occupancy, and/or use have been inspected and approved as being in conformity with the provisions of this
title. A zoning compliance permit need not precede subdivision or land development applications. No building
or occupancy permit shall be issued prior to the securing of a zoning compliance permit. However, a building
permit may be issued in conjunction with a zoning compliance permit.
2. Building Permits: No building or structure shall be erected, moved, or structurally altered unless a building
permit has been issued by the City Manager. All permits shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of
this title and all other applicable City ordinances.
3. Certificate Of Occupancy: No land may be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, moved, or
structurally altered may be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the City
Manager. Such permit shall only be issued when the building and use thereof complies with this title and all
other applicable City ordinances.
B. Inspections: The City Manager or authorized representative is hereby empowered to cause any building, other
structure or tract of land to be inspected and examined, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition
found to exist in violation of the provisions of this title. After any such order has been served, no work shall
proceed on the building, structure, or tract of land covered by such order except to correct or comply with the
terms of the order. (Ord. 20-2018, 2018: Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
17.11.1105: LIFE OF A PERMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 20-2018, 2018)
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 294/313
17.11.1106: SEVERABILITY:
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter adopted hereby is for any reason held to
be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of this chapter; the City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter in each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared invalid. (Ord. 4-1995 §2, 1995)
Chapter 17.12
AID AIRPORT INFLUENCE DISTRICT
17.12.1201: PERMITTED USES; PURPOSE:
The airport influence district may overlay any other zoning district. Permitted uses within the respective zoning
district are allowed except as they may be restricted or prohibited by the airport influence district. The purpose and
intent of the regulations contained in this chapter shall be to:
A. Minimize the danger to public health and safety or to property to hazardous areas around the airports;
B. Discourage traffic congestion, incompatibility of uses, expansion of demand for government services beyond the
reasonable capacity of the community or area to provide such services as determined by local government;
C. Avoid danger to public safety and health or to property due to aircraft crashes and traffic congestion. (Ord. 4-
2001 §10, 2001)
17.12.1202: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the following meanings:
AIRPORT: The existing Yuma municipal airport.
AIRPORT AREA OF INFLUENCE: That area upon which this regulation applies as shown on the map in section
17.12.1210 of this chapter.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: Four thousand one hundred thirty six feet (4,136') mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or object or natural growth located on or in the vicinity of the airport, or any use
of land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at the
airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of aircraft.
AIRPORT HEIGHT SURFACES: Imaginary surfaces designed by the federal aviation administration to control the
height of objects, both natural and manmade, which may affect navigable airspace around an airport, defined in
section 17.12.1207 of this chapter.
APPROACH AND TRANSITIONAL SURFACES: The imaginary surfaces applying to the area under the approach
and transitional defined in section 17.12.1207 of this chapter.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all surfaces set forth in this chapter and shown on the
airport influence area map, means the datum being the equivalent of mean sea level elevation, unless otherwise
specified.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure or object of natural growth which is inconsistent with the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 295/313
provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto.
PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway and extending two hundred feet (200') beyond
the end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of the runway is two hundred fifty feet (250').
RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
SETBACK: An area shown on the airport zoning map and described as a fifteen foot (15') setback off of the property
lines on Flagstaff Street from north to the south lot lines of lots 3 and 4.
STRUCTURE: An object constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers,
smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines.
TREE: Any object of natural growth.
USE:
Compatible Use: A use which is presumed to be compatible for the zone in which it is proposed and may be
permitted pursuant to the permit provisions of this title. A compatible use shall not be regarded as a use by right.
Conditional Use: A use granted by virtue of chapter 17.05 of this title.
Incompatible Use: A use which shall not be permitted in the airport zone where it is proposed.
UTILITY VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures
with no straight in instrument designated indicated on the FAA approved airport layout plan, or by any planning
document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. (Ord. 4-2001 §10, 2001)
17.12.1203: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS:
A. No structure shall be erected, altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow or be maintained above
the following imaginary surfaces:
1. Visual Approach Surface: Slopes upward twenty feet (20') horizontally for each foot vertically, beginning at the
end of and at the same elevation (4,136 feet MSL) as the primary surface and extending to an elevation of
four thousand two hundred eighty seven feet (4,287') MSL.
2. Transitional Surface: Slopes upward and outward seven feet (7') horizontally for each foot vertically beginning
at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surfaces, to the foregoing,
there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet (7') horizontally for each foot
vertically beginning at the sides and at the same elevation as the approach surfaces, and extending to an
elevation of four thousand two hundred eighty six feet (4,286') MSL.
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this regulation, no use may be made, or activity carried on, on any land
or water located within any surface established by this title in such a manner as to:
1. Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and
aircraft;
2. Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lighting;
3. Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport;
4. Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or
5. Otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to
use the airport including any structure, including towers, stacks or dirt piles over thirty five feet (35') in height
above four thousand one hundred thirty six feet (4,136') MSL, including the setback requirements as stated in
the definitions section of this chapter.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 296/313
C. In order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, the area around the Yuma airport is defined as the
following basin zones:
1. Visual Approach Surface Zone: As shown on the airport influence area map, a trapezoidal area beginning at
the end of the primary surface with the lateral width of two hundred fifty feet (250') at all runways, and:
a. Extending three thousand feet (3,000') horizontally in length and flaring to a dimension of eight hundred fifty
feet (850') in lateral width at runway 12 at the Yuma municipal airport;
b. Extending three thousand eighty feet (3,080') horizontally in length and flaring to a dimension of eight
hundred eighty four feet (884') in lateral width at runway 17 at the Yuma municipal airport.
2. Transitional Surface Zone: As shown on the air influence area map and described as those ground surface
areas lying under the imaginary surface explained in section 17.12.1207 of this chapter. (Ord. 4-2001 §10,
2001)
17.12.1204: APPLICABILITY:
These regulations shall apply to development in the airport influence area as zoned in this title. (Ord. 4-2001 §10,
2001)
17.12.1205: NONCONFORMING USES:
The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to any nonconforming use existing on the date the area is zoned
or subjected to regulations of the airport influence district; provided, that when the nonconforming use is
discontinued for a period of six (6) months or the nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged to the extent of
over fifty percent (50%) of the appraised value of the nonconforming structure, any reuse, reconstruction or
replacement shall be deemed a new use and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 4-2001
§10, 2001)
17.12.1206: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as exempting an applicant for a permit for any other requirements
of this jurisdiction of other state or federal laws and regulations.
B. To the extent that the requirements of these regulations differ from any other applicable requirements, the more
restrictive requirements shall apply. (Ord. 4-2001 §10, 2001)
17.12.1207: CRITERIA FOR ADMINISTRATION:
A. The provisions of this section apply to the area around the airport shown on the airport influence area map
authorized and contained by and in this chapter.
B. There are hereby established imaginary surfaces for the purpose of limiting height within the zoned area. Such
height limitations are established according to the provisions of FAA regulation FAR, part 77.
C. An area located in more than one of the following surfaces is limited by the more restrictive surface. (Ord. 4-2001
§10, 2001)
17.12.1208: AREA ZONED:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 297/313
The area that is subject to regulation or designation under this chapter is listed and described in sections
17.12.1207 and 17.12.1210 of this chapter. (Ord. 4-2001 §10, 2001)
17.12.1209: ZONING OF AIRPORT AREA:
This council having considered the intensity of current and foreseeable development pressures, the guidelines for
areas around airports promulgated by the Colorado department of local affairs division of planning, it is the order of
this council that the airport described in sections 17.12.1207 and 17.12.1210 of this chapter is zoned as such and
that the airport area described in sections 17.12.1207 and 17.12.1210 of this chapter is subject to these zoning
regulations hereby adopted by this council as an amendment and addition to the existing zoning code. (Ord. 4-2001
§10, 2001)
17.12.1210: AIRPORT INFLUENCE AREA MAP:
As adopted by this jurisdiction. (Ord. 4-2001 §10, 2001)
Title 18
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 18.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.01.101: TITLE:
This title shall be known as, and be cited as SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF CITY OF YUMA or SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.01.102: PURPOSE:
These regulations are designed, intended, and should be administered in a manner to:
A. Implement the Comprehensive Plan.
B. Establish adequate and accurate records of subdivision.
C. Assist efficient, orderly and integrated development of the City.
D. Provide for adequate and safe public utilities and improvements; and provide for other community facilities and
public places.
E. Provide for protection from fire, flood and other natural occurrences; and to provide for proper design of
stormwater drainage and streets.
F. Encourage well planned subdivisions by establishing adequate standards for design and improvement.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 298/313
G. Improve land survey monuments and records by establishing adequate standards for surveys and plats.
H. Safeguard the interests of the public, the homeowner, and the buyer.
I. Provide equitable handling of all subdivision plans by establishing uniform procedures and standards.
J. Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of surface and sub-surface water.
K. Restrict building on floodplains, areas covered by poor soils, or in areas poorly suited for building or construction.
L. Provide adequate space for future development of schools and parks to serve the population.
M. Assure the planning for and provision of an adequate and safe source of water and means of sewage disposal.
N. Provide that the costs of improvements, which primarily benefit the tract of land being subdivided, be provided by
the owners/developers of the tract, and the costs of improvements which primarily benefit the whole community
be provided by the whole community. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.01.103: JURISDICTION:
This title shall apply to all incorporated portions of the City of Yuma and such contiguous unincorporated areas,
within a three (3) mile area of the City, that bears reasonable relationship to the development of the City. (Ord. 4-
2016, 2016)
18.01.104: VIOLATION, PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any person who transfers or sells or agrees to sell, or offers to sell any subdivided land before a final plat for
such subdivided land has been approved by the City Council and has been recorded in the records of the
County Clerk and Recorder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to title 1, chapter 1.24 of this
Code.
B. The City shall have the power to bring to action to enjoin in the Municipal Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction any person from selling, agreeing to sell, or offering to sell subdivided land before a final plat for such
subdivided land has been approved by the City Council.
C. All departments, officials, and public employees of the City shall not issue permits, certificates or licenses for
buildings or use of property when such building or use would be in conflict with the provisions of these
regulations or the City's zoning regulations in title 17 of this Code. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.01.105: DEFINITIONS:
A. For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
ALLEY: A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public uses, which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to
the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility access.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 299/313
BLOCK: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public
streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks, or green strips, rural; or vacant land or drainage
channels or a combination of these.
CITY COUNCIL: City Council of the City of Yuma, Colorado.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto for the City of Yuma which has
been officially adopted to provide development policies for current and long range development with the City
and which may include, but not be limited to, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation, and
community facilities.
DEVELOPER: Any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, or corporation who shall participate as
owner, promoter, developer, promotion, sale, or lease of a subdivision.
FLOODPLAIN: The land inundated during a flood of 100-year frequency.
LOT: A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by a recorded plat map and which is
recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which abuts two (2) or more streets.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY: The map or maps of a proposed subdivision and specified supporting materials, drawn
and submitted in accordance with the requirements of adopted regulations, to permit the evaluation of the
proposal prior to detailed engineering and design.
PLAN, SKETCH: A map of a proposed subdivision, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements
of the subdivision regulations, to evaluate feasibility and design characteristics at an early stage in the
planning.
PLAT, FINAL: A map and supporting materials of certain described land prepared in accordance with
subdivision regulations as an instrument for recording of real estate interests with the City Clerk and Recorder.
STREET: Any public or private thoroughfare which affords a principal means of access to abutting property,
including public rights-of-way, highways, roads and avenues. For the purpose of this title, streets shall be
classified as defined in subsections 1 through 8 of this definition:
1. Major Highway: A major regional highway including an expressway, freeway, or interstate highway
designed to carry vehicular traffic:
a. Into, out of, or through the regional area (interregional);
b. From one political subdivision of the region to another or from an interregional highway (intraregional).
2. Major Or Arterial Street: A street or road designed to carry vehicular traffic from one part of a political
subdivision to another part of that same political subdivision.
3. Collector Street: A street or road designed to carry vehicular traffic from one or more individual residential
or nonresidential areas to or from a major street or major highway.
4. Local Street: A street or road designed to carry vehicular traffic from one or more individual residential or
nonresidential unit(s) to or from a collector street.
5. Cul-De-Sac: A short dead-end street terminating in a vehicular turn-around area.
6. Half Street: A street parallel and contiguous to a property line and of lesser right-of-way width than is
required for minor or major streets.
7. Service Road: A street or road paralleling and abutting major streets to provide access to adjacent
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 300/313
property so that each adjacent lot will not have direct access to the major streets.
8. Stub Street: A street or road extending from within a subdivision boundary and terminating there with no
permanent vehicular turnaround. Stub streets are provided to permit adjacent undeveloped parcels of land
to be developed later with an adjacent connecting street system.
SUBDIVISION: The division of any land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, tracts, plats, sites or separate
interests, or such other division, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or transfer of ownership,
or for building or other development, or for the creation of streets or other rights-of-way. Subdivision shall also
mean the consolidation, aggregation, and reconfiguration of lots. Unless otherwise specified, the term
subdivision does not apply to any of the following divisions of land:
1. Created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction in this State or by operation of law, provided that the
City is given notice of and an opportunity to participate in any judicial proceedings prior to the entry of any
such court order;
2. Which create separate but undivided interests in a tract of land such as joint tenancy, tenancy in
common, tenancy in entirety, trust, lien mortgage, deed of trust or other security interest, unless such
separate interests apply to less than all of the tract;
3. Which create cemetery lots;
4. Which create an interest in oil, gas, minerals or water which is severed from the surface ownership or real
property; or
5. Which create a utility easement or an easement unrelated to the use of the surface estate.
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT: A written contract between the City and a developer
providing for and describing conditions of approval for the subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: A subdivision of property that is not considered a minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A subdivision of property or change to lots that results in no more than two (2) lots.
This term shall include lot line eliminations and lot line adjustments so long as no more than two (2) lots result
from the change. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 7-2016, 2016: Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
Chapter 18.02
SUBDIVISION PROCESS
18.02.201: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
A. The developer should initiate the subdivision process by consulting with the City Manager or his or her designee
regarding this title and the proposed subdivision.
B. Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be placed on the agenda of the appropriate decisionmaking
body, only once a complete application is received by the City. However, a plat that does not meet all of
the requirements of this title may be submitted, providing the developer presents with the plat a written request
for specific exceptions and includes detailed information as to why the requirements are not being met.
C. Every application shall be accompanied by the application fee as set by City Council. In addition to the standard
fees, the applicant shall pay any actual costs incurred by the City for review of the application by consultants,
including but not limited to engineering, surveying, legal and planning, plus fifteen percent (15%) of such actual
costs for City staff administrative costs and supplies. The City may require a deposit from applicants to offset the
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 301/313
City's costs for review prior to consideration of any application. If the applicant does not pay any such fees within
thirty (30) days of written request by the City, the City may certify such past due fees to the County Treasurer as
a first and prior lien on the property for which the application is submitted. (Ord. 7-2016, 2016: Ord. 4-2016,
2016)
18.02.202: SKETCH PLAN:
A. Submission: Applicants shall submit an application for a sketch plan along with the items required in this section
to the City prior to the submission of a preliminary plan. The sketch plan will enable the City Council to informally
review the subdivision for compliance with these regulations.
B. Review Of Sketch Plan: The City Council shall review the sketch plan within thirty (30) days after receipt of a
complete submission and approve, approve with conditions or deny the sketch plan.
C. Submission Requirements: Developers shall submit an application for a sketch plan along with the following
items:
1. A sketch plan, drawn to a scale of 1" = 200' or greater (note: 1" = 100' is greater). The sketch plan shall
include:
a. Proposed name of subdivision. No subdivision in the City shall bear the same name as another subdivision
in the City or County unless adjoining and using consecutive numbering.
b. Name and address of the owner(s) and/or developer(s).
c. Vicinity map - showing major land use division, streets and major physical features for at least one-half (1/2)
mile on all sides of the proposed subdivision.
d. North point and date.
e. Legal description and total area of the subdivision.
f. Boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy solid line.
g. Existing zoning district boundaries.
h. Scale - written and graphic.
i. Proposed street layout, lots and other planning features.
j. Total acreage of the tract and the area percent of total area to be devoted to streets, residential types,
schools, and parks.
k. Existing topographic contours at ten foot (10') intervals or less drawn from available data such as the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) maps.
2. Report containing the following information:
a. Type of water system proposed; also documentation from the City showing its capability to supply water.
b. Type of sewage system proposed; also documentation from the City showing the capability to handle the
sewage.
3. Report concerning streams, drainage areas, topography, and vegetation and floodplain.
4. Report concerning the geological characteristics of the area significantly affecting the land use and
determining the impact of such characteristics on the proposed subdivision.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 302/313
5. Maps and tables concerning suitability of types of soils in the proposed subdivision, as shown on soil survey
maps prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and also a table of
interpretations of soil type should be included. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.02.203: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
A. Submission: The applicant shall submit a required preliminary plan application along with the other submission
requirements of this section to the City prior to the submission of a final plat but within twelve (12) months after
the City Council's action on the related sketch plan.
B. Expiration Of Approval: Approval of the preliminary plat shall expire eighteen (18) months after the date of
approval by City Council, unless an extension has been granted by City Council. Whenever a final plat is
submitted for a portion of the area of a preliminary plan the remaining unplated area shall be effectively
extended for an additional eighteen (18) months.
C. Preliminary Plan Review:
1. After the receipt of a complete preliminary plan submission, the City shall distribute copies of the preliminary
plan to the following for review and comment, suggestions and recommendations.
a. The local Soil Conservation District Board for review and recommendations regarding soil suitability and
drainage and flooding problems.
b. The State Department of Health, Water Pollution Control Division for reviewing adequacy of the sewer
collection system and water distribution system.
c. Yuma School Board.
d. To any utility, local improvement and service district where applicable.
e. Yuma County Planning Commission.
f. Yuma County Health Department.
g. Northeastern Colorado Council of Governments.
h. State Engineering Office for review of water rights available for the subdivision.
2. The above agencies shall have thirty (30) days to respond to the City.
3. Within forty five (45) days of the receipt of a complete application for a preliminary plan to the City, the
Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application.
4. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted on the property and published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing. At a public hearing, the City Council shall review the preliminary plan, supporting
documentation and any City staff input, and determine whether the plat complies with all City requirements,
regulations and standards. The City Council may continue the public hearing as it deems necessary.
5. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall approve, conditionally
approve or deny of the application.
D. Preliminary Plan Submission Requirements:
1. Applicants shall submit a minimum of ten (10) sets of the preliminary plan and supporting material to the City.
2. The preliminary plan submittal shall contain the following items:
a. Two (2) copies of the application.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 303/313
b. A preliminary plat, drawn to a scale of 1" = 200' or greater. One set must be drawn on linen or mylar. The
preliminary plat shall include the following on one or more 24" x 36" sheets:
(1) The name of the subdivision.
(2) The name and address of the owner(s), developer(s), designer and surveyor.
(3) A legal description of the area to be subdivided and its acreage.
(4) A vicinity and location map should be provided showing all major features within one-half (1/2) mile on all
sides.
(5) North point and date.
(6) Scale written and graphic.
(7) Boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy solid line with a small circle at each change in direction.
(8) Existing and proposed zoning district boundary lines.
(9) Total acreage and total number of proposed dwelling units.
(10) Proposed and existing contours referred to a datum found acceptable by the City Engineer with
intervals of one foot (1') within the tract and at least one hundred feet (100') immediately adjacent to the
tract.
(11) All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners in the
proposed subdivision, together with the purpose and conditions of such reservations. This shall include
names, locations, and widths of proposed right-of-ways of streets and alleys, along with total linear
footage of streets and alleys.
(12) Location, width, and purpose of all easements, existing and proposed sewers, utility mains, culverts, or
other underground structures within the subdivision and at least one hundred feet (100') immediately
adjacent to the subdivision.
(13) Layout dimensions of proposed lots and blocks, to the nearest foot.
(14) Drainage channels, wooded areas, and other significant features within the subdivision and at least one
hundred feet (100') immediately adjacent to subdivision.
(15) Location, widths, and names of all existing or platted right-of-ways for streets or other public right-ofways.
(16) The boundaries of an area subject to inundation or stormwater overflows of an intensity estimated to
occur with a return frequency of once every one hundred (100) years shall be shown.
c. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by the following reports:
(1) Estimated total number of gallons of sewage which will be necessary to treat.
(2) Estimated total number of gallons of water which will be necessary to supply.
(3) Evidence that a water supply system to the subdivision will be adequate in terms of quantity, pressure,
quality and dependability to supply the type of subdivision proposed. The evidence shall include the
following:
(A) Evidence of ownership or right to acquire the use of existing and/or proposed water rights.
(B) Estimated yield of such water rights.
(C) Evidence that the City can and will supply water to the proposed subdivision including a statement of
water available for use within the subdivision, the feasibility of extending service to subdivision, and a plan
for transferring water rights to the City if the City Council requests this conveyance.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 304/313
(4) Evidence to show that all areas of the subdivision which may involve soil or topographical conditions
presenting hazards have been identified by the developer and that proposed uses are compatible with the
conditions.
(5) Estimated construction cost of streets and related facilities, water distribution system, sewage collection
system, storm drainage facilities, and other utilities which may be required by the City.
(6) Evidence that adequate school and park facilities are available to serve the proposed subdivisions and in
accordance with public dedication requirements of this title. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.02.204: FINAL PLAT:
A. Submission:
1. The final plat may only be submitted for all or a portion of an area within an approved preliminary plan.
2. Final plat shall be submitted for approval within eighteen (18) months of the date the preliminary plan was
approved. No final plat submission shall be accepted which has exceeded the period of time unless an
extension was formally granted by the City Council. The final plat shall be considered as a preliminary plan if it
has been submitted after the eighteen (18) month period has lapsed without any granting for a time extension.
B. City Council Review:
1. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a complete application for a preliminary plan to the City, the City
Council shall consider the final plat at a public hearing.
2. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted on the property and published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing. At a public hearing, the City Council shall review the final plat, supporting documentation and
any City staff input, and determine whether the plat complies with all City requirements, regulations and
standards. The City Council may continue the public hearing as it deems necessary.
3. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the application.
4. Approval of the application shall not constitute acceptance by the City of the streets, alleys and other public
land as indicated for dedication on the plat. The dedication of any of the lands shall be accepted by the City
only by specific action of the City Council.
C. Final Plat Submission Requirements:
1. Applicants shall submit a minimum of ten (10) sets of the final plat to the City. The final plat submission shall
conform in all respects to the preliminary plan as approved and shall incorporate all modifications made in its
review. The final plat may also be approved due to changes made to improve the design. If a plat is revised, a
copy of the old plat shall be provided for comparison.
2. The final plat submittal shall contain the following information:
a. The final plat, drawn by a registered land surveyor in the State of Colorado, to a scale of one inch to a
hundred feet (1" = 100') or one inch to fifty feet (1" = 50') from an accurate survey. The plat should be drawn
on one or more sheets of linen or mylar with dimensions of twenty four by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). On
plats requiring more than one sheet an index shall be provided. The plat shall show the following:
(1) Name of the subdivision.
(2) The name and address of the owner(s), developer(s), designer(s), and surveyor.
(3) Name of City and State.
(4) Location and description of the subdivision referenced to section, township, and range.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 305/313
(5) North arrow and graphic scale.
(6) A vicinity and location map should be provided showing all major features within one-half (1/2) mile on all
sides.
(7) Legal description of the area to be subdivided and its acreage.
(8) Owner's and mortgagee's certificate and dedication signed.
(9) Surveyor's certificate of survey, signed, and his seal, and the date of survey.
(10) Certificate of City Council's acceptance of dedicated ways, easements and public lands.
(11) Boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy solid line with a small circle at each change in direction.
(12) The location and description of all section corners and permanent section monuments in or near the
tract. The subdivision shall be referenced to at least one of the section corners or monuments.
(13) The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals, the value of all true bearings and
angles dimensioned in degrees, minutes, and seconds.
(14) The location of boundary lines of adjoining lands, with adjacent subdivisions identified by official name.
(15) Boundary perimeter lines shall have bearing, distances and curve data on the outside of the lines, not
inside with lot dimensions. Boundary lines and interior street lines shall have exact lengths and bearings
or angles which must cross within the limits of one in ten thousand (10,000). If bearings are given on the
final plat, they must be based on true meridian, either by solar or polaris observation. Bearings must be
close to true meridian within plus or minus 0.01" method and date shall be listed on the final plot.
(16) The lines of all proposed streets and alleys shall be fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings or
angles.
(17) The widths and names, where appropriate, of all proposed streets, alleys and easements which shall
be properly located.
(18) The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings or angles except where a line
meets a street line at a right angle, the bearings or angle may be omitted.
(19) The outline of any property which is offered by dedication for public use shall be fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings or angles with the area labeled, "Public".
(20) The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision and the lots numbered
consecutively throughout each block with areas to be excluded from plating marked, "reserved" or "not a
part".
(21) The locations of all building lines, setback lines, and easement for public services or utilities with
dimensions showing their locations.
(22) The location of all easements for drainage and their dimensions.
(23) The radii arcs, deltas, points of tangency, points of intersection, and central angles for curvilinear
streets and central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns.
(24) The boundary of any floodplain shall be shown on the plat.
b. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following items:
(1) A title certificate or an abstract of title covering all public dedications.
(2) Treasurer's certificate of taxes.
(3) Subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with the specifications set forth in these regulations.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 306/313
(4) Certified check representing amount in lieu of land donation required of the applicant pursuant to
approval.
(5) A complete drainage report as specified in these regulations.
(6) Copies of all design drawings for storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, and the power distribution
system. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 7-2016, 2016: Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.02.205: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Process: The process in this section shall only be applicable to minor subdivision.
B. Submission Requirements: Applications for minor subdivisions shall meet the criteria specified for final plats,
unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. All plats shall conform to the applicable requirements for final plats
as provided in this title and shall conform to the City's zoning regulations.
C. Staff Review: City staff shall review the application for completeness and compliance with this chapter. Staff, in
its sole discretion, may require the applicant to attend a conference with staff to discuss the application prior to
the consideration by the City Council of the application.
D. City Council Review:
1. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a complete application for a final plat to the City, the City Council shall
consider the final plat.
2. The City Council shall review the final plat, supporting documentation and any City staff input, and determine
whether the plat complies with all City requirements, regulations and standards. The City Council may
continue its consideration of the application and the final plat.
3. The City Council shall recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of the application. (Ord. 7-2016,
2016)
Chapter 18.03
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
18.03.301: LAND DEDICATION OR CASH PAYMENT IN LIEU OF LAND:
A. Every developer shall convey to the City ten percent (10%) of the total gross acreage of the subdivision, except
for minor subdivisions, for the purpose of providing school sites, park sites, fire station sites, or site for public
purposes, other than roads, drainage and utility easements, for the purpose of providing park, recreation, school,
and other public facilities to serve future residents of the subdivision.
B. In the event that the proposed land to be conveyed under subsection A of this section would provide a site or
sites inappropriate to be useable for the purposes set forth in subsection A of this section, as determined by the
City Council, or if the City Council determines the sites cannot be properly located in the subdivision, the
developer shall be required to locate the sites or pay a sum of money to the City in lieu of the dedication under
subsection A of this section. The amount of payment shall be equal to the fair market value of ten percent (10%)
of the gross acreage of the subdivision as determined by mutual agreement between the developer and the City.
C. Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a subdivision, and when the space is
to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision for the mutual use and benefit of
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 307/313
the residents, such land may be credited against the requirements set forth in subsections A and B of this
section, subject to the approval of City and if the following standards are met:
1. That the private ownership and maintenance of the said land area is adequately provided for by written
agreement.
2. That the proposed land is reasonably adaptable for park and recreational purposes.
3. That the facilities proposed for the land area are substantially in conformance with the provisions of these
regulations and are approved by the City.
D. The land and monies received under this section shall be used only for the purposes of park and recreation sites
and facilities, school sites and facilities, fire station sites and facilities, or other public sites and facilities, which
would serve the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 7-2016, 2016: Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.03.302: PHASED SUBDIVISION:
A. The final plat may cover a portion of a total major subdivision as presented in the preliminary plan. The developer
would submit two (2) or more fillings per subdivision.
B. The City Council and the developer would agree on the following:
1. The installation of improvements, located outside of the area, which are needed to provide access and service
to the area.
2. The amount of collateral needed to insure the completion and performance of the improvements serving the
particular phase of the total subdivision. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 7-2016, 2016: Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
Chapter 18.04
DESIGN STANDARDS
18.04.401: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. The design of the subdivision shall preserve as much as possible the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing
top soil, and trees.
B. Land subject to hazardous conditions such as mud flows, shallow water tables, open quarries, floods, polluted or
non-potable water supply shall be identified and shall not be subdivided until the hazards have been eliminated
or will be eliminated by the subdivision and construction plans.
C. It is intended that the urban area be designed as a group of integrated neighborhoods with appropriate
residential, commercial, industrial, and community facilities. The neighborhood is intended as an area principally
for residential use. Space for religious, recreational, educational, and commercial shopping facilities should be
provided and designed as an integral part of the neighborhood.
D. The layout of lots and blocks should provide desirable settings for structures by making use of natural contours
and maintaining existing views affording privacy for the residents and protection from adverse noise and vehicle
traffic. Natural features and vegetation of the area must be preserved if at all possible.
E. Pedestrian walks should be separated from roadways used by vehicular traffic. Sidewalks should be designed to
provide all residential building sites with direct access to all neighborhood facilities.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 308/313
F. Tracts subdivided into large parcels which offer the possibility of further subdivision, shall be arranged to allow the
opening of future streets and logical further subdivision.
G. Tracts of land or portions of these lying within the floodplain shall not be out of the floodplain for building
purposes. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.402: STREETS:
A. Street Requirements:
1. Street Design Guidelines:
a. The street or highway layout shall conform to the street plan of the City.
b. Major highway - a minimum of one hundred feet (100') right-of-way, or as required by State and Federal
guidelines.
c. Collector street - eighty feet (80') right-of-way.
d. Local street - sixty feet (60') right-of-way.
e. Streets shall have the following improved surface widths:
(1) Major highway - a minimum of sixty four feet (64'), or as required by State or Federal standards.
(2) Collector street - forty four feet (44') wide.
(3) Local street - thirty four feet (34') wide.
(4) Ten foot (10') shoulders shall be required where curbs are not provided.
f. Roadbed construction standards for paved roadways:
(1) Roadbed grading and paving a minimum of forty feet (40') in width on local streets and a minimum of
forty four feet (44') on all other streets shall be required. Ten foot (10') shoulders should be required
where curbs are not provided.
(2) On the rolled and crowned subgrade, there shall be constructed a base course of six inches (6")
minimum depth when compacted conforming to the State Department of Highway's specifications.
(3) On the base course, a bituminous penetration surface course or bituminous mix approved by the City
shall be constructed of two and one-half inch (21/2") minimum thickness conforming to State Department
of Highway's specifications for a bituminous surface course. Should conditions warrant, the City may
specify asphaltic concrete surface course, conforming to Department of Highway specification.
(4) Curbs, constructed of cement concrete, or asphalt on all streets throughout the subdivision shall be
either straight or rolled type. Straight curbs shall be twenty inches (20") in depth, six inches (6") wide at
the top and eight inches (8") wide at the bottom. Rolled curbs shall be fourteen inches (14") in depth,
twenty four inches (24") in total width, six inches (6") wide at the top and have a seventeen inch (17") curb
return, except at corners where it shall have a fifteen inch (15") curb return. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.403: ALLEYS:
A. Except where justified by special conditions, alleys will not be approved in residential districts. When approved
the right-of-way dedication shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in width and paving or not less than ten feet
(10') shall be required.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 309/313
B. Alley rights-of-way of not less than thirty feet (30') in width and paving of not less than twenty feet (20') in width
may be required in commercial and industrial districts. The City Council may waive these requirements where
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking,
which will adequately serve the uses proposed.
C. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, but if unavoidable an adequate turn-around shall be provided.
D. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be prohibited. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.404: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets, not less than three feet (3') in width and constructed of
reinforced three thousand (3,000) psi concrete at least four inches (4") thick. The area from the curb line to sidewalk
shall slope one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot toward the street. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.405: EASEMENTS STANDARDS:
Easements shall follow rear and side lot lines whenever practical and shall have a minimum of total width of twenty
feet (20') apportioned equally in abutting properties. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.406: BLOCKS:
A. The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard for the following:
1. The configuration of building sites suitable to the type of development contemplated.
2. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
3. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic.
4. Limitations and advantages of topography.
B. Blocks for residential use shall not be greater than one-quarter (1/4) mile.
C. Blocks for business and industrial use should be a width suitable for the intended use with allowance for offstreet
parking and loading facilities.
D. Blocks in residential areas should be a sufficient width to allow for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate width. (Ord.
4-2016, 2016)
18.04.407: LOTS:
A. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the location, topography, and type of development
proposed.
B. Lots should front only on local streets. If this is unfeasible, lots facing collector streets must be provided with
adequate means for vehicle turn-around within the lot.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 310/313
C. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to street lines.
D. Lots may not be required for subdivision of commercial or industrial use, but when provided should be of
appropriate size and arrangements to provide for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities based on the
intended use, and no individual parcel shall be created for a particular commercial or industrial use that has an
area, width, or depth that is less than is required for the permitted use under the applicable provisions.
E. Double frontage shall be avoided except in cases where they are needed for separation of residential areas from
major streets, or to overcome specific disadvantages or topography and orientation.
F. The building location of lots should not face directly into oncoming traffic of an intersection street of a "T"
intersection. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.408: STORM DRAINAGE:
A. Complete drainage systems for the entire subdivision shall be designed by a professional engineer, licensed in
the State of Colorado, and qualified to do such work.
B. The drainage system shall adequately drain all low points and unimpede all natural water courses.
C. The following regulations should be followed regarding development in established floodplains:
1. Construction of building shall not be permitted in an established floodway with a return frequency more often
than a 100-year storm.
2. Building construction may occur in the established floodway where the return frequency is between a 100-
year and a maximum probable storm providing the ground floor is constructed above the maximum probable
flood level.
3. A preliminary report showing the method of moving stormwater through the subdivision shall be needed. The
map should also show runoff concentrations in acres of drainage area on each street entering each
intersection. Flow lines should clearly show the complete run-off pattern at each intersection.
4. Demonstrate the adequacy of drainage outlet by plan cross-section and/or notes and explain plan for handling
diverted stormwater after it leaves the subdivision.
5. Submit detail of a ditch and culvert as applicable.
6. Calculate protected quantity of stormwater entering the subdivision naturally from areas outside the
subdivision.
7. Quantities of flow at each pick up point.
8. Location, size, and grades of required culverts, drain inlets and storm drainage sewers.
9. The handling of storm drainage shall be based upon the flow of stormwater calculated from the rainfall
frequency rate. Methods of handling drainage shall be based on the following:
a. A 10-year frequency storm shall be carried in the paved portion of the street, from back of sidewalk to back
of sidewalk. A 50-year frequency storm shall be carried within the dedicated right-of-way. Where a quantity
of water in excess of these limits is calculated to exist, a storm system will be provided either in a form of an
underground system or a formal drainage way and retention ponds to prevent excessive ponding and
flooding.
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 311/313
b. A generally accepted rational formula and tabulation shall be used to calculate individual drainage areas,
time of flow, and ultimate quantities at each collection point.
c. Culverts should be generally sized to be sufficient to carry the computed flow with no head at the inlet and
no less than the equivalent of an eighteen inch (18") diameter pipe.
d. The velocity of flow in an unlined ditch shall be compatible with the soil erosion characteristics.
e. The quantity and velocity of flow in streets shall be computed from acceptable flow charts or by the usual
methods used in computing flows in open channels.
f. Whenever a subdivision is traversed by a drainage way which is approved by the City Engineer for surface
drainage. Provisions shall be made for the dedication of adequate rights-of-way for access and
maintenance. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.409: WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
A. The water system shall conform in all respects to standards and specifications set forth by the Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment. The developer shall also consult with the City Engineer or his
authorized representative to assure that adequate mains are installed to provide sufficient fire protection.
B. All proposed water mains should be constructed with a minimum pipe size of six inches (6").
C. To assure adequate fire protection and water pressure, construction of distribution loops should be encouraged.
In case of commercial structures, hydrants should be placed no more than three hundred feet (300') from any
building. Fire hydrants shall be placed so that no lot in a residential subdivision is more than six hundred feet
(600') from two (2) fire hydrants, the distance to be measured along street lines, providing water mains are
available.
D. Connection to a lot shall be installed prior to paving of the street, if possible.
E. Water lines shall be placed below frost line. A depth of at least four feet (4') shall be required. (Ord. 4-2016,
2016)
18.04.410: SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. In all subdivisions where lots cannot be connected to a public sanitary sewer system the developer shall consult
with the County Board of Commissioners regarding County regulations governing installation of on-lot sewage
disposal.
B. When subdivisions can be served by the City's sanitary sewer system all lots shall be provided by a sewer
connection.
C. The City's Public Works Department shall supervise all installation of the sewer mains, laterals and house
connection to insure that the system conforms with established construction methods and is in conformance with
specifications set forth by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Water Pollution Control
Division. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.411: GRID OR RANGE LINES:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 312/313
A. Location: Range lines shall be located on center lines of streets. Range points shall be installed at the PCs and
PTs of street intersection, or change of direction of the street intersections and subdivision boundaries, and
subdivision boundary lines shall be monumented at every corner, angle point, PC and PT.
B. Installation Of Range Points Or Monuments: The engineer or surveyor representing the developer shall install
solid iron rods three-fourths inch (3/4") or larger in diameter, a minimum of thirty inches (30") long, set in concrete
at least five inches (5") in diameter and twenty four inches (24") in depth.
C. Boundary Range Points: At least two (2) of the subdivisions boundary corners (boundary range points) shall be
tied to the nearest section corner by distance and bearing. The boundary range points shall be installed prior to
filing the final plat, in order for the City to verify the accuracy of the boundary. The interior range points shall be
installed prior to seal coating.
D. Monumentation: Section corner monumentation must be equal to or better than the installation of range point
monuments within the subdivision.
E. Range Point Boxes: Standard range point boxes shall be set over every range point located at intersections in
the subdivisions. The range point boxes shall be set over each range point after streets have been paved and
immediately before seal coating. The top of the range point box shall be set one-fourth inch (1/4") above the
paving grade and approximately two inches (2") above the range point.
F. Administration: The City Engineer or his authorized representative will check all range points which must balance
and close prior to adjustment within one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000). (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.412: VERTICAL CONTROL:
A vertical control shall be established from USGS Datum. Bench marks shall be established and described within
the platted survey dependent upon the terrain and layout. There shall be a minimum of two (2) bench marks per
plat, and the bench marks will not be further apart than one (1) in one thousand feet (1,000'). The range points with
range point boxes or equivalent monuments, shall be used for vertical control. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)
18.04.413: POWER DISTRIBUTION:
A. All electrical facilities shall comply with existing laws and shall conform to the National Electrical Code and the
Underwriters' Laboratory Standards.
B. The developer is responsible for the design of the power distribution system and shall produce all permits and
licenses required by the City.
C. The power distribution system design shall be approved by the City before any construction is undertaken. (Ord.
4-2016, 2016)
Chapter 18.05
UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
18.05.501: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
10/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=329 313/313
A. The following improvements shall be constructed at the expense of the developer as stipulated in the subdivision
improvements agreement in a manner approved by the City Council which is consistent with sound construction
practice, local practice and as specified in this title.
1. Road grading and surfacing.
2. Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, unless specifically waivered by action of the City Council.
3. Sanitary mains and laterals. The City Council may require installation of sewer mains in excess of the
subdivision design needs and mutually established with the developer, and other people who will benefit from
such improvement.
4. Storm sewers or storm drainage system, as required.
5. Water distribution system; the City Council may require installation of sewer mains in excess of subdivision
design needs and mutually establish with the developer a proportionally distributed cost to be shared by the
City, developer, and other people who will benefit from such an improvement.
6. The power distribution system.
7. Street signs at all street intersections.
8. Permanent reference monuments and monument boxes, in conformance with specifications set forth in these
regulations.
9. Other facilities as may be required in these regulations by the City Council.
10. All utilities except major power transmission lines, shall be underground, unless specifically exempted by the
City Council who shall grant such exemptions in any cases of extreme difficulty. (Ord. 2-2019, 2019: Ord. 4-
2016, 2016)
18.05.502: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIREMENT GUARANTEE:
A. Prior to approval of the final plat, City Council will require one or a combination of the following:
1. A subdivision improvement agreement agreeing to construct any required public improvement shown in the
final plat documents, together with collateral which is sufficient to make reasonable provision for the
completion of required improvements in accordance with design and time specifications; the types of collateral
shall take the form of, but are not limited to performance bonds, private or public escrow agreements, loan
commitments, assignment of receivables, liens on property, deposit of certified finds, or other similar surety
agreements, or
2. Other agreements or contracts setting forth the plan, method, and parties responsible for the construction of
any required improvements shown in the final plat which will make reasonable provision for the completion of
required improvements in accordance with design and time specifications,
3. The improvement shall be guaranteed in writing to perform adequately and without malfunction for a period of
one year after the improvements have been accepted by the City. Appropriate collateral shall be maintained
which will assure that the guarantee is met,
4. As improvements are completed, the developer may apply to the City Council for a release of part or all of the
collateral deposited with said Council. Upon inspection and approval, the Council shall release such collateral.
If the Council determines that any of such improvements are not constructed or functioning in one year after
final acceptance of the improvements, it shall furnish the developer a list of specific deficiencies or
malfunctioning items and shall be entitled to withhold collateral sufficient to ensure such substantial
compliance. If the Council determines that the developer will not construct any or all of the specifications, the
Council may withdraw and employ from the deposit of collateral such funds as may be necessary to construct
the improvement(s) in accordance with the specification. (Ord. 4-2016, 2016)