CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF AVON, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Council, 2007 
____________ 
Adopted: February 1, 2007 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
AVON, CONNECTICUT 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
John F. Carlson, Chairman 
Diane S. Hornaday 
William J. Shea, II 
Joseph C. Woodford 
Mark W. Zacchio 
Town Council 
____________ 
Philip K. Schenck, Jr. 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Ann Dearstyne 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
Dwight A. Johnson 
Town Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the ordinances of the Town of Avon, Connecticut. It also includes the Charter and selected regulations and policies of the Town. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by Town, as amended through December 31, 2006. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Kristen S. Mire, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Dwight A. Johnson, Town Attorney, Mr. Michael Zizka, Assistant Town Attorney, Ms. Caroline LaMonica, former Town Clerk, and Mr. Steven Kushner, Town Planner for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Towns 's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Avon, Connecticut. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Avon, Connecticut. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Avon, Connecticut. 2007. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. Ord. of  6- 3-10 Included 9 Amend. of  6-22-10 Included 9 Ord. of 11- 9-10 Included 9 Amend. of 12-14-10 Included 9 Amend. of  4- 5-11 Included 10 Amend. of  6- 7-11 Included 10 Amend. of  6-28-11 Included 10 Amend. of  7-10-12 Included 11 Amend. of 10- 4-12(1) Included 11 Amend. of 10- 4-12(2) Included 11 Ord. of  1- 3-13 Included 11 Res. of  5- 2-13 Included 12 Amend. of  5-21-13 Included 12 Amend. of 11-14-13 Included 12 Amend. of  7-15-14(1) Included 13 Amend. of  7-15-14(2) Included 13 Amend. of  9- 9-14 Included 13 Res. of 11- 3-14 Included 13 Amend. of  3- 5-15 Included 13 Amend. of  9- 3-15 Included 14 Amend. of 10- 1-15 Included 14 Amend. of  1-12-16 Included 14 Amend. of  9-13-16 Included 15 Amend. of  9-27-16(1) Included 15 Amend. of  9-27-16(2) Included 15 Amend. of  9-27-16(3) Included 15 Amend. of 11- 15-16 Included 15 Amend. of  1- 5-17 Included 15 Amend. of  5-23-17(1) Included 16 Amend. of  5-23-17(2) Included 16 Amend. of  5-23-17(3) Included 16 Amend. of  9- 7-17 Included 16 Amend. of  3-27-18 Included 16 Amend. of  6-12-18 Included 16 Amend. of 10-17-17(1) Included 16, Add. Amend. of 10-17-17(2) Included 16, Add.  
PART I - TOWN CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this part is the Town Charter. The Charter was originally adopted in 1959 and was amended in full and approved by the voters on November 3, 1998. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Municipal charters, G.S. § 7-87 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS 

Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation. 
    1.1.1. All the inhabitants dwelling within the territorial limits of the Town of Avon, as heretofore constituted, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the "Town of Avon," in this Charter called the "Town," and, as such, shall: 
(a)  Have perpetual succession. 
(b)  Hold and may exercise all powers and privileges heretofore exercised by the Town which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. 
(c)  Have those additional powers and privileges herein conferred. 
(d)  Have all powers and privileges conferred upon towns under the general laws of the State of Connecticut, as the same may be amended. 
Sec. 1.2. - Continuance of rights and obligations. 
    1.2.1. All property, both real and personal, all rights of action and rights of every description and all securities and liens vested or inchoate in the Town are continued in the Town. The Town shall continue to be liable for all debts and obligations of every kind for which the Town is presently liable, whether accrued or not. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the right of the Town to collect any assessment, charge, debt or lien. If any contract has been entered into by the Town prior to the effective date hereof or any bond or undertaking has been given in favor of or by the Town which contains provisions that the same may be enforced by or against any office or agency therein named, and which office or agency is hereby abolished, such contract, bond or undertaking shall be in no manner impaired but shall continue in full force and effect, and the powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any such abolished office or agency in any such contract, bond or undertaking shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the Town Council of the Town. 
Sec. 1.3. - General grant of powers. 
    1.3.1. The Town shall have all powers granted to towns under the Constitution and the General Statutes of the State and all other powers incident to the management of the property, government and affairs of the Town. 
CHAPTER 2. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, G.S. § 9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2.1. - General. 
    2.1.1. The election of Federal, State and elective municipal officers and elective members of municipal boards and commissions shall be as prescribed by the Constitution of the United States and of the State, by Federal Statutes and by the General Statutes of the State. The next meeting of the electors of the Town for the election of municipal officers shall be held on the Tuesday after the first Monday of November 1999 and biennially thereafter. 
Sec. 2.2. - Voting district. 
    2.2.1. A voting district or voting districts shall be established as prescribed by law. 
Sec. 2.3. - Eligibility for office. 
    2.3.1. To be eligible for election to any Town office, a person must be a qualified resident elector of the Town at the time of election. Any person holding an elective office in the Town shall automatically cease to hold that office on the date that person ceases to be a qualified resident elector of the Town and the office shall be deemed vacant as of that date. 
Sec. 2.4. - Breaking a tie. 
    2.4.1. When any regular or special municipal election conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Charter results in a tie, if necessary, a special election shall be conducted in the manner provided by statute to determine who shall be elected, or in the case of a question at a referendum, whether the question shall pass or fail. 
Sec. 2.5. - Vacancies. 
    2.5.1. Unless otherwise provided by law, any vacancy in any elective town office from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council for the unexpired portion of the term or until the first day of January next following the next biennial municipal election, whichever shall be sooner; provided, that when the person vacating the office shall have been elected as a member of a political party the vacancy shall be filled by the appointment by the Town Council of a member of the same political party. If the Town Council fails to fill the vacancy within 60 days from the time of its occurrence it shall be filled by the board, commission or agency upon which the vacancy exists for the period ending on the first day of January following the next biennial election. If there is a biennial municipal election before the expiration of the term of office of any person appointed to any elective office under the provisions of this section, such office shall be filled by the election of a person to fill that office for the unexpired portion of the term. 
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIVE OFFICES 

Sec. 3.1. - General powers and duties. 
    3.1.1. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all elective town office holders, boards and commissions shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law. 
Sec. 3.2. - Term of office. 
    3.2.1. The term of office of all municipal elective office holders, except as otherwise provided herein, shall commence on the first day of January next following their election and shall continue until their successors shall have been chosen and qualified. 
Sec. 3.3. - Town Council. 
    3.3.1. There shall be an elective Town Council consisting of five members. 
    3.3.2. The term of office of the members of the Town Council as of the effective date of this Charter shall be extended to expire on December 31, 1999. 
    3.3.3. At the municipal election to be conducted in November 1999 and at each biennial election thereafter all members of the Town Council shall be elected for a term of two years. 
Sec. 3.4. - Board of Education. 
    3.4.1. There shall be an elective Board of Education consisting of nine members. 
    3.4.2. The term of office of the members of the Board of Education, whose terms expire on June 30, 1999 as of the effective date of this Charter, shall be extended to expire on December 31, 1999. The term of office of the members of the Board of Education whose terms expire on June 30, 2001 as of the effective date of this Charter shall be extended to expire on December 31, 2001. 
    3.4.3. At the biennial municipal election to be conducted in November 1999 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected five members of the Board of Education for a term of four years. At the biennial municipal election to be conducted in November 2001 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected four members of the Board of Education for a term of four years. 
    3.4.4. At any election for membership on the Board of Education the determination of how many candidates may be nominated by a political party, how many candidates an elector may vote for and the candidate or candidates deemed elected shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-204b of the General Statutes, as amended. 
    3.4.5. No member of the Board of Education shall, during the term for which he is elected, hold any other office of profit or position of profit under the government of the Town of Avon, nor may more than two members of such Board serve on the School Building Committee. 
State Law reference- Town management of schools, G.S. § 10-240 et seq.; board of education, G.S. § 10-218 et seq. 
Sec. 3.5. - Board of Finance. 
    3.5.1. There shall be an elective Board of Finance consisting of seven members. 
    3.5.2. The term of office of the members of the Board of Finance whose terms expire on June 30, 1999 as of the effective date of this Charter shall be extended to expire on the December 31, 1999. The term of office of the members of the Board of Finance whose terms expire on June 30, 2001 as of the effective date of this Charter shall be extended to expire on December 31, 2001. 
    3.5.3. At the biennial municipal election to be conducted in November 1999 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected three members of the Board of Finance for a term of four years. At the biennial municipal election to be conducted in November 2001 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected four members of the Board of Finance for a term of four years. 
State Law reference- Town board of finance, G.S. § 7-340 et seq. 
Sec. 3.6. - Board of Assessment Appeals. 
    3.6.1. There shall be an elective Board of Assessment Appeals consisting of five members. 
    3.6.2. The term of office of the members of the Board of Assessment Appeals whose terms expire on June 30, 1999 as of the effective date of this Charter shall be extended to expire on December 31, 1999. The term of office of the members of the Board of Assessment Appeals whose terms expire on June 30, 2001 as of this effective date of this Charter shall be extended to expire on the December 31, 2001. 
    3.6.3. At the biennial municipal election to be conducted in November 1999 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected three members of the Board of Assessment Appeals for a term of four years. At the biennial municipal election to be conducted in November 2001 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected two members of the Board of Assessment Appeals for a term of four years. 
State Law reference- Board of assessment appeals required and size thereof, G.S. § 9-199; authority to provide for appointed board, G.S. § 9-185; functions of board of assessment appeals generally, G.S. § 12-110 et seq. 
Sec. 3.7. - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
    3.7.1. There shall be an elective Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five members. 
    3.7.2. The term of office of the elected members of the Zoning Board of Appeals whose terms expire on June 30, 1999 as of the effective date of this Charter shall be extended to expire on December 31, 1999. The term of office of the elected members of the Zoning Board of Appeals whose terms expire on June 30, 2001 as of the effective date of this Charter shall be extended to expire on the December 31, 2001. 
    3.7.3. At the biennial municipal election to be conducted in November 1999 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected three members of the Zoning Board of Appeals for a term of four years. At the biennial municipal election to be conducted in November 2001 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected two members of the Zoning Board of Appeals for a term of four years. 
State Law reference- Zoning board of appeals, G.S. § 8-5 et seq. 
Sec. 3.8. - Registrars of Voters. 
    3.8.1. At the state election to be conducted in November 2000 and quadrennially thereafter there shall be elected two Registrars of Voters in accordance with Section 9-190 of the General Statutes, as amended [G.S. § 9-190], for a term of four years. 
CHAPTER 4. - TOWN COUNCIL 

Sec. 4.1. - The Town Council. 
    4.1.1. There shall be a Town Council consisting of five members, hereinafter referred to as the Town Council the members of which shall serve without compensation. No member of the Town Council shall, during the term for which such member is elected, hold any office of profit or position of profit under the government of the Town of Avon. 
Sec. 4.2. - Council Chairman. 
    4.2.1. Each Town Council elected subsequent to the adoption of this Charter shall meet on the second day of the January following its election, and shall choose one of its members to be Council Chairman, but this office shall not deprive the Council Chairman of a vote on any question. The Council Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the Town Council and perform such other duties consistent with such office as may be imposed by the Town Council. The Council Chairman shall be recognized as the official head of the Town for all ceremonial purposes and for military purposes. During the Council Chairman's absence or disability the Council Chairman's duties shall be performed by another member chosen by the Town Council except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 4.3. - General powers and duties of the Town Council. 
    4.3.1. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the legislative power of the Town shall be vested in the Town Council. 
    4.3.2. The Town Council shall have the duties and powers to: 
(a)  Enact, amend or repeal ordinances and resolutions, not inconsistent with this Charter or the General Statutes. In adopting ordinances, the Town Council is authorized to incorporate by reference thereto in such ordinance any nationally recognized code, rules or regulations, or portions thereof, that have been printed in book form or any code officially adopted by any administrative agency of the State. Upon adoption of any such ordinance wherein any such code, rules or regulations, or portions thereof, have been incorporated by reference, there shall be maintained two copies of such code, rules or regulations in the office of the Town Clerk for examination by the public. 
(b)  Create or abolish, by resolution or ordinance, boards, commissions, committees, agencies or offices, subject however to the provisions of the General Statutes and this Charter. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided by law, establish, abolish, consolidate or merge, by ordinance, such administrative offices and departments, and divisions thereof, as it shall deem necessary for the furnishing of municipal services and to carry out statutory and Charter requirements. 
(d)  Appoint such town officers, the members of boards, commissions, committees and agencies as may be required or established under the provisions of this Charter or by the General Statutes. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law, appoint members to any state, regional or intertown board, commission, committee, council or agency on which the Town is entitled to membership. 
(f)  Establish, by resolution, such study, advisory or consulting committees as the Town Council may determine necessary or proper for the general welfare of the Town. The Town Council may appoint not more than one of its members to each such committee. 
(g)  Oversee, to the extent allowed by law, the activities of all individuals appointed by the Town Council. 
(h)  Combine functions and positions of appointive offices except as otherwise provided by law. 
(i)  Provide for the preservation of good order, peace, health and safety of the Town and its inhabitants. Approve procedures established by the Town Manager for the purchase of services, supplies, materials, equipment and other commodities required by any office or agency of the Town, including the Board of Education, if that Board approves. 
(k)  Contract for services and the use of facilities of the United States or any federal agency, the State, or any political subdivision thereof, or may, by agreement, join with any such political subdivisions to provide services and facilities. 
(l)  Accept, by resolution, in the name of the Town, any gift of money or personal property or any interest therein for any public purpose and to provide for the administration of the same for such purpose subject to the terms of the gift. 
(m)  By annual resolution authorize the Avon Board of Education from time to time to accept in the name of the Town any gift of personal property, tangible or intangible, for the use and benefit of the students served by the Board of Education. 
(n)  After public hearing, accept, by resolution, in the name of the Town any gift of real property or any interest therein for any public purpose and to provide for the administration of the gifted real property subject to the terms of the gift. 
(o)  Authorize, after public hearing, as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  The sale or conveyance, with or without consideration, of Town real property or any interest therein used or reserved for Town purposes, or 
(2)  The purchase of real property or any interest therein for such purposes; provided that, in either instance, the value of such real property or any interest therein is not more than one percent of the current tax levy. 
(p)  Authorize, after public hearing, the payment pursuant to a final judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(q)  Coordinate the activities of Town boards, commissions, committees and agencies and, at the Town Council's discretion, may: 
(1)  Require any or all Town officials, boards, commissions, committees or agencies to review, plan and coordinate activities and operations with the Town government. 
(2)  From time to time, convene a joint meeting of such officials, boards, commissions, committees or agencies for such purposes as the Town Council shall deem proper. 
(3)  From time to time, require such reports to be submitted as the Town Council shall deem proper. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for legislative body, G.S. § 7-193(a)(1). 
Sec. 4.4. - Procedure. 
    4.4.1. The Town Council shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and provide a method for the calling of special meetings. The Town Council shall determine its own rules of procedure. The presence of three members shall constitute a quorum; however, no motion, ordinance, resolution or otherwise, except to adjourn or to fix the time and place of its next meeting, shall be adopted by less than three affirmative votes. 
Sec. 4.5. - Ordinance procedure. 
    4.5.1. Before any ordinance shall be adopted, amended or repealed, at least one public hearing shall be held by the Town Council. Ten days prior notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town, and by posting in such public place or places as the Town Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe. 
    4.5.2. The adoption of such ordinance shall be advertised in one or more newspapers having a circulation in the Town within ten days after its adoption. Said ordinance shall become effective 21 days after such publication. 
    4.5.3. All ordinances, after adoption, shall be filed with the Town Clerk and recorded, compiled and published by the Town Clerk as required by law. 
State Law reference- Publication of ordinances, G.S. § 7-157. 
Sec. 4.6. - Public emergency ordinances. 
    4.6.1. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, a public emergency ordinance, stating the facts constituting such public emergency, shall become effective upon enactment. No public hearing or notice of public hearing shall be required for any public emergency ordinance. Such public emergency ordinance shall be advertised in one or more newspapers having a circulation in the Town within five days of its adoption. Every such public emergency ordinance, including any amendments thereto, shall automatically stand repealed at the termination of day 61 following adoption of said ordinance; provided, however, that if action has been initiated on the same subject matter providing for a permanent ordinance under Section 4.5 hereof prior to such day 61, then such public emergency ordinance shall remain in full force and effect until final action is taken on said permanent ordinance. 
Sec. 4.7. - Fiscal year. 
    4.7.1. To the extent permitted by law, the Town Council shall have power to adjust the fiscal year of the Town to coincide with the tax year or to adjust either or both to the end that they may coincide. 
State Law reference- Municipal uniform fiscal years, G.S. § 7-381 et seq. 
Sec. 4.8. - Duties of the Town Council on budget. 
    4.8.1. The Town Council shall have such duties with respect to finance and taxation as are hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 4.9. - Duties of the Town Council on Charter. 
    4.9.1. At least every ten years the Town Council shall consider whether or not to appoint a commission to review and propose revisions to the Town Charter. 
CHAPTER 5. - BOARD OF FINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Town board of finance, G.S. § 7-340 et seq. 

Sec. 5.1. - Board of Finance. 
    5.1.1. The Board of Finance members shall serve without compensation. At all meetings of such Board four members shall constitute a quorum and the concurrence of not less than three votes shall be necessary for the transaction of business. No member during the term of office for which he is elected shall hold any elective office or appointive office of profit under the government of the Town of Avon. 
Sec. 5.2. - General duties. 
    5.2.1. The Board of Finance shall have such duties with respect to finance and taxation as are hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 5.3. - Annual audit. 
    5.3.1. The Board of Finance shall annually designate an independent public accountant or firm of independent public accountants to audit the books and accounts of the Town as provided by law. 
CHAPTER 6. - APPOINTMENTS BY THE TOWN COUNCIL 

Sec. 6.1. - Appointive offices; boards, commissions, and panels or alternates. 
    6.1.1. The Town Council shall appoint: 
(a)  A Director of Health, appointed in accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes. 
(b)  A Fire Marshal, appointed in accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes. 
(c)  An individual or law firm as Town Attorney. In the case of an individual the individual shall be an attorney-at-law in good standing admitted to practice law in Connecticut. In the case of a law firm, the members of the firm shall be attorneys-at-law in good standing admitted to practice law in Connecticut. 
(i)  In the event of the appointment of a law firm to serve as Town Attorney, the firm shall designate a member of the firm, acceptable to the Town Council, as the Principal Town Attorney, who shall serve as the primary contact and the individual of primary responsibility in the relationship of the law firm with the Town. The Principal Town Attorney may, with the consent and approval of the Town Council, designate one or more attorneys-at-law at the firm as an Assistant Town Attorney to perform any of the duties incumbent upon the law firm serving as Town Attorney. The term of an Assistant Town Attorney so designated shall be co-terminus with that of the Town Attorney. 
(ii)  In the event of the appointment of an individual to serve as Town Attorney, the Town Council may, from time to time, and at the discretion of the Town Council, appoint one or more Assistant Town Attorneys who may or may not be a member of, or be associated with a law firm of which the Town Attorney is a member. The term of any Assistant Town Attorney so appointed shall be co-terminus with that of the Town Attorney. 
(iii)  No Town Attorney, no Assistant Town Attorney and no attorney-at-law at a firm with which the Town Attorney, or an Assistant Town Attorney, is associated in any manner shall simultaneously hold any elected or appointed office or position under the government of the Town of Avon. 
(iv)  The Town Attorney shall: 
(a)  Appear for and protect the rights of the Town in all actions, suits or proceedings brought by or against it or any of its officers or agencies. 
(b)  With approval of the Town Council based on criteria determined by said Town Council appear for and protect the rights of individual officers, members of boards, commissions, committees and agencies in all actions, suits or proceedings brought by or against them. 
(c)  Be the legal advisor to all Town boards, commissions, committees, agencies, departments and offices, in all matters affecting the Town. 
(d)  Upon request, and with the approval of the Town Council or Town Manager, furnish a written opinion on any question of law. 
(e)  Upon request, and with the approval of the Town Council or the Town Manager, prepare or approve forms of contracts or other instruments to which the Town is a party or in which it has an interest. 
(f)  Have power, with the approval of the Town Council, to compromise decisions and judgments. 
(d)  A Town Treasurer. 
(e)  Two constables. 
(f)  A Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of seven members, exclusive of non-voting members. 
(i)  The term of office of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission whose terms expire on June 30, 1999, as of the effective date of this Charter, shall be extended to expire on the thirty-first day of December 1999. The term of office of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission whose terms expire on June 30, 2001, as of the effective date of this Charter, shall be extended to expire on the December 31, 2001. 
(ii)  The Town Council elected at the November 1999 municipal election shall appoint four members of the Planning and Zoning Commission for a four-year term commencing January 1, 2000 and expiring the thirty-first day of December 2003. Quadrennially thereafter, four successor members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed for four-year terms. 
(iii)  The Town Council elected at the November 2001 municipal election shall appoint three members of the Planning and Zoning Commission for a four-year term commencing January 1, 2002 and expiring on December 31, 2005. Quadrennially thereafter, three successor members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed for four-year terms. 
(g)  A panel of three alternate members to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(h)  A panel of three alternate members to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(i)  A Building Code Board of Appeals consisting of five members. 
(i)  The terms of office of the members of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall be for four years commencing on January 1, 2000 and quadrennially thereafter. 
(ii)  The term of office of the members of the Building Code Board of Appeals whose terms expire on June 30, 1999, as of the effective date of this Charter, shall be extended to expire on December 31, 1999. 
(j)  A Water Pollution Control Authority consisting of five members. 
(i)  The term of office of the members of the Water Pollution Control Authority shall be for four years, two of which shall commence on January 1, 2000, and quadrennially thereafter, two of which shall commence on January 1, 2002, and quadrennially thereafter, and one of which shall commence on January 1, 2003, and quadrennially thereafter. 
(ii)  The term of office of the members of the Water Pollution Control Authority whose terms expire on June 30, 1999, whose terms expire on June 30, 2001 and whose term expires on June 30, 2002, as of the effective date of this Charter, shall be extended to expire on the subsequent thirty-first day of December. 
(k)  Such other officers, members of boards, commissions, panels of alternates and the like as the Town Council shall deem appropriate. 
Sec. 6.2. - Terms of office. 
    6.2.1. Unless otherwise provided by law or this Charter, each appointee of the Town Council shall serve for a two-year term concurrent with the terms of the members of the Town Council making the appointment. 
    6.2.2. All appointees shall take office on the day of appointment and shall serve until their respective successors shall have been appointed and shall have qualified. 
Sec. 6.3. - Vacancies. 
    6.3.1. Any vacancy in an appointive Town office, board, commission or panel of alternates under this chapter shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council for the unexpired portion of the term. 
Sec. 6.4. - General powers and duties. 
    6.4.1. Except as the Town Council may lawfully restrict or prescribe, all appointed officers, board, commission and panel of alternate members shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by law. 
CHAPTER 7. - TOWN MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Town manager authorized, G.S. § 7-1931(a)(2). 

Sec. 7.1. - Appointments, qualifications and removal. 
    7.1.1. The Town Council shall appoint a Town Manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the Town Manager's compensation. The Town Manager shall be appointed taking into account executive and administrative qualifications. The Town Manager need not be a resident of the Town or State at the time of appointment, but may reside outside the Town, while in office, only with the approval of the Town Council. 
    7.1.2. The Town Council may remove the Town Manager provided such removal is by affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Town Council and in accordance with the procedures of Section 11.4.1. 
Sec. 7.2. - Responsibility and authority. 
    7.2.1. The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative official of the Town. The Town Manager shall have such responsibility and authority as shall be vested in the Town Manager or delegated to the Town Manager by the General Statutes, this Charter and the Town Council. In fulfillment of the Town Manager's duties and responsibilities, the Town Manager shall be directly responsible to the Town Council. The Town Manager shall also be directly responsible to the Town Council for the administration of all offices and departments, and divisions thereof, directed by persons appointed by the Town Manager. 
Sec. 7.3. - Duties of the Town Manager. 
    7.3.1. The Town Manager shall have such powers and duties prescribed by the General Statutes for the chief executive officer of a municipality and such other powers and duties as this Charter shall provide or the Town Council shall authorize. 
    7.3.2. Without limiting the foregoing, the Town Manager shall have the following duties: 
(a)  To supervise and direct the activities of those appointed by the Town Manager. 
(b)  To keep full and complete records of the activities of the Town Manager's office. 
(c)  To ensure that all laws and ordinances of the Town are faithfully executed. 
(d)  To make periodic reports to the Town Council and to attend the meetings thereof with full right of participation in its discussions. 
(e)  To prepare and cause to be printed, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year, an Annual Town Report. 
(f)  To recommend to the Town Council such measures as the Town Manager shall deem necessary or expedient. 
(g)  To keep, or cause to be kept, complete books of accounts, showing the financial condition and financial transactions of the Town, including accounts of all funds and appropriations and such other accounts and records not specifically required by law to be kept by other officers, as may be prescribed by the Town Council. 
(h)  To purchase, or cause to be purchased, subject to such procedures as shall be approved by the Town Council, all services, supplies, materials, equipment and other commodities required by any office or agency of the Town. 
(i)  To keep the Town Council fully advised as to the financial condition of the Town. 
(j)  To prepare and submit to the Town Council, as directed, an annual budget and capital improvement program. 
(k)  To approve departmental procedures, rules and regulations as may be required by this Charter. 
(l)  To make those appointments authorized by law or this Charter, and to remove same in accordance with the Town Personnel Policy. 
(m)  Subject to the approval of the Town Council to prepare and keep current the Personnel Policy as required by this Charter. 
Sec. 7.4. - Acting Town Manager. 
    7.4.1. The Town Manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Town Council, a qualified Town administrative official as Acting Town Manager to exercise the duties of the Town Manager during temporary absence or disability of the Town Manager. 
    7.4.2. If the Town Manager fails to make such an appointment, the Town Council shall appoint an Acting Town Manager. 
    7.4.3. In the event the Acting Town Manager does not exercise the duties of the Town Manager because of temporary absence or disability, the Town Council may appoint a qualified Town administrative official as Acting Town Manager for the duration of such temporary absence or disability. 
    7.4.4. In the event the Acting Town Manager, having been appointed by the Town Manager does not so exercise the duties of the Town Manager in a manner satisfactory to the Town Council, the Town Council may terminate said appointment and appoint a qualified town administrative official as Acting Town Manager. 
Sec. 7.5. - Town Manager appointments. 
    7.5.1. The Town Manager, with the approval of the Town Council, shall appoint for an indefinite term and may remove: 
(a)  A Tax Collector. 
(b)  A Town Clerk. 
    7.5.2. In addition, the Town Manager shall make those appointments otherwise provided for in Chapter 8. 
CHAPTER 8. - TOWN ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8.1. - Town administration. 
    8.1.1. The administrative organization of the Town offices and departments, and their divisions and activities, including their functions and responsibilities, shall be recommended by the Town Manager, and shall, by resolution, be adopted, revised or amended by the Town Council. 
    8.1.2. 
(a)  Each office and department, and division and activity thereof shall be administered by an officer appointed by, and subject to the supervision and direction of, the Town Manager. 
(b)  With the consent of the Town Council, the Town Manager may: 
(1)  Serve as the head of one or more offices or departments, and divisions thereof. 
(2)  Appoint one person as the head of two or more of them. 
(c)  The head of each office or department, shall, with the approval of the Town Manager: 
(1)  Make such rules and regulations for the operation of same as may be reasonable. 
Sec. 8.2. - Personnel policy. 
    8.2.1. For purposes of this section, the term "Town Service" shall be deemed to include all Town employees. 
    8.2.2. The personnel rules prepared by the Town Manager shall, by resolution, be adopted by the Town Council with or without amendment. Said rules may thereafter be revised in the same manner. Said rules shall, at least, provide for: 
(a)  Classification of all positions of employment within the Town Service based on the duties, authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate provision for reclassification of any position warranted by changed circumstances. 
(b)  A pay plan for all Town Service positions. 
(c)  Methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for appointment or promotion. 
(d)  Policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and the removal of employees. 
(e)  Hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for sick, vacation and other leave. 
(f)  Policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional appointments. 
(g)  Policies regarding in-service training programs. 
(h)  Grievance procedures. 
(i)  Standards of Conduct. 
    8.2.3. Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, the Town Manager or his authorized agent shall make all appointments to, and removals from, the Town Service. 
    8.2.4. All appointments and promotions of employees in the Town Service shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence. 
CHAPTER 9. - FINANCE AND TAXATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal uniform fiscal year, G.S. § 7-381 et seq.; municipal auditing, G.S. § 7-391 et seq.; municipal finance, G.S. § 7-398 et seq. 

Sec. 9.1. - Preliminary budget estimates. 
    9.1.1. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Town Manager, with the assistance of the Department of Finance, to compile preliminary estimates for the annual budget. 
(b)  The head of each office or agency of the Town supported wholly or in part from Town funds, or for which a specific Town appropriation is made, including the Chairman of the Board of Education shall, on or before February 15, file with the Town Manager on forms provided by the Town Manager, expenditure requests of that office or agency and the revenue, other than tax revenues, to be collected thereby in the ensuing fiscal year. 
(c)  Expenditure requests, except the requests of the Board of Education, shall be submitted in accordance with a budget classification plan formulated by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town Council and the Board of Finance. Expenditure requests of the Board of Education shall be submitted in accordance with a budget classification plan formulated by the Board of Finance and approved by the Town Council. Such requests shall be accompanied by data setting forth a program or programs showing services, activities and work accomplished during the current year and to be accomplished during the ensuing year. 
(d)  Any office or agency shall include as part of its requests, estimates of the cost of proposed capital improvement projects for the ensuing fiscal year and four fiscal years thereafter. Such requests and estimates shall be in the form and at such time as prescribed by the Town Manager. 
Sec. 9.2. - Duties of the Town Manager on budget. 
    9.2.1. On or before March 1, the Town Manager shall present to the Town Council a budget consisting of: 
(a)  A written statement outlining the important features of the budget plan; 
(b)  Detailed estimates of revenue by source, itemized receipts collected in the last completed fiscal year, receipts estimated to be collected during the current fiscal year, and estimates of receipts to be collected in the ensuing fiscal year; 
(c)  Estimates of expenditures, in detail, directed by the Town Council, for each office or agency for the last fiscal year and expenditures for the current fiscal year to the time of preparing the estimates, total expenditures as estimated for the current fiscal year, the requests of the several offices and agencies for the ensuing fiscal year and the Town Manager's recommendations for the ensuing fiscal year. The Town Manager shall, at the request of the Town Council, present reasons for any recommendations; 
(d)  As a part of the annual budget or as a separate report attached thereto the Town Manager shall present a program concerning proposed municipal capital improvement projects for the ensuing year and for the four fiscal years thereafter, a copy of which shall be transmitted to the Zoning and Planning Commission. The Town Manager shall recommend to the Town Council a program of projects for the ensuing fiscal year and a method of financing the same. Such method may include but need not be limited to the special tax levy provided in Section 9.4.1 of this chapter for the benefit of the "Capital & Non-Recurring Expenditure Fund". 
Sec. 9.3. - Duties of the Town Council on budget. 
    9.3.1. 
(a)  On or before April 1, the Town Council shall present and recommend to the Board of Finance the budget for the ensuing fiscal year prepared and presented by the Town Manager pursuant to Section 9.2 with such modifications as the Town Council deems appropriate. As respects the budget proposal of the Board of Education, such alterations or changes shall be in the form of recommendations. 
(b)  A copy of the budget as recommended by the Town Council shall be available for public inspection at the office of the Town Manager. 
Sec. 9.4. - Duties of the Board of Finance; Annual Budget Meeting. 
    9.4.1. 
(a)  The Board of Finance shall hold one or more public hearings not later than three weeks before the Annual Budget Meeting at which any elector or taxpayer may have an opportunity to be heard regarding the budget for the ensuing year. 
(b)  After the Board of Finance public hearing or hearings, and after consultation with the Town Council and the Board of Education, the Board of Finance shall make those revisions in the budget as the Board of Finance deems desirable and shall recommend the budget so revised to the Annual Budget Meeting. Summary copies of the budget showing estimated revenues by major sources and recommended appropriations by office or agency shall be available in sufficient numbers for public distribution at the office of the Town Manager and at the public hearing or hearings. 
(c)  The revised budget as submitted to the Annual Budget Meeting shall not be in less detail than the recommended totals for each office or agency. Sufficient copies of the budget to be presented to the Annual Budget Meeting shall be available to the public in the office of the Town Manager, and at least five days prior to the Annual Budget Meeting the Board of Finance shall cause to be published in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town, a summary of the budget showing estimated revenues by major sources and recommended appropriations by major sources. 
(d)  The Annual Budget Meeting shall receive and consider a resolution for the adoption of the budget recommended by the Board of Finance pursuant to Section 9.4.1(b). 
(e)  At the conclusion of the discussion on the resolution for the adoption of the budget recommended by the Board of Finance to the Annual Budget Meeting, the moderator shall adjourn the Annual Budget Meeting to a date certain on a weekday not less than seven days nor more than 14 days thereafter for a referendum vote by voting machine by those eligible by law to cast ballots for that purpose. All ballots shall be cast in accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes. 
(f)  If the majority of the ballots cast at any referendum of the adjourned Annual Budget Meeting on a budget recommended by the Board of Finance shall be "Yes" the budget shall be deemed approved as of the date of such affirmative vote. 
(g)  An official copy of the approved budget at any referendum setting forth appropriations in accordance with the budget classification established under Section 9.1.1 shall be filed by the Board of Finance with the Town Clerk within one week following such approval. 
(h)  Within ten days after the approval of the budget at any referendum, the Board of Finance shall fix the tax rate in mills which shall be levied on the taxable property in the Town for the ensuing fiscal year. In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 108 of the General Statutes, as amended, the Board of Finance may levy annually a tax not to exceed two mills to be assessed upon the taxable property in the Town at the same time as the regular annual taxes for Town expenses for the benefit of a fund to be known as the "Capital and Non-Recurring Expenditure Fund" established for the purpose of paying the cost of capital improvements for which the Town is authorized to issue bonds and for no other purpose. 
(i)  The Board of Finance shall have the power to transfer from time to time to this fund any portion of the resources of the general fund not otherwise appropriated. Appropriations for construction or for other permanent improvements, from whatever source derived, shall not lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished, or abandoned by action by the Board of Finance or by the Town Meeting, whichever authorized the original appropriation provided any project shall be deemed to have been abandoned if three fiscal years shall elapse without an expenditure from or encumbrance of the appropriation therefor. 
    9.4.2. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of Section 9.4.4, in the event the majority of the ballots cast at a referendum conducted pursuant to Section 9.4.l(e) or conducted pursuant to Section 9.4.2(c)(ii) shall be "No," the Annual Budget Meeting shall be deemed to be further adjourned to a date certain to be designated by the Town Council in accordance with Section 9.4.2(c)(i), except as prohibited by Section 9.4.3. 
(b)  Within 20 days after a vote at referendum which results in the rejection of a budget recommended by the Board of Finance pursuant to either Section 9.4.1(b) or pursuant to Section 9.4.2(b)(iii) the Board of Finance shall: 
(i)  After any consultation with the Town Council and the Board of Education the Board of Finance deems advisable, determine those modifications, if any, to the rejected budget the Board of Finance deems appropriate. 
(ii)  Conduct a public hearing on the rejected budget including those modifications, if any, determined to be appropriate by the Board of Finance pursuant Section 9.4.2(b)(i). 
(iii)  Recommend to the Town Council a budget for vote thereon at referendum at the adjourned Annual Budget Meeting on the date designated by the Town Council in accordance with Section 9.4.2.(c)(i). 
(c)  Upon receipt from the Board of Finance of a recommended budget pursuant to Section 9.4.2(b)(iii) the Town Council shall: 
(i)  Designate a date for a vote at referendum on a budget recommended by the Board of Finance pursuant to Section 9.4.2(b)(iii), which date shall be not more than 30 days after the vote on the budget rejected at the immediately prior referendum. 
(ii)  Instruct the Town Clerk to publish a timely call for a vote at referendum on a budget recommended by the Board of Finance on the date designated by the Town Council pursuant to Section 9.4.2(c)(i) by those eligible by law to cast ballots for that purpose, which call shall set forth the recommendation of the Board of Finance made pursuant to Section 9.4.2(b)(iii). 
    9.4.3. No more than two referenda may be conducted on budgets recommended by the Board of Finance to the Town Council pursuant to Section 9.4.2(b)(iii) for the same fiscal year. 
    9.4.4. If the number of persons voting at any referendum conducted pursuant to this Charter shall be less than nine percent of the electors of the municipality, as determined by the last completed active registry list, the budget voted upon shall be deemed approved notwithstanding that a majority of the votes cast shall be for rejection of the budget. 
Sec. 9.5. - Expenditures and accounting. 
    9.5.1. 
(a)  No purchase shall be made by any office or agency of the Town other than the Board of Education except with the approval of the Town Manager or authorized agent. 
(b)  No voucher, claim or charge against the Town by other than the Board of Education shall be paid until the same has been approved by the Town Manager or authorized agent. No voucher, claim or charge against the Board of Education shall be paid until the same has been approved by the Superintendent of Schools or authorized agent. Checks for the payment of approved claims other than those against the Board of Education shall be drawn by the Town Manager and shall be valid only when countersigned by the Treasurer or authorized agent. In the absence or inability to act of either the Town Manager or the Treasurer, with respect to the above duty, the Council chairman is authorized to substitute against the Board of Education shall be drawn by the Superintendent of Schools or authorized agent and shall be valid only when countersigned by the Treasurer or authorized agent. In the absence or inability to act of either the Superintendent of Schools or authorized agent or the Treasurer with respect to the above duty, the Chairman of the Board of Education is authorized to substitute temporarily for either but not both of them. Any provisions of this Charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the Town Manager or authorized agent may exercise the powers vested in the Superintendent of Schools or authorized agent with respect to purchasing, the approval of vouchers, claims or charges against the Board of Education, and the drawing of checks to pay approved claims, but only if and to the extent and for the period requested by the Board of Education and approved by the Town Council. 
(c)  The Town Manager or authorized agent shall prescribe the time at which and the manner in which persons receiving money on account of the Town shall pay the same to the Town Treasurer. 
(d)  The several offices and agencies of the Town shall not obligate the Town to spend money for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for such office or agency; provided, when any office or agency except the Board of Education shall desire a transfer of funds between its appropriations such office or agency shall, with the approval of the Town Council, make application to the Board of Finance whose duty it shall be to examine into the matter, and upon its approval such transfer may be made except that said Board of Finance may, by resolution, delegate to the Town Council all or any part of its authority to examine into and approve such transfers. Authority delegated to the Town Council to transfer between appropriations for such office or agency shall not exceed one-tenth of one percent of the current Town Operating Budget. 
(e)  Additional appropriations over and above the total budget may be made from time to time by the Board of Finance upon favorable recommendation of the Town Council and certification from the Town Manager that there are available unappropriated general fund resources in excess of the proposed additional appropriations. 
(f)  Upon the request of the Town Council, the Board of Finance may, by resolution, transfer any unencumbered appropriation or portion thereof from one office or agency to another, except that said Board of Finance may, by resolution, delegate to the Town Council all or any part of its authority to examine into and approve such transfer. Authority delegated to the Town Council to transfer any unencumbered appropriation or portion thereof from one office or agency to another shall not exceed one-tenth of one percent of the current Town Operating Budget. 
(g)  Emergency appropriations not exceeding an amount four percent of the current tax levy in any one fiscal year may be made upon the favorable recommendation of the Town Council to the Board of Finance and by vote of not less than four members of said Board of Finance for the purpose of meeting a public emergency which threatens the lives, health or property of citizens. In the absence of available unappropriated general fund resources to meet such appropriation, the Board of Finance shall provide additional means of financing in a manner consistent with the provisions of the general statutes and of this Charter. 
(h)  Each order drawn upon the Treasurer shall state the office or agency or the appropriation against which it is to be drawn. 
(i)  Every payment made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be deemed illegal and every official authorizing or making such payment or any part thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to the Town for the full amount so paid or received. If any appointive officer or employee of the Town shall knowingly incur any obligation or shall authorize or make any expenditure in violation of the provisions of this Charter or take part therein, such action may be the cause for removal. 
Sec. 9.6. - Borrowing. 
    9.6.1. The Town shall have the power to incur indebtedness by issuing bonds or notes as provided in the General Statutes subject to the limitation thereof and the provisions of this Charter. 
CHAPTER 10. - TOWN MEETINGS 

Sec. 10.1. - Annual Budget Meeting and other town meetings. 
    10.1.1. A town meeting for the consideration of the budget, the Annual Budget Meeting, and the transaction of other town business shall be held on the first Monday in May. Other town meetings shall be called by the Town Council only in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and in the manner provided by the General Statutes. The Annual Budget Meeting and other town meetings may be adjourned from time to time. 
Sec. 10.2. - Procedure. 
    10.2.1. All Town meetings, including the Annual Budget Meeting, shall be called to order by the chair of the Town Council or authorized representative. A moderator shall be elected and all business conducted in the manner provided by the General Statutes, except as in this Charter otherwise provided. The Town Clerk shall serve as clerk of all town meetings but in the absence of the Town Clerk an acting clerk may be designated by the meeting. 
Sec. 10.3. - Action by town meeting. 
    10.3.1. 
(a)  Action by a town meeting, without vote pursuant to 10.3.3(c) shall be required for the adoption of: 
(1)  Any resolution making an appropriation of more than one percent of the current tax levy but less than one-tenth of one percent of the current grand list. 
(2)  Any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes or other borrowing, except as provided in 10.3.4, if less than one tenth of one percent of the current grand list. 
(3)  Any resolution providing for the sale of Town real property or any interest therein, the selling price of which is more than one percent of the current tax levy. 
(4)  Any resolution providing for the purchase of real property or any interest therein the purchase price of which is more than one percent of the current tax levy. 
(b)  After consideration of any of the foregoing resolutions the moderator shall call for a vote and the resolution shall become effective if a majority of those persons present at the meeting and qualified to vote shall vote "yes" . 
(c)  Except as provided in 10.3.5, and except for any resolution presented to a town meeting pursuant to 10.3.7, no resolution under 10.3.1(a) above shall be considered by a town meeting until it has been recommended by the Town Council and until it has received the approval of the Board of Finance. 
(d)  With the exception of the annual budget at the Annual Budget Meeting, a town meeting may increase the amount of any appropriation above the amount recommended by the Town Council or make an appropriation not recommended by the Town Council, provided either such action shall require the affirmative vote of a two-thirds majority of the eligible voters voting thereon, which majority shall consist of at least 150 voters. No town meeting shall increase the amount of any bond issue above the amount recommended by the Town Council. 
    10.3.2. Action by a town meeting, exclusive of the Annual Budget Meeting or unless otherwise provided in this Charter, may be taken upon any resolution placed upon the call for a town meeting pursuant to the provisions of this Charter. 
    10.3.3. 
(a)  Action by a town meeting with vote pursuant to (c) hereafter shall be required for: 
(1)  Any resolution making an appropriation one-tenth of one percent of the current grand list or more. 
(2)  Any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes or other borrowings, except as provided in 10.3.5, of one-tenth of one percent of the current grand list or more. 
(b)  Except as provided in 10.3.5, no resolution under 10.3.3(a) above shall be considered by a town meeting until it has received the approval of the Board of Finance. 
(c)  After the consideration of a resolution under 10.3.3(a) the moderator shall adjourn the town meeting for a vote upon the resolution at a reconvened town meeting to be held not less than 30 days after consideration. The resolution shall become effective only after it has been submitted to those persons qualified to vote "yes" or "no" on the voting machine or by absentee ballot as provided in the general statutes, as amended. At the closing of the polls the moderator shall cause the vote to be counted and the resolution shall, if approved by a majority of those voting thereon, be deemed to be a vote of the town meeting. 
    10.3.4. Action by a town meeting, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, may be taken upon any resolution placed upon the call for a town meeting pursuant to the provisions of this Charter: 
(a)  Provided for in 10.3.1(a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), and (a)(4), without vote in the manner provided in 10.3.3(c) after the same has been before the Town Council or the Board of Finance for 60 days without action by either body. 
(b)  Provided for in 10.3.3(a)(1) and (a)(2) with vote in the manner provided in 10.3.3(c) after the same has been before the Town Council or the Board of Finance for 60 days without action by either body. 
    10.3.5. Action by a town meeting shall not be required for any resolution provided for in 10.3.1(a)(1) or (a)(2) or provided for in 10.3.3(a)(1) or (a)(2) the purpose of which is to enable the Town to make payment pursuant to a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    10.3.6. The Town Council may at its discretion require any proposal it may deem of sufficient importance be submitted to those entitled to vote by law at the Annual Budget Meeting or at any town meeting called for that purpose and that proposal shall become effective only after it has been approved by a majority of those eligible to vote thereon at the town meeting. 
    10.3.7. Any other item or resolution, not provided for in 10.3.1 and 10.3.3, with the exception of the annual budget, on the call of any town meeting, may, if the Town Council deems it advisable, be submitted to a vote on the voting machines pursuant to 10.3.3(c). 
Sec. 10.4. - Petition for overrule of action of Town Council. 
    10.4.1. All ordinances, resolutions, or votes of the Town Council, except those making appointments or removals or regulating exclusively the internal procedure of the Town Council shall be subject to overrule by a town meeting, as follows: If within 20 days after the publication of any such ordinance, resolution or vote, a petition signed by not less than ten percent of the voters of the Town, as determined from the latest official lists of the Registrars of Voters and the latest official grand list, is filed with the Town Clerk requesting its reference to a town meeting, the effective date of such ordinance, resolution or vote shall be suspended and the Town Council shall fix the time and place of a town meeting, which shall be within 20 days after the filing of the petition, and notice thereof shall be given in the manner provided by law for the calling of a town meeting. Any ordinance, resolution or vote so referred shall take effect upon the conclusion of such meeting, unless at least 100 voters constituting a majority of those voting hereon, shall have voted in favor of overruling. 
Sec. 10.5. - Petition for enactment of ordinances. 
    10.5.1. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of 10.3.1 hereof, not less than ten percent of the voters of the Town, as determined from the latest official lists, may at any time petition under their personal signatures for the enactment of any proposed lawful ordinance by filing a petition, including the complete text of the proposed ordinance, with the Town Clerk. The Town Council shall call a town meeting, to be held within 30 days from the date of filing, unless prior to the date of the town meeting such ordinance shall be enacted by the Town Council. The call for the meeting shall state the proposed ordinance in full and shall provide for a "yes" or "no" vote as to its enactment. If a majority of the persons entitled to vote and voting at the town meeting shall vote "yes" then the ordinance shall take effect on the tenth day thereafter without further action of the Town Council. 
(b)  The proposed ordinance shall be examined by the Town Attorney before being submitted to town meeting. The Town Attorney is authorized to correct the form of such ordinance for the purpose of avoiding repetitions, illegalities and unconstitutional provisions, and to assure accuracy in its text and references and clearness and preciseness in its phraseology, but not materially changing its meaning and effect. 
CHAPTER 11. - TRANSITION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11.1. - Financial interest prohibited. 
    11.1.1. No member of the Town Council, member of the Board of Finance, or member of the Board of Education shall derive, by reason of holding such office any direct financial benefit as the result of any contract with the Town or the Board of Education or of any sale to the Town or said Board of Education of any materials, supplies or services. 
    11.1.2. No member of the Town Council or the Board of Education shall hold any Town office or Town position of remuneration. 
    11.1.3. No member of any board or commission of the Town shall hold any office or position of remuneration which is under the jurisdiction of said board or commission. 
Sec. 11.2. - Terms of office for standing bodies. 
    11.2.1. Minority representation on any elective or appointive board, commission, committee, panel of alternates or similar body of the Town, including the Town Council, shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-167a of the General Statutes, as amended. 
    11.2.2. Except as may otherwise be provided by the General Statutes or this Charter, the membership of all standing elective or appointive boards, commissions, committees, panels of alternates or similar bodies of the Town with an expected life in excess of three years from the time of creation, shall be uneven in number. The terms of office thereof, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, shall be for either two years or four years. 
    11.2.3. All terms of office shall be arranged so that not more than a bare majority of them shall expire at any one time. 
    11.2.4. At the time of creation of any such body, terms expiring with the expiration of the term of the incumbent Town Council may be established for not more than a bare majority thereof, with the balance of the terms expiring subsequent to the expiration of the term of the incumbent Town Council, so that, thereafter, there shall be elected or appointed, as the case may be, alternately, members on said body constituting one less than a bare majority, and then a bare majority. 
Sec. 11.3. - Terms of office for special purpose bodies. 
    11.3.1. Except as may otherwise be provided by the General Statutes or this Charter, the membership on all non-standing elective or appointive boards, commissions, committees, panels of alternates, or similar bodies created by the Town Council for a particular purpose and for a term not to exceed three years, shall be determined by the Town Council as to the number of members and the term of each member, all of which terms may be coincidental. 
Sec. 11.4. - Removals. 
    11.4.1. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, and except as provided by Section 7-278 of the General Statutes, as amended, any appointive officer or appointive member of a board, commission, committee, panel of alternates or similar body of the Town may be removed by the authority which appointed said officer or member, provided notification of such removal shall first be given in writing. 
    11.4.2. In the event such removal notice shall not specify the grounds for removal, said officer or member shall, upon written request to the appointing authority within ten days from the date of receipt of the removal notice, be immediately given notice in writing of the specific grounds of removal. 
    11.4.3. The absence of such appointee from at least one-half of the regular meetings during the preceding 12 months shall constitute cause for removal, without hearing. 
    11.4.4. Except as provided in Section 11.4.3, and if requested, either in the request for specific grounds or in a subsequent written request submitted to the Town Council within five days from the receipt of such specific grounds, said officer or member shall be given written notice from the Town Council setting forth the time and place of an opportunity to be heard in defense of said officer or member, personally or by counsel, at a public hearing before the Town Council. Such hearing shall be held not less than five nor more than 20 days after the receipt of such request for hearing and a decision shall be made thereon within 20 days after such hearing. 
Sec. 11.5. - Contributions. 
    11.5.1. No contribution having a value in excess of 1/100 of one percent of the Town's Operating Budget shall be made to any charitable or not for profit organization, unless the Town, at the option of the Town Council, is entitled to be represented on the governing Board of the organization by one or more persons designated by the Town Council and unless the Town shall be entitled to conduct an audit of the books and records of the organization at any time at the expense of the Town. 
Sec. 11.6. - Existing laws and ordinances. 
    11.6.1. All general laws applicable to the Town and all ordinances and by-laws of the Town shall continue in full force and effect, except as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. All special acts or parts of special acts relating to the Town are repealed with the exception of those not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 11.7. - Official bonds. 
    11.7.1. Authority is given for the purchase of a blanket bond conditioned upon honesty and/or faithful performance of official duties on those officials required by the Town Council or the Town Meeting to post a surety company bond. Premiums for any such bond shall be paid by the Town. 
Sec. 11.8. - Gender. 
    11.8.1. When the context so requires, the masculine gender shall include the feminine, the feminine shall include the masculine, and the singular shall include the plural, the plural the singular. 
Sec. 11.9. - Parliamentary procedure. 
    11.9.1. Each Town board, commission, committee or similar body of the Town shall be authorized to adopt rules of procedure by a majority vote of its membership. In the event of a failure to adopt such rules, Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail. 
Sec. 11.10. - Amendment of this Charter. 
    11.10.1. This Charter may be amended in the manner prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- Charter amendments, G.S. § 7-188 et seq. 
Sec. 11.11. - Saving clause. 
    11.11.1. If any section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter, nor the context in which such section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section, may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of the section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Sec. 11.12. - Transfer of power. 
    11.12.1. The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon any commission, board, department or office under the General Statutes or any ordinance or regulation, in force at the time this Charter shall take effect, shall be thereafter exercised and discharged by the commission, board, department or office upon which are imposed corresponding or like functions, powers and duties under the provisions of this Charter. All commissions, boards, departments or offices abolished by this Charter, whether elective or appointive, shall continue in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made for the discontinuance of such commissions, boards, departments or offices and the performance of their duties by other commissions, boards, departments or offices created under this Charter and until the Town Clerk shall have notified the members of such commissions, boards, departments or offices as are abolished by this Charter that their successors have qualified. 
Sec. 11.13. - Effective date. 
    11.13.1. This Charter shall become effective on November 3, 1998. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter was originally adopted in 1959 and was amended in full and approved by the voters on November 3, 1998. 
Amendment Date Section  Charter 
Section  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Avon, Connecticut," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference- Compilations of ordinances, G.S. § 7-148a. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Town of Avon, Connecticut, as designated in Section 1-1. 
    Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females. 
    G.S. The abbreviation "G.S." refers to the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended or revised. Any reference to a state act by title is to such act as amended or revised. Any reference by section number to a statute that is subsequently renumbered shall be construed to be a reference to the renumbered statute. 
    Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. Words in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to Town officers, Town departments, Town boards, Town commissions and Town employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner" shall include any part owner or joint owner. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, public or private corporation, any partnership, firm, association or other organization, receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    State. The term "State" means the State of Connecticut. 
    Street. The term "street" means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, or other public way in the Town. 
    Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant" include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of any building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Town. The term "Town" means the Town of Avon, Connecticut. 
    Town Council. The term "Town Council" refers to the Town Council of the Town of Avon, Connecticut. 
    USC. The abbreviation "USC" refers to the United States Code, as amended. 
State Law reference- Rules of construction of terms used in the General Statutes, G.S. § 1-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Headings of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The headings of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere descriptions of the contents of the sections and are not parts of the sections. 
(b)  A history note appearing in parentheses after a section in this Code indicates the legislative history and has no legal effect. Cross references, Charter references, editor's notes and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any previously repealed ordinances in force before or at the time the repealed ordinance took effect 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment, penalty, proceeding or prosecution with respect to an offense committed prior to the repeal of the ordinance. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and may be printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)  All provisions to be repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplements to Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code may be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Town. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as necessary in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such headings and titles or in any such headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to titles, chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this section" or "sections ___ to ___ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  In this section "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  An act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction, a public nuisance or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction, a public nuisance or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person in violation of this Code is punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provide in this Code, the Town Manager or his designee is authorized to issue citations and to otherwise enforce the ordinances, regulations and policies of the Town. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code: 
(1)  That are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  That are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)  The imposition of any punishment hereunder shall not prevent the enforced abatement of any unlawful condition by the Town. Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
State Law reference- Penalties for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any portion of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Code. The parts of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that if any portion of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any Town ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed below. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Providing for salaries, retirement or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(5)  Dedicating, establishing, discontinuing, naming, abandoning, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(6)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(9)  Providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations not codified in this Code. 
(10)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(11)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(12)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Town seal. 
    There is hereby adopted, as the official seal of the Town of Avon, a design depicting the Towpath Canal, a manned canal boat being towed by two horses, the founding date of the Town, the incorporation date of the Town, with the name of the Town and the State and the word "seal" inscribed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 17) 
State Law reference- Town seal required, G.S. § 7-101. 
Sec. 2-2. - Official Town signpost. 
    The Official Town Signpost shall be located at the Town Hall, 60 West Main Street. All notices requiring advertisement in accordance with the Town Charter, or Connecticut General Statutes, shall be posted on the Official Town Signpost. 
(Ord. No. 37, §§ I, II) 
State Law reference- Erection of signposts, G.S. § 7-102; use of signposts as warnings of town and other meetings, G.S. § 7-3. 
Secs. 2-3-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-21. - Retirement and pension plans. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to establish pension and retirement plans for the benefit of the officers and employees, and their beneficiaries, of the Town. 
(b)  The Town hereby establishes and adopts the following pension and retirement plans, as amended through the dates specified, for the benefit of the officers and employees, and their beneficiaries, of the Town: 
(1)  Retirement plan for police, non-organized employees, public works employees, and dispatchers of the Town, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2002, as further amended effective as of January 1, 2004, January 1, 2007, and January 1, 2008, as further amended through October 31, 2012, and as further amended and restated effective January 1, 2013. 
(2)  Retirement plan for Board of Education of the Town, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2006, as further amended as of January 1, 2008, as further amended through October 31, 2012, and as further amended and restated effective January 1, 2013. 
(3)  Town of Avon 401(a) Prototype Money Purchase Plan (A.N. 109284), dated June 15, 1995, as amended through October 31, 2012. 
(4)  Town of Avon 401(a) Government Money Purchase Plan (A.N. 109844), as amended through July 1, 2003, and as further amended through October 31, 2012. 
(5)  Town of Avon 457 Deferred Compensation Plan (A.N. 302055), as amended effective as of January 1, 2002, and as further amended through October 31, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 69, §§ I, II; Amend. of 12-3-2009; Amend. of 10-4-12(1), eff. 10-31-12; Amend. of 11-14-13, eff. 12-10-13) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide pension systems, G.S. § 7-148(c)(5)(A). 
Secs. 2-22-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-51-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for police protection, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(A); police and fire departments, G.S. § 7-274 et seq. 

Sec. 2-61. - Average work week for police officers. 
    The average work week for all permanent paid uniformed members of the Avon Police Department shall be 40 hours as provided in G.S. §§ 7-292-7-294. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate animals, G.S. § 7-138(c)(7)(D). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5-1-5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs, G.S. § 22-327 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 5-21-5-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NUISANCE DOGS 

Sec. 5-31. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to identify and place restrictions on dogs that pose a risk of injury to persons or animals. 
(Ord. No. 70, § I) 
Sec. 5-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal Control Officer means a person employed or appointed by the Town who is authorized to investigate and enforce violations relating to animal control under the provisions of this division or state law. 
    Chief of Police means the Chief of Police of the Town police department or, in the absence of the Chief of Police, the person designated as the commanding officer of the department. 
    Direct control means immediate and continuous physical control of a dog by means of a leash, cord or chain that is no more than six feet in length and is of sufficient strength to restrain the dog. 
    Nuisance dog means a dog that has been designated by the Chief of Police to be a nuisance dog as provided for in Section 5-35. 
    Secure enclosure means a pen or structure suitable for confining a dog that has secure sides, a locked entrance and is at least six feet in height. If the secure enclosure has no bottom attached to the sides, the sides must extend no less than one foot below the base. A residence may qualify as a secure enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 70, § II) 
Sec. 5-33. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating this division or a related order of the Animal Control Officer or Chief of Police shall be fined $90.00 for each offense or the maximum amount allowed for infractions as set forth by the state Superior Court infractions schedules. 
(Ord. No. 70, § VI) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 5-34. - Exemptions and service of notices. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, notices shall be in writing and shall be provided by personal delivery, certified mail, or overnight courier service. Notices shall be deemed given or provided as follows: if by personal delivery, when delivery is made upon the person or at the residence of the person; if by certified mail, upon delivery into the hands of the U.S. Postal Service; and if by overnight courier, upon delivery to an office or collection box of the overnight courier. 
(Ord. No. 70, § VII) 
Sec. 5-35. - Designation. 
(a)  The Chief of Police shall have the authority to designate any dog within the Town a nuisance dog if the Chief of Police finds that the dog has on one or more occasions: 
(1)  Severely injured or killed a domestic animal or pet when not on the premises of its owner or keeper; or 
(2)  Inflicted a non-superficial injury on or aggressively attacked a person whether on or off the premises of its owner or keeper. 
(b)  A dog shall not be designated a nuisance dog solely as a result of an injury or attack upon a person who was committing a crime, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises of the owner or keeper of the dog or who was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or if the dog's action was a reasonable response to a threat of injury or harm to the dog or its owner or keeper. 
(c)  The Chief of Police shall provide written notice to the owner and keeper of a dog designated a nuisance dog within two business days of making such a designation. 
(Ord. No. 70, § III) 
Sec. 5-36. - Restrictions and impoundment. 
(a)  The keeping of a dog which has been designated a nuisance dog in accordance with this division shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No person owning or keeping a nuisance dog shall permit the dog to be on the premises of the owner or keeper of the dog unless the dog is within a secure enclosure or under the direct control of a person capable of restraining the dog. 
(2)  No person owning or keeping a nuisance dog shall permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner or keeper unless the dog is under the direct control of a person capable of restraining the dog. 
(3)  The person owning the nuisance dog shall cause to be posted on the premises where the dog is kept a sign to be supplied by the Animal Control Officer warning of the presence of the nuisance dog. The sign shall be readily visible to anyone entering upon the premises where the dog is domiciled or kept. 
(4)  The owner of a nuisance dog shall provide written notification to the Chief of Police within 30 days of the death, sale or other disposition of the dog. 
(5)  The Chief of Police may impose such additional restrictions as he deems necessary to protect members of the public from harm. 
(b)  The Animal Control Officer or any police officer may impound a nuisance dog if the Animal Control Officer or police officer determines that impoundment is necessary to prevent a substantial risk of severe injury to a domestic animal or pet or of a non-superficial injury to or aggressive attack on a person. The owner of the dog shall pay all costs of impoundment. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall use his best efforts to provide notice of the impoundment by telephone or, if unable to reach the owner or keeper, by written notice to the owner and the keeper of the dog within 48 hours of the impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 70, § IV) 
State Law reference- Impoundment of dogs biting persons, G.S. § 22-358. 
Sec. 5-37. - Appeals. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of a dog may appeal a designation of nuisance dog or the impoundment of a nuisance dog by providing a written notice of appeal to the Chief of Police within 15 days of the date of notice of the designation or impoundment. The designation or impoundment shall remain in effect pending the appeal. 
(b)  The Town Manager shall designate a hearing officer to convene a public hearing within 30 days of receipt of a notice of appeal, and shall provide the owner or keeper of the dog with no less than ten days written notice of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted with such rules and methods of proof as the Town Manager deems fair and appropriate. Rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. 
(c)  The Hearing Officer shall issue a ruling upon the appeal within seven days of the conclusion of the hearing, which ruling may include modifications with respect to the restrictions imposed by the Chief of Police. Written notice of the ruling shall be promptly provided to the owner or keeper. 
(Ord. No. 70, § V) 
Chapter 9 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING PERMIT FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, G.S. § 29-252 et seq. 

Sec. 9-21. - Payment. 
    No permit that is required by the State Building Code shall be issued in the name of the Town until the fees prescribed in this article have been paid to the Town. No fee shall be required to be paid on work to be performed under a contract with the Town or as waived by the Town Council as the designee. 
(Ord. No. 29, § I) 
Sec. 9-22. - Determination of fee. 
(a)  Permit fees shall be based upon the value of such work as determined by the Building Official. In determining the value of the work, the Building Official may utilize such nationally recognized methodologies and cost schedules, as the Building Official deems appropriate. 
(b)  Permit fees for work that will require a certificate of occupancy shall be: 
(1)  Based initially upon the value of the work as shown in the application for the permit; and 
(2)  Adjusted upon the completion of the work and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Town. 
Any additional fee shall be based upon the actual value of the work as determined by the Building Official at the time that the permittee requests the certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Permit fees for work that will require a certificate of completion shall be based upon the value of the work as shown in the application for the permit, subject to such adjustment as is determined appropriate by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 29, § II) 
Sec. 9-23. - Fees; amounts; work without permit; reinspection fees. 
(a)  Permit fees shall be as established by regulation or Town Council policy. 
(b)  If work is started without the required permit, the applicable fee shall be increased by the lesser $1,000.00 or 100 percent of the fee that otherwise would be due. However, if the unpermitted work was completed prior to the date of transfer of the property to the applicant, then the Building Official shall waive the fee increase provided for in this subsection (b). 
The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicability of this subsection (b). The applicant shall provide a statement under oath and such other substantial proof and documentation as the Building Official deems necessary to validate the fee waiver request. The Building Official shall grant or deny the fee waiver request in writing within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  A reinspection fee in the amount established by regulation or Town Council policy, shall be imposed for each second or subsequent reinspection. The term "reinspection" is defined as any inspection of work that follows an initial inspection of the work and the issuance by the Building Official or designee of written required changes in the work. 
(Ord. No. 29, § III; Amend. of 11-13-08) 
State Law reference- Surcharge on permits, G.S. § 29-263(b). 
Sec. 9-24. - Refunds. 
(a)  The Building Official may grant a whole or partial refund of a permit fee for the following reasons: 
(1)  An error in the calculation or payment of the fee. 
(2)  Withdrawal of an application or termination of work before the Building Department has devoted substantial time to its review. 
(3)  Modification of the application in a manner that reduces the projected value of the work. 
(b)  The Building Official shall make the final determination of what portion, if any, of a permit fee shall be refunded or retained. 
(Ord. No. 29, § IV) 
Sec. 9-25. - Other fees. 
    The payment of any fee prescribed by this article shall not relieve the permit holder from the payment of other fees such as, but not limited to, water taps, sewer connections, or other fees that may be prescribed by local ordinance, state statute, or the State Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 29, § V) 
Sec. 9-26. - Failure to pay fees. 
    No certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall be issued by the Building Official until all fees have been paid to the Town. 
(Ord. No. 29, § VI) 
State Law reference- Certificates of occupancy, G.S. § 29-265. 
Secs. 9-27-9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BLIGHTED OR UNSAFE PREMISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to define and prevent blight, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv); authority to demolish hazardous buildings preserved, G.S. § 29-253. 

Sec. 9-51. - Findings. 
    The Town Council finds that blighted or unsafe buildings and other structures may pose a threat to the health and safety of their occupants and other members of the public, and may reduce the value and unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties in the vicinity of such premises. The Town Council also finds that buildings and structures within the Town should not be allowed to become blighted or unsafe or to remain in such a condition. 
(Ord. No. 67, § I) 
Sec. 9-52. - Blighted or unsafe structures; defined. 
(a)  A building or structure shall be deemed blighted if it, or any portion that is or may be used as a separate unit of occupancy, is in a state of substantial deterioration as evidenced by one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Missing or boarded windows or doors; 
(2)  Collapsing or missing walls, roof or floor; 
(3)  Exterior walls with substantial breaks, holes, or loose or rotting materials; 
(4)  Foundation walls with substantial breaks or open cracks; 
(5)  Chimneys or other attachments that are in a substantial state of disrepair; or 
(6)  Weakened, deteriorated or structurally unsound components. 
(b)  A building or structure shall be deemed unsafe if it, or any portion that is or may be used as a separate unit of occupancy, poses a threat to the health or safety of its occupants or other members of the public for reasons that include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The building or structure has been partially or wholly damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind or other natural forces, or by any other catastrophe, whether caused by natural forces or by man, and could cause injury or death to any person on or near the premises; 
(2)  The building or structure is in such a state of disrepair or decay as to pose a threat to the safety of its occupants or other members of the public; 
(3)  The building or structure is occupied or intended to be occupied but does not or cannot provide its occupants with reasonable access on the property to clean water and sanitation facilities; 
(4)  The building or structure is infested with vermin or likely to cause disease; 
(5)  The building or structure has been determined by the Director of Health to be a hazard to the health or safety of its occupants, potential occupants, or other members of the public. 
(Ord. No. 67, § III) 
Sec. 9-53. - Prohibitions. 
    No owner or other person having lawful possession or control of a building or other structure within the Town shall permit the building or structure to become blighted or unsafe, as defined in this article, or to remain in a blighted or unsafe condition. 
(Ord. No. 67, § II) 
Sec. 9-54. - Enforcement powers. 
    The Building Official is granted the authority necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. Such authority shall include, but not be limited to: entering premises known to be, or suspected of being, blighted or unsafe for the purpose of conducting inspections, citing violations, determining enforcement actions, assessing fines, filing liens, designating a building or structure as blighted or unsafe, ordering the demolition of unsafe buildings or structures, and initiating legal actions. 
(Ord. No. 67, § IV) 
Sec. 9-55. - Inspection and designation of blighted or unsafe buildings or structures. 
    The Building Official or his designee shall inspect any buildings or structures that appear to be blighted or unsafe based upon reports of the Director of Health or of any other persons who have reason to know of such conditions, or upon such other evidence as the Building Official deems relevant. Any building or structure that has been determined by the Building Official to be blighted or unsafe shall be so designated by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 67, § V) 
Sec. 9-56. - Notice and enforcement procedures; violation and penalty. 
(a)  Upon designating a building or structure as blighted or unsafe, the Building Official shall issue to the owner a written notice of blighted or unsafe premises and shall order the owner to correct the blighted or unsafe condition within 60 days of the date of the notice. The notice shall be sent to the owner by certified mail and shall include the facts upon which the designation is based; the date by which the blighted or unsafe conditions must be corrected; the fines, penalties, costs, fees and other enforcement actions that may be imposed by citation if the conditions are not corrected; and the owner's right to contest the order before one or more citation hearing officers appointed by the Town Council (the Hearing Officer). In the event that the relevant building or structure or portion of a building or structure is known by the Building Official to be occupied by or under the legal control or possession of a person other than the owner, the Building Official may direct a similar notice and order to any such person whom the Building Official may reasonably believe to be fully or partially responsible for creating or maintaining the blighted or unsafe condition. Each person receiving such a notice and order shall be deemed to be jointly and severally liable for correcting the blighted or unsafe conditions. 
(b)  Prior to the expiration of the 60-day repair period specified in the notice of blighted or unsafe building or structure, the owner or person receiving a notice and order pursuant to subsection (a) of this section may apply to the Building Official for an extension of the repair period. The Building Official may grant one or more extensions of the repair period, none of which may be longer than 60 days, if he or she determines that the owner or other person is diligently working to remedy the blighted or unsafe condition and that under the facts and circumstances an extension is reasonable. 
(c)  If the blighted or unsafe building or structure is not repaired to the satisfaction of the Building Official, or demolished, by the conclusion of the 60-day repair period and any extensions thereof granted by the Building Official, the Building Official shall issue a citation. Citations may be enforced in accordance with G.S. § 7-152c. The penalty for failure to make such repairs shall be a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 for each day that the building or structure remains unrepaired. 
(Ord. No. 67, § VI) 
Sec. 9-57. - Procedures after designation of unsafe building or structure; rescinding an unsafe designation. 
(a)  Whenever the Building Official has designated a building or structure to be unsafe, the Building Official or his designee shall post a placard on the principal entrance to the premises indicating that it is unsafe, and, if the building or structure is occupied, shall order the building or structure vacated within a reasonable time, said time not to be less than 24 hours nor more than ten days. 
(b)  Whenever any building or structure has been placarded and vacated, the Building Official may order services and utilities to be turned off or disconnected and all utility meters to be removed. All charges for turning off or on such services and utilities shall be at the owner's expense. 
(c)  No building or structure that has been designated as unsafe and has been placarded as such and vacated, shall be used again for human habitation until written approval is secured from the Building Official and the placard removed by or at the direction of the Building Official. 
(d)  The Building Official shall rescind a designation of unsafe building or structure and remove the placard when the building or structure is deemed by the Building Official no longer to pose a threat to the health or safety of occupants or of a member of the public. 
(e)  Whenever any building or structure has been designated as unsafe, such order shall be filed with the Town Clerk for inclusion in the Land Records of the Town. 
(f)  Any property owner or other person having lawful possession or control of a building or structure that has been designated as unsafe shall upon request be granted a hearing on the matter before the Hearing Officer under the procedure set forth in G.S. § 7-152c. However, such hearing will not stay the designation or placarding of premises as unsafe. 
(Ord. No. 67, § VII) 
Sec. 9-58. - Demolition of unsafe building or structure. 
(a)  Order by Building Official to demolish. The Building Official shall order an unsafe building or structure to be demolished if: 
(1)  It has not been put into proper condition within the time period provided in a notice issued under Section 9-56; or 
(2)  The Building Official has determined that the building or structure is substantially damaged or destroyed and that repair is not practical. 
(b)  Notice to owner. The owner of any building or structure that has been ordered demolished shall be given a notice of this order in the manner provided in Section 9-56 and shall be given a reasonable time not to exceed 90 days to demolish such structure in a manner that will protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(c)  Hearing request. Any owner aggrieved by the notice to demolish may within ten days seek a hearing in the manner provided in Section 9-56. 
(d)  Demolition by Town; cost as lien. If an owner fails, neglects or refuses to demolish, as necessary, any unsafe building or structure within the requisite time, the Building Official may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for a demolition order. The court may grant such order when no hearing on the matter is pending. The cost of the demolition shall create a debt in favor of the Town against such owner; such cost shall be recoverable in a civil action brought by the Town, who shall possess all rights of a private creditor. Any unpaid costs (including legal and other fees related to the recovery of such costs) shall be a lien on the subject real estate. 
(Ord. No. 67, § VIII) 
Chapter 13 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, G.S. § 9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - Justices of the Peace. 
    The number of Justices of the Peace shall be 24. 
(Ord. No. 18, § 1) 
State Law reference- Selection of justices of the peace, G.S. § 9-183a et seq. 
Chapter 15 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1-15-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate alarm systems, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xiv). 

Sec. 15-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide minimal standards and regulations applicable to alarm signaling devices to be monitored by the Town and persons desiring to use such devices as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 50, § I) 
Sec. 15-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm panel indicator means the monitoring device for alarm signaling devices that is installed in the police department communications center. 
    Alarm signaling device means any mechanical or electrical device that is designed or used for the detecting of fire or of an entry into any building, structure or facility or designed for detection of the presence of a person or movement of any kind upon or within any building, structure or facility. Excluded from this definition are any such mechanical or electrical devices keyed to a central station protective system other than the Town police department. 
    Applicant means any person, excluding the Town, applying to install an alarm signaling device that is monitored at the alarm panel indicator. 
    Communications center means that area of the police department offices designated by the Police Chief for the receipt and dispatch of official communications. 
    Fire department means the Avon Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or society, excluding the Town. 
    Police Chief means the Chief of the police department of the Town or his designated representative. 
    Town Manager means the Town Manager of the Town or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 50, § II) 
Sec. 15-23. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. Any person who is a property owner or lessee of property in the Town and who desires to install an alarm signaling device upon or within real estate in Town under his ownership or control to be monitored by the Town, may do so only after obtaining a permit from the Town, excepting that no permit shall be issued for an alarm signaling device if there is also a device outside the building which produces an audible alarm as a result of entry into a building. Applications may be obtained from and returned to the Police Chief. A separate application shall be made for each type of alarm signaling device to be monitored by the Town. 
(b)  Application form and content. Each application shall be made on the form prescribed by the Town Manager. 
(c)  Issuance. Upon the submission of a properly completed and executed application form, payment of the required application fee and payment of the initial hook-up and monitoring fee, a permit shall be issued by the Town Manager. 
(Ord. No. 50, §§ III-V) 
Sec. 15-24. - Hookup and monitoring fees. 
    An initial hookup fee, to cover the costs of connecting a device to the alarm panel indicator, and an annual monitoring fee shall be assessed against each applicant. Said fees shall be prescribed by regulation or Town Council policy. 
(Ord. No. 50, § VI) 
Sec. 15-25. - Form agreement adopted by Town Council. 
    The Town Council shall adopt a form agreement pertaining to installation, maintenance and monitoring of an alarm signaling device and the connection of the same to the alarm panel indicator. This form agreement shall be known as Regulation 1. The Town Council may, from time to time, as deemed necessary, amend or revise Regulation 1 and may promulgate, adopt or amend other rules or regulations. All rules, regulations and amendments thereof shall be directed at the efficient and effective implementation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 50, § VII) 
Sec. 15-26. - Enforcement and administration of article provisions. 
    The Town Manager shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article and such rules and regulations as may be promulgated hereunder from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 50, § VIII) 
Chapter 17 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Environment generally, G.S. § 22a-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Aquifer protection agency. 
(a)  Designation and membership. Pursuant to G.S. § 22a-354o, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town ("Commission") is authorized to be the Aquifer Protection Agency of the Town ("Agency"). Each member of the Commission shall be a member of the Agency, and the term of each member on the Commission shall be co-extensive with his term on the Agency. Each alternate member of the Commission shall be an alternate member of the Agency, and the term of each alternate member on the Commission shall be co-extensive with his term on the Agency. All articles, rules and regulations pertaining to the method of selection and removal of members and alternate members and the filling of vacancies on the Commission shall be deemed to be applicable in equal force and extent to the Agency. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The Agency shall have all such powers and duties, and shall be bound by such requirements, obligations and limitations, as may be prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 1) 
State Law reference- Aquifer protection agency to be established, G.S. § 22a-354o; general powers of aquifer protection agency, G.S. § 22a-354a et seq. 
Sec. 17-2. - Inland Wetlands Commission. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established the Town Inland Wetlands Commission. 
(b)  Members; electors. The Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be electors of the Town and who shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Appointment of members; filling of vacancies. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Town Council. Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council for the unexpired portion of the term in which the vacancy exists. 
(d)  Terms of members. Except for an appointment to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term, members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of four years, which terms shall expire on the fourth December 31 next succeeding the effective date of the term of which such appointments are made. 
(e)  Removal of members. The Town Council, upon good cause shown, may, by resolution adopted by the Town Council, remove any member of the Commission from membership on the Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter. The absence of a member from 50 percent of regular meetings of the Commission within a fiscal year shall constitute a cause for removal from the Commission by the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 44, §§ I-VI) 
State Law reference- Inland Wetland Agencies required and membership thereon, G.S. § 22a-41 et seq. 
Secs. 17-3-17-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 17-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle located on private property for a period of 30 consecutive days which is: 
(1)  Inoperative and no longer intended to be rendered operative; or 
(2)  Unregistered and not in condition for legal use on the public highways and is in such condition as to create an adverse effect upon the public landscape or nearby private or public property or otherwise creates a public nuisance, safety or health hazard. 
    Discarded motor vehicle parts means used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or other waste discarded or second hand material which has been part or is intended to be a part of any motor vehicle located on private property for a period of 30 consecutive days, provided that any such parts or materials are not lawfully stored within a garage, building or structure. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled or drawn by any power other than muscular, to include but not be limited to automobiles, trucks, busses, tractors, trailers, motorcycles and like vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 35, § II) 
Sec. 17-22. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any owner of an abandoned motor vehicle or of discarded motor vehicle parts or any owner of property or person in possession of property on which an abandoned motor vehicle or discarded motor vehicle parts are located may be subject to a fine of not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00, 30 days after the Town has given written notice to remove to such owner or person as provided. In addition to any other available remedies, fines may be imposed pursuant to a citation issued by the Chief of Police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 35, § IV) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 17-23. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to abandoned motor vehicles and discarded motor vehicle parts located in a motor vehicle junkyard licensed in accordance with G.S. § 14-67g-r or permitted under any exemptions to such licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 35, § III) 
Sec. 17-24. - Prohibition. 
    Abandoned motor vehicles and discarded motor vehicle parts are prohibited within the limits of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 35, § I) 
Sec. 17-25. - Removal procedure; generally. 
    When it is determined that an abandoned motor vehicle or discarded motor vehicle parts are located on private property, the Town shall notify the person in possession or control of such property, and also the owner of said vehicle or parts, if known, in writing by registered or certified mail, to cause removal of such vehicle or parts, and shall also provide for notice in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town. If such owner or person has not caused removal of such vehicle or parts within 30 days after receipt of said notification, the Town may cause removal of such motor vehicle or parts to a licensed junkyard or to an area authorized by the proper authority for impoundment and disposal of such vehicle or parts. The Town shall collect the cost incurred in removing and disposing of any such vehicle or parts from the owner of such vehicle or parts or from the party in possession or control of the property or the owner of the property from which removal was made. 
(Ord. No. 35, § V) 
State Law reference- Notice to remove motor vehicle, G.S. § 14-150a. 
Sec. 17-26. - Notice to commissioner of motor vehicles. 
    Prior to removal of abandoned motor vehicles as provided for in Section 17-25, the Chief of Police shall notify the State Motor Vehicle Commissioner of the issuance by the Town of the removal notice, such notification to include the location of the vehicle, the identification number if available and such other description or identification of the vehicle as may assist in establishing the legal ownership of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 35, § VI) 
Sec. 17-27. - Responsibility of Chief of Police. 
    The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the giving of all notices by this article and for removal and disposition of motor vehicles and parts. 
(Ord. No. 35, § VII) 
Secs. 17-28-17-40. - Reserved 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL APPLIERS OF HERBICIDES OR PESTICIDES 

Sec. 17-41. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to provide for the protection and promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by regulating the discharge of chemical material in the Town to prevent contamination of its waters. 
(Ord. No. 54, § I) 
Sec. 17-42. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chemical material means any liquid or solid other than potable water, including, but not limited to, a liquid or solid containing an insecticide or herbicide. 
    Commercial spraying firm means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof that engages in the spraying of chemical materials for hire. 
    Discharge means the draining or dumping, directly or indirectly, of any chemical material from a tank into any waters in the Town. 
    Flush means to drain or release any chemical material or water from a tank used or intended to be used to contain chemical material on a spraying vehicle. 
    Spraying vehicle means a motor vehicle as defined by G.S. § 14-1 that contains a spraying apparatus. 
    Waters means estuaries, rivers, brooks, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, lakes, ponds, marshes, drainage systems, and all other surface or underground streams, bodies or accumulations of water, natural or artificial. 
(Ord. No. 54, § II) 
Sec. 17-43. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be fined not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 54, § IV) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 17-44. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No commercial spraying firm shall flush, dump or discharge any chemical material from any spraying vehicle within the limits of the Town. 
(b)  No commercial spraying firm shall undertake to fill its spray tanks from any waters in the Town, except from those hydrants that may be designated from time to time by the Director of Health. 
(Ord. No. 54, § III) 
Secs. 17-45-17-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to noise, G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i), 7-148(c)(7)(H)(viii). 

Sec. 17-61. - Purpose. 
    The people of the Town are entitled to an environment free from excessive noise and vibration that may jeopardize their health, safety or welfare or degrade the quality of their lives. This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote such health, safety, welfare and quality of life through the control and prevention of excessive noise and vibration due to construction activities. 
(Ord. No. 71, § I) 
Sec. 17-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction activities means activities necessary or incidental to the construction, erection, assembly, installation, equipping, alteration, repair, renovation or demolition of buildings or other structures, roads, utility lines or other property. The term "construction activities", shall include but not be limited to land clearing, grading, blasting, excavation, activities related to the processing of earth and rock such as screening, splitting and crushing, removal of materials, filling, paving and the operation of vehicles, tools and equipment on a construction site. 
(Ord. No. 71, § II) 
Sec. 17-63. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating or causing to be violated this article, including through an agent, employee or contractor, shall be subject to a fine of $90.00. Each day any such violation shall continue and each act in violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 71, § V) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 17-64. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The restrictions contained in this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Construction activities engaged in by the Town or the State; 
(2)  Construction activities engaged in by a resident of the Town who is performing such activities on residential property on which the resident resides; 
(3)  Construction activities undertaken in an emergency by a public service company; 
(4)  Construction activities that do not cause noise or vibration such as painting, plastering and caulking. 
(b)  The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the Executive Officer of the police department, shall, in the event of an emergency not involving a public service company, have the power and authority to permit construction activities otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 71, § IV) 
Sec. 17-65. - Prohibitions. 
    Construction activities shall be prohibited within the Town between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and Town holidays. 
(Ord. No. 71, § III) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal police and fire protection, G.S. § 7-274 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE LANES 

Sec. 20-21. - Defined. 
    As used in this article, the term "fire lane" means any fire zone or fire lane designated or established by the Fire Marshal under the provisions of the General Statutes and the State Fire Safety Code for the orderly access to any premises open to the public of fire and other emergency equipment. 
(Ord. No. 47, § II) 
Sec. 20-22. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of Section 20-25 or Section 20-26 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 47, § VI) 
State Law reference- Penalties for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10). 
Sec. 20-23. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all fire lanes established for the orderly access of fire and other emergency equipment to any premises open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 47, § I) 
Sec. 20-24. - Fire lane-Establishment. 
    Promptly upon the establishment or designation of a fire lane, the Fire Marshal shall notify in writing the owner or owners of the affected premises of the establishment of the fire lane. The notice shall specify the location and dimensions of the fire lane and shall include a copy of this article. Said notice may be delivered personally or sent by certified mail to the address of the owner or owners appearing in the records of the Town Tax Collector. A copy of each such notice shall also be sent to the Town Traffic Authority. 
(Ord. No. 47, § III) 
Sec. 20-25. - Same-Posting. 
    Within 45 days after receipt of notice under Section 20-24, the owner or owners of any premises upon which a fire lane has been established shall cause to be erected, installed and maintained, at the expense of the owner or owners, such permanent signs or markings as the Town Traffic Authority may require for the posting of fire lanes. 
(Ord. No. 47, § IV) 
Sec. 20-26. - Same-Obstructions. 
    The owner or owners of any premises upon which any fire lane has been established shall keep said fire lane free of ice and snow and rubbish containers or other obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 47, § V) 
Sec. 20-27. - Removal of parked vehicles. 
    Any police officer, upon finding a motor vehicle parked within a fire lane in violation of this article may take such motor vehicle into his custody and cause the same to be towed to any public or private parking facility designated for such purpose by the Chief of Police. Subject to the provisions of G.S. § 14-150, all expenses of such towing and any subsequent storage shall be borne by the registered owner of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 47, § VIII) 
Secs. 20-28-20-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 20-41. - Defined. 
    As used in this article, the term "open burning" means burning done under such conditions that the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air space. The term "open burning" shall include burning done in simple outdoor structures, receptacles or other devices which are designed principally to contain the materials being burned or to minimize the risk of fire and which do not provide effective control of the air pollutants generated. 
(Ord. No. 33, § I) 
Sec. 20-42. - Permit required; applicability; issuance; revocation. 
    No person shall initiate open burning in any public or private area outside any building without first acquiring a permit from the Fire Marshal. A permit shall be applicable only for the occasion or circumstances, as the case may be, for which the application is approved; a new permit shall be required for all contemplated open burning not sanctioned by an existing permit. Permits can be issued no earlier than 24 hours prior to the effective permit hours. Permits may be revoked by the Fire Marshal or the State Forest Fire Warden, because of the following: 
(1)  High air pollution potential, as noted in Section 20-43; 
(2)  The creation of a nuisance or hazard by the open burning in question; 
(3)  A high extreme forest fire danger. 
Open burning initiated in violation of this article shall be promptly extinguished by the individual or individuals responsible for the same, upon notice from the Fire Marshal. 
(Ord. No. 33, § II) 
Sec. 20-43. - Permit issuance criteria. 
    Open burning permits shall not be issued if the Fire Marshal determines that: 
(1)  A practical alternative method is available for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
(2)  A hazardous health condition might be created by such burning; 
(3)  A salvage operation by open burning would be conducted; 
(4)  The purpose of the burning would be to dispose of automobiles and accessories, scrap and waste materials derived from automobile salvage; 
(5)  Garbage, paper, grass, metals, plastics, leaves, rubber, painted materials or demolition materials are to be burned; 
(6)  An advisory of an air pollution emergency episode is in effect pursuant to Section 22a-174-6 of the Regulations of State Agencies; 
(7)  Such open burning would interfere with or prevent the attainment or maintenance of a relevant air quality standard; 
(8)  The forest fire danger, as determined by the State Forest Fire Warden, is high or extreme and the area of the proposed burning is within 100 feet of a woodland or grassland; 
(9)  Burning is being conducted within a Town right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 33, § III) 
Sec. 20-44. - Specific circumstances not requiring a permit. 
    Open burning may be conducted under the following circumstances without first acquiring a permit as required by this article, except as noted: 
(1)  To abate an immediate fire hazard provided that the abatement fire is supervised by a responsible fire official; 
(2)  The cooking of food, providing no smoke violation or other nuisance is created; 
(3)  Construction purposes, such as open burning in salamanders or other devices used by the workers for heating purposes and small fires kindled by contractors essential to street installation or paving activities, the repairing of utilities, or other similar work, providing no smoke violation or other nuisance is created; 
(4)  Campfires. 
(Ord. No. 33, § IV) 
Sec. 20-45. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for any open burning permit is as established by regulation or Town Council policy. No permit shall be issued until the permit fee has been paid to the Town. 
(Ord. No. 33, § VII) 
Chapter 26 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State public health code authorized, G.S. § 19a-36. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Fee for well drilling permit. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish a fee, payable to the Farmington Valley Health District, for the signing of a well drilling permit pursuant to G.S. § 25-130. All fees shall be established by and payable to the Farmington Valley Health District, for the countersigning by the Director of Health of any well drilling permit issued by the State. 
(Ord. No. 57, §§ I, II) 
State Law reference- Permits for wells on residential property near approved community water supply systems, G.S. § 19a-209a. 
Secs. 26-2-26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD PROCESSING AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Pure food and drugs, G.S. § 21a-13 et seq.; food operators, G.S. § 19a-36a et seq. 

Sec. 26-21. - Findings. 
    The regulation of food processing and food service establishments is hereby declared necessary to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 41, § I) 
Sec. 26-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director of Health means the Director of Health of the Farmington Valley Health District. 
    Food processing establishment means any commercial establishment (excluding seasonal fruit and vegetable stands) in which food is processed, prepared, packaged or distributed for human consumption. 
    Food service establishment means any fixed or mobile restaurant, industrial feeding establishment, private, public or nonprofit organization or institution, catering kitchen, commissary, snack bar or similar place where food or drink is prepared for sale, or for service on the premises or elsewhere, and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided to the public with or without charge. 
    Public Health Code means the Public Health Code of the State, as such shall be amended from time to time. 
    Temporary food service establishment means any food service establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time, not to exceed 14 consecutive days, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering. 
    Year means the fiscal year ending June 30 of each year, or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 41, § II) 
Sec. 26-23. - Public Health Code violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Public Health Code shall be deemed in violation of this article, and shall, in addition to any other available remedies, be subject to citation by the Director of Health or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 41, § XV) 
Sec. 26-24. - Food service establishments outside jurisdiction of Farmington Valley Health District. 
    Food from food service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Farmington Valley Health District may be sold within the Town if such food service establishments conform to the provisions of this article or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the Farmington Valley Health District may accept reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service establishments are located. 
(Ord. No. 41, § XIV) 
Sec. 26-25. - License requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment or food processing establishment (temporary included) within the Town, who does not possess a valid license issued by the Director of Health. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article and/or the Public Health Code shall be entitled to receive and retain such a license. 
(b)  Licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another person or place of business. 
(c)  A valid license shall be posted in every food processing and food service establishment in a conspicuous place for public viewing. 
(Ord. No. 41, § III) 
Sec. 26-26. - Application and issuance of license. 
(a)  Submission. Applications to operate a food processing or food service establishment (temporary included) shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the Farmington Valley Health District. 
(b)  Inspection. The Farmington Valley Health District shall review said applications and make an inspection of the food processing or food service establishment to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and the Public Health Code. 
(c)  Issuance. When an inspection reveals that the applicable requirements have been met, a license shall be issued to the applicant by the Farmington Valley Health District. 
(d)  Disapproval. Any disapproval of an application shall be in writing and shall state the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. No. 41, § IV) 
Sec. 26-27. - License expiration and renewal date of licenses. 
(a)  Permanent license; fee. All permanent licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year and shall be renewed annually upon application and payment of the appropriate fee. Said application and the fee must be received at least 30 days before the expiration date of the license. 
(b)  Temporary license. Licenses for temporary food service establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 41, § V) 
Sec. 26-28. - Fees. 
(a)  Licenses. 
(1)  Permanent. Except for temporary food service establishment licenses, the fee shall be $75.00 for food service establishments with less than 100 seats and $150.00 for food service establishments with 100 or more seats, unless otherwise provided by the Farmington Valley Health District. 
(2)  Temporary. For each temporary food establishment license, the fee shall be $25.00, unless otherwise provided by the Farmington Valley Health District. 
(3)  Public, private and nonprofit. For licenses issued to public and private, nonprofit institutions or organizations, there shall be no fee. 
(b)  Reinspections. 
(1)  Failing inspection. Any food processing establishment or any food service establishment receiving a failing score on inspection, as defined by the Public Health Code of the State, shall pay a reinspection fee of $100.00 prior to such reinspection. 
(2)  License revocation. Any food processing establishment or any food service establishment for which the license has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall pay a reinspection fee of $100.00 in addition to any license fee provided for in connection with the application for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 41, § VI) 
Sec. 26-29. - Suspension of license. 
(a)  The Director of Health may suspend at any time, any license to operate a food processing or food service establishment (temporary included) if the license holder does not comply with the requirements of this article and/or the Public Health Code, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the requirements of this article and/or the Public Health Code. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by Section 26-35. However, notwithstanding the other provisions of this article and/or the Public Health Code, if the Director of Health finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food processing or food service establishment (temporary included), which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial and/or immediate hazard to public health, he may, without warning, prior notice or hearing, issue an immediate written notice to the license holder or person in charge citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and if deemed necessary, immediately suspend the license. 
(b)  Whenever a license is suspended, the license holder or person in charge shall immediately cease all food operations. 
(c)  Any license holder to whom a suspension order is issued shall have an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with Section 26-32. 
(d)  Once a license has been suspended, the food operation shall not be resumed without the written approval of the Director of Health. 
(e)  The Director of Health may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 41, § VII) 
Sec. 26-30. - Reinstatement of suspended license. 
    Any person whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make a written request for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the license. Within ten days following the receipt of a written request, including statement signed by the applicant that, in his opinion, the conditions causing the suspension of the license have been corrected, the Director of Health shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this article, and/or the Public Health Code, the license shall be reinstated by the Director of Health. 
(Ord. No. 41, § VIII) 
Sec. 26-31. - Revocation of license; suspension of licensing pending revocation. 
    For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article and/or the Public Health Code, or for interference with the Director of Health in the performance of his duties, the license may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with Section 26-32. Prior to such action, the Director of Health shall notify the license holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation, and advising that the license shall be permanently revoked at the end of ten days following service of such notice in accordance with Section 26-35, unless a hearing request is filed in accordance with Section 26-32. A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 41, § IX) 
Sec. 26-32. - Hearings. 
    Hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the Director of Health at a time and place designated by him, provided a written petition for such action is filed with the Director of Health by the license holder within 72 hours of receipt of notice excluding Saturday and Sunday. The license holder shall then be afforded a hearing to take place not more than ten days after such petition is filed unless the petitioner agrees in writing to a postponement. Based upon the record of such hearing, the order may be vacated, modified or affirmed. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the license holder. 
(Ord. No. 41, § X) 
Sec. 26-33. - Reapplication for license after revocation. 
    Whenever a revocation of a license has become final, the holder of the revoked license may make written application for a new license as provided in Section 26-26 after the expiration of 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 41, § XI) 
Sec. 26-34. - Plan review and construction or preoperational inspection. 
(a)  No person shall begin to construct or remodel any food processing or food service establishment unless he first secures a review and approval of plans from the Director of Health. 
(b)  The Director of Health shall inspect the food processing or food servicing establishment prior to its beginning operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this article and/or the Public Health Code. 
(Ord. No. 41, § XII) 
Sec. 26-35. - Service of notices. 
    Notices provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the license holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by certified mail to the last known address of the license holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the enforcement authority. Any notice containing an order shall state that there is a right to a hearing under Section 26-32 and in addition to food service establishments, a right to appeal, pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 19A-229. 
(Ord. No. 41, § XIII) 
Secs. 26-36-26-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS, WHIRLPOOLS, AND HOT TUBS 

Sec. 26-51. - Findings. 
    The establishment and enforcement of minimum standards for the operation and maintenance of public swimming pools, whirlpools and hot tubs is necessary in the interest of public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 56, § I) 
Sec. 26-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commissioner means the Commissioner of Health Services of the State. 
    Director of Health means the Director of Health of the Farmington Valley Health District. 
    Operator means an individual at least 18 years of age who has been designated by the owner to be responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the pool, the keeping of records and the activities and regulations pertaining to bathers. 
    Owner means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental agency or club and includes the plural. 
    Public Health Code means the Public Health Code of the State, as such shall be amended from time to time. 
    Public swimming pool means a manmade structure with a controlled water supply intended for bathing, swimming or therapeutic purposes, including any related equipment, structures, areas and enclosures that are intended for the use of the pool patron or pool staff and excluding pools intended to serve a single family residence. 
(Ord. No. 56, § II) 
Sec. 26-53. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  No owner shall operate or permit the use of a public swimming pool in the Town without a valid permit to operate issued to such owner by the Director of Health. Only an owner who complies with the requirements of this article and applicable provisions of the Public Health Code shall be entitled to secure and retain such a permit. 
(b)  No permit issued under this article is transferable to any subsequent owner. 
(c)  A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place for public viewing at every public swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 56, § III) 
Sec. 26-54. - Application and issuance of permit; recordkeeping and precautionary requirements; fees. 
(a)  Application for a permit to operate a public swimming pool shall be submitted together with the permit fee as set forth in subsection (e) of this section on forms prescribed by the Director of Health and shall include the name of the person designated as operator of the public swimming pool. For licenses issued to public or private, nonprofit institutions, there shall be no fee. 
(b)  The operator of each pool shall keep a daily record of information regarding operation, including disinfectant residuals, pH, maintenance procedures and recirculation, together with other data as may be required. The data shall be kept on file by the operator at the premises where the pool is located for a minimum of six months for review by the Director of Health. 
(c)  A telephone accessible to users of the pool shall be provided in the immediate pool area. The Town "all-emergency" telephone number shall be posted in print at least one-half inch high at this telephone. 
(d)  A sign with minimum print one-half inch high with the following precaution shall be adjacent to whirlpools: 
CAUTION 
(1)  Elderly persons and those suffering from heart disease, diabetes, and high or low blood pressure should not enter whirlpool. 
(2)  Unsupervised use by children prohibited. 
(3)  Do not use while under the influence of alcohol, anticoagulants, hypnotics, narcotics or tranquilizers. 
(4)  Do not use alone. 
(5)  Observe a reasonable time limit; then shower, cool down and, if you wish, return for another brief stay. Long exposures may result in nausea, dizziness or fainting. 
(e)  The fee shall be as established by and is payable to the Farmington Valley Health District. 
(Ord. No. 56, § IV) 
Sec. 26-55. - Suspension of permit. 
    If, upon inspection, conditions detrimental to the public health are found, due to violation of the Public Health Code or to a violation of this article, or due to negligence, faulty equipment or inadequate operating procedures, the Director of Health may, by written order, immediately suspend the permit to operate the pool. In the event of such suspension, the Director of Health shall post a sign in a prominent location on the premises stating that the pool is closed to use. The owner of the pool shall be responsible for ensuring that this sign is not removed and the pool is not used. Any pool owner to whom a suspension order is issued shall have an opportunity for appeal in accordance with Section 26-58. 
(Ord. No. 56, § V) 
Sec. 26-56. - Reinstatement of suspended permit. 
    A suspended permit may be reinstated by the Director of Health upon request of the owner and upon evidence based on a reinspection within 14 days after receipt of such request by the Director of Health, that the conditions responsible for the suspension of the permit have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 56, § VI) 
Sec. 26-57. - Revocation of permit. 
    The Director of Health may revoke any permit to operate a pool for failure to comply with his written order following a 14-day suspension of the permit or for repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or the Public Health Code or for interference with the Director of Health in the performance of his duties. A written notice of revocation shall be sent from the Director of Health to the licensee stating the permit has been revoked and the reasons for the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 56, § VII) 
Sec. 26-58. - Appeal. 
    The owner may appeal to the Commissioner any written order issued by the Director of Health in the manner provided by the State General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 56, § VIII) 
State Law reference- Appeals, G.S. § 19a-229. 
Sec. 26-59. - Reissuance of permit after revocation. 
    Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, a permit to operate may be issued upon proper application and upon presentation of evidence that the deficiencies causing revocation have been corrected. A permit fee as for an original permit will be required for all reissued licenses. 
(Ord. No. 56, § IX) 
Secs. 26-60-26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 26-71. - Findings. 
    The regulation of private sewage disposal systems is hereby declared necessary to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 40, § I) 
Sec. 26-72. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private sewage disposal system means any system not owned or operated by the Town or the State, which treats and/or disposes of sanitary or other solid or liquid waste; said term shall not include stormwater runoff systems. 
    Public Health Code means the Public Health Code of the State, as such shall be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 40, § II) 
Sec. 26-73. - Penalty. 
    The owner of any building, or his agent, who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00, pursuant to a citation issued by the Director of Health or the Sanitarian. 
(Ord. No. 40, § VIII) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A); penalty for violation of orders of board of health or director of health, G.S. § 19a-230. 
Sec. 26-74. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  New systems . No building requiring a private sewage system, nor any new private sewage disposal system shall be constructed in the Town without a sewage disposal permit. 
(b)  Existing systems . No existing private sewage disposal system shall be repaired, altered or reconstructed in the Town without a sewage disposal permit. 
(Ord. No. 40, § III) 
Sec. 26-75. - Fees. 
    All fees shall be those established by and payable to the Farmington Valley Health District. 
(Ord. No. 40, § IV) 
Sec. 26-76. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application for private sewage disposal permits shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the Sanitarian. As part of the application for permit, plans shall be submitted as required by the Sanitarian to determine conformance with the Public Health Code. 
(b)  The Sanitarian shall review said applications and shall approve or disapprove the proposed installation, repair, alteration or reconstruction within ten days of the filing date of the application for permit. 
(c)  Any disapproval of an application shall be in writing and shall state the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. No. 40, § V) 
Sec. 26-77. - Inspections. 
(a)  Work performed under any private sewage disposal permit shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Sanitarian to ensure conformance with the Public Health Code and the approved plans. 
(b)  Any private sewage disposal permit may be suspended by the Sanitarian for violations of the Public Health Code or the approved plans after due written notice and a reasonable time having been given to correct said violations. Said permit may be revoked in writing by the Sanitarian for violations presenting a clear and immediate present danger to the public health. 
(c)  The Building Official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any new construction until the requirements of this article have been fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 40, § VI) 
Sec. 26-78. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an action of the Sanitarian in connection with the enforcement of this regulation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Director of Health, provided that such person shall file a petition stating the reasons for such hearing within ten days after the date such action was taken. 
(b)  The hearing shall take place not more than ten days after such petition is filed unless the petitioner agrees in writing to a postponement. 
(c)  After such hearing the Director of Health may, by order, sustain or deny the petition or modify the permit in accordance with these regulations and the findings of the hearing. A summary of the hearing and the decision of the Director of Health, as well as all other submitted material shall become a part of the public record in the office of the Town Manager. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director of Health may seek relief therefrom, as provided by the laws of this State. 
(Ord. No. 40, § VII) 
State Law reference- Appeals, G.S. § 19a-229. 
Secs. 26-79-26-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ILLEGAL DISCHARGE AND ILLICIT CONNECTION TO STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 1-3-13, effective 1-31-13, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. V, §§ 26-99-26-120 herein. 
Cross reference- Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 62, Art. III et seq. 

Sec. 26-99. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the Town's citizens through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the Town's stormwater drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Town's municipal separate storm sewer system (the "Town MS4") in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") permit process and the State of Connecticut's General Permit for the Discharge of Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (the "MS4 General Permit"). The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Town MS4 by illicit discharges by any user; 
(b)  To prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to the Town MS4; and 
(c)  To establish the legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-100. - Definitions. 
    All words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the MS4 General Permit, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-101. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all water generated on any premises that enters the storm drainage system, unless explicitly exempted by this article or the Director of the Department of Public Works. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-102. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The Director of the Department of Public Works shall be the Authorized Enforcement Agent and shall have the powers to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Authorized Enforcement Agent may be delegated in writing by him to persons who are employees of the Town. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-103. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, premises, facility, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-104. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drainage system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or liquids containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards promulgated by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, as may be amended, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited except as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from the discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, washing of non-commercial vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated-typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities (other than training), and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the Authorized Enforcement Agent as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing, if prior written notice is given to the Authorized Enforcement Agent. 
(4)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that prior written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person violates this ordinance if he/she/it connects a line conveying sewage to the Town MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-105. - Suspension of access to Town MS4. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Authorized Enforcement Agent may, without prior notice, suspend a person's discharge access to the Town MS4 when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the Town MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the Authorized Enforcement Agent may take such steps as he deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the Town MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the Town MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have his/her/its access to the Town MS4 terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Authorized Enforcement Agent will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its access. The violator may petition the Authorized Enforcement Agent for a reconsideration and hearing. 
    A person violates this article if the person reinstates access to the Town MS4 for premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior written approval of the Authorized Enforcement Agent. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-106. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an Industrial Activity or Construction Activity NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Authorized Enforcement Agent prior to the allowing of discharges to the Town MS4. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-107. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The Authorized Enforcement Agent shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Authorized Enforcement Agent. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the Authorized Enforcement Agent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, and the examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The Authorized Enforcement Agent shall have the right to set up on any facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Authorized Enforcement Agent to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The Authorized Enforcement Agent has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the facility operator at the written or oral request of the Authorized Enforcement Agent. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the facility operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delay in allowing the Authorized Enforcement Agent access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit associated with industrial activity violates this article if the person denies the Authorized Enforcement Agent reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the Authorized Enforcement Agent has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the Authorized Enforcement Agent may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-108. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of BMPs. 
    The Authorized Enforcement Agent will adopt requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. Any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit authorizing the discharge of Stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-109. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials that are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify the appropriate emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Authorized Enforcement Agent in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Authorized Enforcement Agent and all appropriate emergency response agencies within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-110. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the Authorized Enforcement Agent finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Authorized Enforcement Agent may order compliance by issuing a written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation: 
(a)  The performance of monitoring, sampling, analyses, and/or reporting; 
(b)  The elimination of illicit connections or the cessation of illegal discharges; 
(c)  The cessation of violating discharges, practices, or operations; 
(d)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected premises; 
(e)  Payment of a penalty; 
(f)  Payment of the Town's administrative and remediation costs; and/or 
(g)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
    If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected premises is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the person fail to remediate or restore within the timeframe provided, the work will be done by the Authorized Enforcement Agent or a third-party at the Authorized Enforcement Agent's direction, and the expense thereof shall be charged to the person to whom the notice is directed as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-111. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the Authorized Enforcement Agent. The notice of appeal must be received by the Authorized Enforcement Agent within 14 days from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before the Town Manager or his designee shall take place within 14 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Town Manager or his designee shall be final. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-112. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been fully corrected as set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal within 14 days of the decision of the Town Manager or his designee upholding the decision of the Authorized Enforcement Agent, then representatives of the Authorized Enforcement Agent shall enter upon the subject private premises and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow representatives of the Authorized Enforcement Agent or a designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-113 - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within 14 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the premises will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The premises owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 21 days of the date of the assessment. If the amount due is not paid within the time set forth in the decision of the Authorized Enforcement Agent or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the premises and shall constitute a lien on the premises for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the Town by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 30 th day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-114. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Authorized Enforcement Agent may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities that would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-115. - Compensatory actions. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, fines, and remedies authorized by this article, the Authorized Enforcement Agent may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as but not only storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, and watercourse cleanup. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-116. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-117. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $100.00. Each day such violation continues is a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-118. - Town's expenses. 
    The Authorized Enforcement Agent may recover all attorney's fees, court costs, expert or consultant fees, and any other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-119. - Criminal prosecution. 
    Any person who has violated or continues to violate this article may be subject to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and to a criminal penalty in accordance with applicable law as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Sec. 26-120. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies set forth in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under federal, state or local law, and it is within the discretion of the Authorized Enforcement Agent to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. of 1-3-13, eff. 1-31-13) 
Chapter 36 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 36-1. - Discharge of firearms; violation and penalties. 
(a)  No minor under 16 years of age, shall discharge any firearm, air rifle or air pistol within the limits of the Town, unless such discharge shall be in the presence and under the supervision of the parent or legal guardian of such minor, or a qualified instructor on an authorized range. 
(b)  Unless otherwise permitted by law, no person shall discharge any firearm outdoors and within 500 feet of any building situated anywhere in the Town, except as to buildings on his own land or on land used in conjunction with a duly organized rifle, fish and game, or gun club, or in an area approved by the Chief of Police. 
(c)  A landowner may extend to others by written consent, the right to use his property for hunting, target practice or other purposes requiring the use of firearms. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section, or a parent or legal guardian permitting violation by a minor less than 16 years of age, shall be fined not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00. Each day such violation shall continue after notice to the owner may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 11, § 1) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A); unlawful discharge of firearms, G.S. § 53-204. 
Sec. 36-2. - Contest, race or demonstration permits; penalty. 
    No motor vehicle or horse race, contest, or demonstration shall be conducted in the Town, without a permit from the Town Council. Application for such permit shall be made at least ten days prior to such race, contest or demonstration. If the Town Council shall find that such race, contest, or demonstration is inconsistent with the public safety and welfare, they shall not issue such permit. Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 3, § 1) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A); authority to regulate processions and parades, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(i). 
Sec. 36-3. - Fireworks permit required for public display. 
    The use of fireworks except for public display is forbidden within the Town. The use of fireworks for public display is allowed only upon written permit from the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 1, § 1) 
State Law reference- Fireworks permits, G.S. § 29-356 et seq. 
Sec. 36-4. - Littering prohibited; violation and penalty. 
    The throwing or placing of any waste materials, bottles, cans or paper on or bordering the highways of the Town is prohibited, in accordance with G.S. § 7-149. When any waste material or paper is thrown from a motor vehicle, the operator thereof shall be deemed prima facie to have violated this section. Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 16, §§ I, II) 
State Law reference- Littering, G.S. § 22a-247 et seq.; ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 36-5. - State law relating to bazaars and raffles adopted. 
    The Town adopts the provisions of G.S. §§ 7-170 through 7-186, as amended, to permit the conduct of bazaars and raffles, subject to the regulations, restrictions and requirements of such statutes. 
(Ord. of 7-11-08) 
Sec. 36-6. - Outdoor wood-burning furnaces. 
(a)  Outdoor wood-burning furnaces are prohibited in the Town of Avon. For purposes of this section, "outdoor wood-burning furnace" means an accessory structure or appliance designed to be located outside living space ordinarily used for human habitation and designed to transfer or provide heat, via liquid or other means, through the burning of wood or solid waste, for heating spaces other than where such structure or appliance is located, any other structure or appliance on the premises, or for heating domestic, swimming pool, hot tub or Jacuzzi water. "Outdoor wood-burning furnace" does not include a fire pit, wood-fired barbecue or chiminea. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of $100.00. Each day such violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-9-10) 
Chapter 41 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish, maintain, etc., parks, G.S. § 7-149(c)(3)(A). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 41-1-41-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONDUCT IN PARKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 41-21. - Intent. 
    The Town is fortunate to possess, within its boundaries, a spacious system of open space, parkland and public improvement that has been dedicated to the use and enjoyment of the citizens of the Town. Residents are encouraged to utilize these facilities and by doing so may participate in a wide variety of both active and passive activities. The Town wishes to ensure that all public places and parks are used in the most safe and enjoyable manner possible; and to ensure this optimum use, it is necessary to adopt and enforce certain rules and regulations for the good of all. The intent of this article is to provide for the protection and promotion of the peace, safety and welfare of the Town and its inhabitants, by regulating the use of public places owned by the Town and under the management or control of the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 49, § I) 
Sec. 41-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle as defined in the State General Statutes. 
    Park means any property owned, managed or controlled by the Town and designated as a park by the Town Council. The term "park" does not include any street maintained by the Town, unless the street is located in such a park. 
    Public place means all property owned by the Town and managed or controlled by the Town. The term "public place" does not include any street maintained by the Town unless the street is located in such a public place. 
    Regulations mean regulations approved by the Town Council for the use of a public place. 
    Vehicle means any conveyance or vehicle, whether wheeled or not, that is propelled by a person, motor, animal, force of nature or another vehicle, excluding emergency vehicles in the service of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 49, § II) 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle defined, G.S. § 14-1(51). 
Sec. 41-23. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $25.00 for the first violation and not more than $100.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the Town Manager or his designated representative shall have the authority to eject from any public place, any person violating the terms of any permit, any regulation or the provisions of this article. In the case of a serious consistent violation of the terms of any permit, any regulation, or the provisions of this article, the Town Manager or his designated representative may bar a person from a park, permanently or temporarily. 
(Ord. No. 49, § VI) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 41-24. - Prohibited conduct; generally. 
(a)  Except when being performed by officials or employees of the Town in the course of their duties, or by independent contractors engaged by the Town for such purpose, or unless otherwise permitted in a public place in accordance with regulations, no person in a public place shall: 
(1)  Mark, deface, damage, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any buildings, pools, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, fences, paving, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent; monuments, stakes, posts, other boundary markers, other structures or equipment, improvements or facilities or any appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Deface, litter or make unsanitary any restroom, washroom or shower room or prevent the proper drainage of any toilet, pipe or drain. 
(3)  Dig, for the purpose of removing from such public place, any sand, soil, stones, trees, shrubs or plants without the consent of the Town Manager or his designated representative. 
(4)  Erect, or bring into a public place, any building or structure of any kind whatsoever, whether permanent or temporary, without the consent of the Town Manager or the Town Council. 
(5)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark of any tree, pick the flowers or seeds of any plant or dig in or otherwise disturb lawn areas or walk upon planted areas without the consent of the Town Manager or his designated representative. 
(6)  Throw, discharge, deposit or otherwise place, or cause to be placed, in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, swimming pool or other body of water in any public place, any substance, matter or thing, in any form whether liquid, solid or otherwise, which will result in the pollution, discoloration or change in the chemical content of said water. 
(7)  Bring into, or dump, deposit or leave in a public place any dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, litter, refuse or other trash, except in receptacles provided for the same. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such refuse or trash shall be carried away from the public place by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(8)  Announce, advertise or call public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire, except as the same may be permitted in association with a permit issued under the terms of Section 41-26. 
(9)  Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, or station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing except as the same may be permitted in association with a permit issued under the terms of Section 41-26. 
(10)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever, or erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever except as the same may be permitted in association with a permit issued under the terms of Section 41-26. 
(11)  Bring upon, operate, permit or cause to be operated upon any public place, any vehicle except in those areas and at such times as shall be designated for such type of vehicle for each public place or any portion of a public area. 
(12)  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways, or skate or slide upon the same when frozen, or frequent any such areas for the purpose of skating, sliding, swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except at such times as shall be designated by the regulations for such purposes for each public place or any portion of a public place. 
(13)  Hunt, trap, poison, pursue, annoy or disturb wildlife, or use, carry or possess firearms of any description or other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife or dangerous to human safety except in accordance with a permit issued under the provisions of Section 41-26. 
(14)  Fish or seek to catch any fish in any manner except as the same may be permitted in any public place, or any portion thereof under the regulations. 
(15)  Drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches or any burning matter; make or cause to be made, any fire other than in fireplaces provided by the Town, or in other appropriate receptacles designated in the regulations, or fail to completely extinguish such fire before leaving the area and dispose of ashes in receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(16)  Place or operate, upon or in any waters, any boat, raft or other craft whether or not motor powered, except at such times as may be designated under regulations for each public place or portion thereof, and if permitted to do so in accordance with said regulations, no person shall operate such boat, raft or other craft in a manner as to annoy, frighten or endanger any other person. 
(17)  Possess or be under the influence of any illegal drugs. 
(18)  Engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace. 
(19)  Escort, induce or permit any dog or pet, on or in any park or public place, unless secured to a leash of not more than six feet in length. At no time should the pet not be secured to its owner or keeper, unless authorized in writing, by the Director of Recreation and Parks, or permit any dog to go upon any portion of a public place prohibited to dogs, except as may be designated under regulations for such public place or portion thereof, and if permitted to do so, in accordance with said regulations. 
(20)  Be within any park during the period from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise the following day, except as permitted in association with a permit issued under the terms of Section 41-26, or as may be permitted in regulations issued for subsections (11), (12), (14), (15), (16), (19), (21) and (23) of this section. 
(21)  Take or permit any horse to go upon any portion of any public place, except such portion permitted by the regulations and no person shall ride or control in any such manner as to annoy, frighten or endanger any other person. 
(22)  Aid, abet or participate in gambling or betting for money or other prize. 
(23)  Camp in areas other than those designated for camping, unless a special permit has been obtained from the Town Manager or his designated representative. 
(b)  Any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor in a park or public place shall be ordered to leave such park or public place. No person shall fail to obey such an order. 
(Ord. No. 49, § III) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, G.S. § 53a-115 et seq.; littering, G.S. § 22a-247 et seq.; local ordinances relative to public intoxication, G.S. § 17a-690. 
Sec. 41-25. - Operation of motor vehicles. 
    Every person, in the operation of a motor vehicle in any portion of a public place where permitted under the regulations shall: 
(1)  Obey all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking. 
(2)  Be a duly licensed driver for the operation of such motor vehicle. 
(3)  Operate only such motor vehicle as complies with all the provisions of the state motor vehicle laws in regard to the equipment on such vehicle. 
(4)  Not operate any such vehicle in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(5)  Obey all directions of police officers or other employees of the Town authorized to direct traffic in a public place. 
(6)  Not park any such vehicle in any place except those areas designated or provided for parking. 
(7)  Not drive any such vehicle on any area except roads or parking areas or such other areas as may be specifically designated as temporary parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 49, § IV) 
State Law reference- Traffic generally, G.S. § 14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 41-26. - Permit applications and use; fees; issuance; revocation and refusal. 
(a)  To the extent allowed by the regulations, an area in a public place, together with the facilities situated in such area, may be reserved for the exclusive use of any person, or may be used by a natural person for the uses prohibited under Section 41-24(a)(3)-(a)(5), (a)(8)-(a)(10), (a)(13) and (a)(23) provided a permit therefor is obtained from the Town Manager or his designated representative. 
(b)  Any person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the Town Manager or his designated representative. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any; 
(3)  The age of the applicant if a permit for a use prohibited under Section 41-24(a)(13) is being sought; 
(4)  The day or days and hours for which the permit is desired; 
(5)  The public place or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; 
(6)  An estimate of anticipated attendance if the permit is for a group activity; 
(7)  The use or activity for which the permit is sought; 
(8)  Any other information that the Town Manager or his designated representative shall find reasonable and necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder. 
(c)  The Town Manager or his designated representative may issue a permit hereunder provided he finds that the proposed activity or use: 
(1)  Will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment of the public place; 
(2)  Will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
(3)  Is not unreasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  Will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense to the Town for police supervision; 
(5)  Will not interrupt an established schedule for Town-sponsored recreational activities or that the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the date and hour requested in the application; 
(6)  Will not damage the natural flora or fauna. 
(d)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the Town, in accordance with the regulations. 
(e)  Any person issued a permit shall observe all regulations and the provisions of this article as though the same were inserted in such permit. A copy of this article shall be forwarded to the permit applicant. 
(f)  The person to whom a permit is issued shall agree to be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person or property whatsoever by reason of negligence on the part of any person engaged in the activity being sponsored under the permit and shall agree to hold the Town and any of its agents, servants and employees harmless from any and all losses caused by the permittee or any person engaged in activity being sponsored under the permit. 
(g)  The Town Manager or his designated representative may revoke or suspend the permit of any person at any time upon determining that any such person has violated the terms of the permit, the provisions of any regulation, a provision of this article or that such revocation or suspension is reasonably necessary for the purpose of preserving the peace, safety and welfare of any person or preserving the public place from damage or injury. 
(h)  If the Town Manager or his designated representative shall refuse to issue a permit or revoke or suspend the permit of any person, the applicant or permit holder may appeal in writing within ten days of notice of said refusal to the Town Council, which shall hear said appeal and render a decision within 21 days from the filing of such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 49, § V) 
Chapter 43 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CLOSEOUT SALES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate and prohibit the carrying on of any trade, manufacture, business or profession which is, or may be, so carried on as to become prejudicial to public health, conducive to fraud and cheating, or dangerous to, or constituting an unreasonable annoyance to, those living or owning property in the vicinity, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)((H)(ii); authority to regulate peddlers, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)((H)(iv); authority to regulate vending or hawking, G.S. § 21-37; itinerant vendors, G.S. § 21-27 et seq.; closing out sales, G.S. § 21-35a et seq.; hawkers and peddlers, G.S. § 21-36 et seq. 

Sec. 43-1. - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by regulating itinerant vendors, hawkers, peddlers and solicitors. 
(Ord. No. 46, § I) 
Sec. 43-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Class A license means a license issued by the Town to any nonprofit organization or representative thereof. 
    Class B license means a license issued by the Town to any person or organization not qualifying for a Class A license. 
    Closing out sale means all sales advertised, represented or held forth under the designation of "going out of business," "selling out," "liquidation," "lost our lease," "forced to vacate," "moving to a new location," or any other designation of like meaning. 
    Hawker or peddler means any person or organization which goes from town to town or from place to place in the same town selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor, any goods, wares or merchandise, either on foot or from any vehicle. 
    Itinerant vendor means any person or organization which engages in a temporary or transient business in the Town, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, selling goods, wares and merchandise and who, for the purposes of carrying on such business, hires, leases or occupies any building or structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise. 
    Nonprofit organization means an organization exempt from federal taxation by Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
    Organization means a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association or other organization. 
    Representative means an individual who is employed by an independent contractor or agent of, or a volunteer for an organization. 
    Solicitor means any person or organization soliciting or collecting money or pledges for the support or benefit of any person or organization. 
    Temporary or transient business means and includes any exhibition and sale of goods, wares or merchandise which is carried on in any tent, booth, building or other structure, unless such place is open for business during usual business hours for a period of at least nine months in each year. 
(Ord. No. 46, § II) 
Sec. 43-3. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $100.00 for each offense. For purposes of this section, each sale made without a license shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 46, § XI) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A); penalty for violating ordinances regulating hawkers and peddlers, G.S. § 21-38; penalty for not obtaining municipal itinerant vendor's license, G.S. § 21-35. 
Sec. 43-4. - License requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. No person or organization shall engage in any activities of an itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor or hold or sponsor a closing out sale as defined in Section 43-2, within the Town, without first obtaining a license from the Chief of Police or his designee in accordance with the provisions of this section. If an organization desires to engage in such activities, both the organization and each of its representatives must obtain a license. Irrespective of the foregoing, no person or organization shall be required to obtain a license if the person or organization is exempted by G.S. § 21-27 or G.S. § 21-37. 
(b)  Classes of licenses. There shall be two classes of licenses: Class A for nonprofit organizations and their representatives; and Class B for all other applicants. 
(c)  Application requirements. Licenses of the appropriate class shall be issued to any person or organization only after the Chief of Police or his designee has completed an investigation of the moral character of the applicant and, if applicable, of each of the representatives of an organization. Licenses shall be issued to a qualifying applicant once their fingerprints results are received from the State Police Bureau of Investigation. Each applicant for a license shall furnish, in writing, on a form to be provided by the Chief of Police, such information as the Chief of Police deems relevant under the chapter, including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  If the applicant is a person or representative, name and physical description, permanent address, and, if applicable, local address; 
(2)  A description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold or services to be performed; 
(3)  If the applicant is an organization, name and business address; 
(4)  The length of time for which the applicant anticipates engaging in such activities; 
(5)  If the applicant is a person or a representative, whether the applicant has ever been convicted or a crime of moral turpitude; 
(6)  The make, model, color and registration number of the vehicle or vehicles, if any, to be used, whether or not owned by the applicant; and 
(7)  If the applicant is a person or representative who is 18 years of age or older, a photograph and fingerprints, both of which shall be taken by the police department. 
(d)  Investigation . The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall make such investigation of the business, reputation and moral character of any applicant as he deems appropriate before approving the issuance of the license. 
(e)  Reasons for rejection. The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall approve the application unless his investigation discloses that: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or the applicant has been charged with such a crime and, pending a judicial resolution of the charge, the Chief of Police determines that there is a reasonable probability that the applicant will be convicted of the crime; 
(2)  The applicant has willfully made misstatements in the application; 
(3)  The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to itinerant vendors, hawkers, peddlers and solicitors; 
(4)  The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; 
(5)  The applicant has a record of repeated breaches of solicited contracts; or 
(6)  The proposed activity violates the zoning regulations of the Town. 
If an investigation discloses that a representative of an organization is or has been the subject of any of subsections (e)(1) through (e)(6) of this section, the Chief of Police or his designee may specifically exclude such representative in granting a license to an organization. 
(f)  Copy of chapter and regulations . Each applicant who is granted a license shall be furnished with a copy of this chapter and any related rules or regulations. 
(g)  Use and display of license. No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used at any time by any person other than the license holder. Each license shall be displayed for inspection at the request of any citizen or police officer. 
(h)  Expiration. A license shall expire one year after the last day of the month in which it is issued, and may be renewed annually upon application and payment of the appropriate fee. 
(Ord. No. 46, § III; Amend. of 9-7-17) 
State Law reference- Municipal itinerant vendor license required, G.S. § 21-29. 
Sec. 43-5. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No solicitation notice. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to enter upon any premises and ring the doorbell or seek to attract the attention of the occupants for the purpose of engaging in the activities of an itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor if a notice is posted or exhibited on the property prohibiting such activities. 
(b)  Departure upon request. Any itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(c)  Hours. Hawkers and peddlers may solicit from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. or one-half hour before sunset, whichever is earlier, except by appointment. 
(d)  No right to location. An itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor shall have no exclusive right to any location on public streets or public property, shall not be permitted any stationary location thereon and shall not be permitted to operate in any congested area or any area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public health, safety or welfare. 
(e)  Receipts for goods and services ordered. An itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor shall give a written receipt for all orders for goods and services for later delivery. Such receipt shall be signed by the itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor and shall set forth a brief description of the goods, wares, memberships or services ordered, the total purchase price thereof and the amount of any down payment made by the purchaser. Such receipt shall also include the name, address and phone number of the itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor and, if applicable, the name, address and phone number of the organization. 
(f)  Rules and regulations. The Chief of Police of the Town or his designee may establish, in writing, additional rules and regulations to govern the conduct and method of operation by any person or organization issued a license. 
(Ord. No. 46, § IV; Amend. of 9-7-17) 
Sec. 43-6. - Fees. 
(a)  Fee for Class A license. The annual fee for a Class A license shall be as established by regulation or Town Council policy and shall cover both the nonprofit organization and all of its representatives. 
(b)  Fee for Class B license. The annual fee for a Class B license shall be as established by regulation or Town Council policy, for an organization and its representatives. 
(c)  Exemptions. No resident of the State that has resided within the State for a period of at least two years and who is a veteran, as defined by G.S. § 27-103, shall be required to pay a license fee. 
(d)  Time of payment. The license fee shall be paid at the time of filing the application. 
(Ord. No. 46, § V) 
State Law reference- License fee of itinerant vendors, G.S. § 21-29. 
Sec. 43-7. - Suspension of license. 
(a)  Generally. The Chief of Police may suspend any license issued pursuant to this chapter upon written notice to the licensee, for a definite or indefinite term. The grounds for suspension shall be as follows: 
(1)  Conviction of a felony or, if the licensee is a person, conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or, if the licensee is a person charged with either such crime, the Chief of Police determines, pending a judicial resolution of the charge, that there is a reasonable probability that the licensee will be convicted of the crime; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, false or incomplete statement in the application for a license; 
(3)  Repeated breaches of solicited contracts; 
(4)  Conducting business in an unlawful or fraudulent manner or in such a manner as to cause a breach of peace or menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
(5)  Violation of this chapter or of the zoning regulations of the Town. 
(b)  No solicitation during suspension. Whenever a license is suspended, the license holder shall immediately cease all activities permitted under the license and shall immediately surrender the license to the Chief of Police. Once a license has been suspended, no activities permitted under the license shall be resumed without the written approval of the Chief of Police or his designee or as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Reinstatement. Any license suspended under this section, if not subsequently revoked pursuant to Section 43-8, will be reinstated upon expiration of the time determined by the Chief of Police or his designee for such suspension or upon separate order of the Chief of Police or his designee specifying such reinstatement. 
(Ord. No. 46, § VI) 
Sec. 43-8. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Generally. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be permanently revoked by the Chief of Police or his designee for any of the reasons set forth in Section 43-7, after an opportunity for a hearing as provided in Section 43-9. Notice of intention to revoke shall be provided to the license holder by the Chief of Police or his designee in writing by certified mail, stating with specificity the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and advising that the license shall be permanently revoked at the end of ten calendar days following the service of such notice, unless the license holder files a request in writing for a hearing in accordance with Section 43-9. 
(b)  Suspension pending revocation. A license may be suspended by the Chief of Police or his designee pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 46, § VII) 
Sec. 43-9. - Hearings. 
(a)  Generally. A license holder may request a hearing on a suspension or revocation of a license by providing a written request to the Chief of Police within ten business days of receipt of the notice of suspension or revocation. The hearing shall be conducted by: 
(1)  The Chief of Police, if the suspension or revocation was occasioned by a designee of the Chief of Police; 
(2)  The Town Manager, if the suspension or revocation was occasioned by the Chief of Police. 
(b)  Time and place. Hearings shall be held at a time and place designated by the Hearing Officer. The hearing shall be held not more than ten business days after a timely request has been filed unless the petitioner agrees in writing to a postponement of the hearing. 
(c)  Decision. Based upon the record of such hearing, the suspension or revocation of the license may be vacated, modified or affirmed by the Hearing Officer. A written decision of the hearing shall be furnished to the license holder within 30 days of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 46, § VIII) 
Sec. 43-10. - Reapplication for license after license revoked. 
    Whenever revocation of a license has become final, the holder of the revoked license may make written application for a new license as provided in this chapter after the expiration of at least one year, or, if a hearing is held, such longer period as may have been ordered by the Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. No. 46, § IX) 
Sec. 43-11. - Town records. 
    It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his designee to maintain a record of all applications made and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter for a period of at least two years, including a detailed accounting of all receipts for such licenses. 
(Ord. No. 46, § X) 
Chapter 45 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning generally, G.S. § 8-18 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 45-1. - Regional Council of Governments. 
(a)  The Town hereby adopts G.S. § 4-124i-p (Public Act 821), providing for the formation of a Regional Council of Governments and does hereby join such Regional Council of Governments when and as such Council is duly established in accordance with said statutes, upon the adoption of said statutes by not less than 60 percent of all municipalities within such planning region. The adoption of such sections of the General Statutes is intended to include the provisions of any special act of the 1973 General Assembly, respecting additional representation for the core city within the capital region on a Regional Council of Governments, and a nonvoting advisory Regional Forum thereunder, consistent with proposed bylaws of such Regional Council of Governments dated January 25, 1973, and endorsed by the existing Regional Council of Governments on May 3, 1973. 
(b)  The Town Council may appoint an alternate representative to the Regional Council of Elected Officials. 
(Ord. No. 38, § I) 
State Law reference- Regional councils of elected officials, G.S. § 4-124c et seq. 
Sec. 45-2. - Acceptance of subdivision streets and improvements. 
    No road or subdivision improvements shall be accepted by the Town Council until the developer has submitted to the Council, certification, signed and sealed by a qualified civil engineer licensed in the State, that the work being offered for acceptance has been completed in accordance with the applicable highway and/or other specifications of the Town, together with any conditions which may have been attached to the approval by the Zoning and Planning Commission; and until any performance bond or surety with respect to the road area or improvements being considered for acceptance has been released by the proper authorities. 
(Ord. No. 22, §§ I, II) 
State Law reference- Acceptance of municipal improvements, G.S. § 8-24. 
Secs. 45-3-45-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAND USE APPLICATION FEES 

Sec. 45-21. - Purpose. 
    The intent of this article is to establish a schedule of fees for the processing of applications by certain agencies of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 55, § I) 
Sec. 45-22. - Agency fees superseded. 
    The fees set forth in this article shall supersede any and all specific fees heretofore established pursuant to General Statutes by any of the agencies of the Town referenced in this article. 
(Ord. No. 55, § V) 
Sec. 45-23. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    The Town Planning and Zoning Commission shall charge the following fees for processing applications in connection with matters administered by said Commission: 
(1)  Zoning. 
a.  Application for site plan approval: 
1.  Residential use: $200.00 per unit; minimum fee, $200.00. 
2.  Business use, site plan: $50.00 for each 1,000 square feet of structure shown on the plan or any portion thereof; minimum fee, $100.00, plus $100.00 per acre. 
3.  Consolidated parcel agreement under Section V.C. of the Zoning Regulations either as a separate application or in conjunction with other site plan approval: $300.00 in addition to site plan fee. 
b.  Application for special exception or special permit: 
Residential-$100.00. 
Commercial-$200.00. 
c.  Application for zone change: $350.00. 
d.  Application for change in zoning regulations: $200.00. 
e.  Application for modification of any prior approval (includes staff approval): $50.00. 
f.  Certificate of zoning compliance: $50.00. 
(2)  Planning. 
a.  Application for subdivision approval, including resubdivision: $250.00 for each lot. 
b.  Application for change in subdivision regulations: $100.00. 
c.  Application for change in plan of development: $150.00. 
d.  Application for modification of any prior approval: $50.00. 
(3)  [Projects requiring consultants.] In addition, certain applications submitted to the Commission for site plan and/or special permit review for projects which are large in scope may require the Commission to retain the service of outside consultants. Projects which require such services are those which are likely to generate significant traffic volumes and/or impact existing roadways in a manner that could compromise public safety; location in the Village Center where special consideration of building architecture is of concern; or where the site to be developed includes physical characteristics relating to topography, natural resources, or plant and animal communities; or where the proposed use may have the potential for adverse impacts to adjoining properties. Technical areas subject to such services include, but are not limited to, the fields of traffic engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, civil engineering, planning, etc. 
The hiring of consultants and preparation of reports may require a substantial amount of time. Prior to the filing of an application(s), the applicant shall consult with the Director of Planning who shall make a determination whether the Commission needs to hire one or more outside consultants to analyze said application(s). As an alternative, an applicant may seek such determination from the Planning and Zoning Commission. If an applicant chooses this approach and the Commission does not have enough time to have a report(s) prepared and review its findings within required statutory time frames, then said application may be denied on the basis of incompleteness. In this instance, the decision to require the support service fee shall be by an affirmative vote of not less than 4 members of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The fees for any consultant(s) retained by the Commission shall be borne entirely by the applicant and shall be deposited with the Town prior to the review of such application. Costs will be estimated by the Commission based on preliminary estimates from such experts; said estimate of costs times 150 percent shall be paid to the Town. Upon completion of the technical review and a determination of the costs incurred, any excess will be refunded to the applicant. The applicant shall not be responsible for costs incurred in excess of 150 percent of the Commission's estimate. 
    NOTE: In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22a-27j, an additional $60.00 fee for each application shall be collected. Municipalities are exempt from this $60.00 fee. 
(Ord. No. 55, § II; Amend. of 3-4-10, eff. 3-31-10; Amend of 1-5-17) 
Sec. 45-24. - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
    The Town Zoning Board of Appeals shall charge a fee of $100.00 to process any application in connection with matters administered by said Board. 
(Ord. No. 55, § III) 
Sec. 45-25. - Inland Wetlands Commission. 
    The Town Inland Wetlands Commission shall charge the following fees for processing applications in connection with matters administered by said Commission: 
(1)  Application for summary ruling. 
a.  Residential. $100.00 for the first lot, plus $50.00 for each additional lot containing wetlands/watercourse or wetlands/watercourse regulated area located on the property. 
b.  Agricultural/recreational or miscellaneous minor activities as determined by Commission. $150.00 for first acre (or fraction thereof) plus $75.00 for each additional acre (or fraction thereof) of wetlands/watercourse or wetlands/watercourse regulated area affected by proposed activity. 
c.  Commercial, industrial or residential multifamily/condo . $300.00 plus $100.00 for each lot/acre (whichever is greater) of wetlands/watercourse or wetlands/watercourse regulated area located on the property. 
(2)  Application for plenary ruling. 
a.  Residential. $400.00 for first lot, plus $150.00 for each additional lot containing wetlands/watercourse or wetlands/watercourse regulated area located on the property. 
b.  Agricultural or recreational. $200.00 per acre (or fraction thereof) of wetlands/watercourse or wetlands/watercourse regulated area affected by proposed activity. 
c.  Commercial, industrial or residential multifamily/condo. $750.00 plus $100.00 for each lot/acre (whichever is greater) of wetlands/watercourse or wetlands/watercourse regulated area located on the property. 
(3)  Application for modifications as they affect wetlands/watercourses. $85.00 if the agency determines that the revisions constitute a significant change from the original application, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(4)  Application for wetlands permit renewal. $75.00. 
(5)  Application for amendments to the wetlands map or wetlands regulation . $100.00. 
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22a-27j, an additional $60.00 fee for each application must be collected. Municipalities are exempt from this $60.00 fee. 
(Ord. No. 55, § IV; eff. 7-1-04) 
Chapter 51 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste management, G.S. § 22a-207 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 51-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acceptable waste means solid waste generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town, and deemed acceptable by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, as well as the CRRA procedures, for processing by and disposal at the Mid-Connecticut Facility or the Mid-Connecticut Recycling Facility. Acceptable waste may include but is not limited to the following, subject to such restrictions as may be imposed by the regulations: 
(1)  Scrap wood not exceeding six feet in length or width or four inches in thickness; 
(2)  Single trees and large tree limbs not exceeding six feet in length or four inches in diameter and with branches cut to within six inches of the trunk or limb, as the case may be; 
(3)  Metal pipes, tracks and banding or cable and wire not exceeding three feet in length and 11/2 inches in diameter; 
(4)  Cleaned and emptied cans or drums not exceeding five gallons in capacity and with covers removed; 
(5)  Paper butts or rolls, plastic or leather strappings or similar materials in thickness and cut in half lengthwise; 
(6)  Items constituting nonprocessible waste; and 
(7)  Any other solid waste deemed acceptable by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority. 
The term "acceptable waste" shall not include "recyclables." 
    Bulky waste means construction, demolition and land clearing debris, white metals and scrap/light weight metals generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town. 
    Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority means the body politic and corporate, constituting a public instrumentality and political subdivision of the State established and created pursuant to G.S. § 22a-257 et seq., and any successor thereto. 
    Contaminated soil means soil derived from fuel tank excavation, sludge residue, steel casting sands, metal wash down residue, rust/scale materials, foundry residue, grinding sludge and any other material deemed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority in its sole discretion to be contaminated soil, generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town. 
    CRRA procedures means the Mid-Connecticut Project Permitting, Disposal and Billing Procedures promulgated by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority as in effect from time to time. 
    Department of Public Works means the department of the Town designated as such. 
    Director of Public Works means the official of the Town designated as such. 
    EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Hazardous waste collection program means a program for the collection of unacceptable waste that is sponsored by a federal, state and local government. 
    License means the license issued pursuant to Section 51-101 by the Department of Public Works to authorize the collection of certain types of Solid Waste generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town. 
    Licensed hauler means haulers that have received licenses pursuant to Section 51-101. 
    Mid-Connecticut Facility means the resources recovery facility of the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority located on Maxim Road in Hartford, Connecticut. 
    Mid-Connecticut Recycling Facility means the container and paper recycling facilities, collectively, of the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority located at 211 Murphy Road and 123 Murphy Road, Hartford, Connecticut, respectively. 
    Nonprocessible waste means acceptable waste that cannot be processed at the Mid-Connecticut Facility and is normally disposed of at a landfill; provided that the individual items of such acceptable waste are 2,000 pounds or less in weight and physically of such size as to fit without compaction into an area having dimensions of three feet in height, six feet in width and seven feet in length, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Household furniture, chairs, tables, sofas, mattresses, appliances and rugs; 
(2)  Liquid and semi-solid waste derived from food and food by-products; 
(3)  Bathroom fixtures, such as toilets, bathtubs and sinks; 
(4)  Purged and emptied propane, butane and acetylene tanks with valves removed exclusively from the residential solid waste stream and in limited quantities, if any, to be determined by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority on a day-to-day basis; and 
(5)  Any other acceptable waste deemed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority in its sole discretion to be nonprocessible waste, but shall in no event include bulky waste or contaminated soil. 
    Nonresidential establishments means any premises located in the Town devoted, wholly or in part, to the sale or provision of goods or services, including charitable and tax exempt organizations and institutions. Nonresidential establishments shall also include condominium complexes, apartment buildings and multifamily housing to the extent solid waste is collected from such locations from the residents therein on an aggregate basis for disposal. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the Town to residents pursuant to Section 51-73 for access to the transfer station. 
    Recyclables means those items of solid waste generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town designated as recyclable in the regulations and shall include all materials required to be recycled in accordance with G.S. § 22a-241(b) and other laws of the State. 
    Regulations means regulations adopted by the Town Council pursuant to this chapter. 
    Resident means a resident of the Town, including individual residents in condominium complexes, apartment buildings and multifamily housing to the extent any portion of solid waste collected from such locations is not aggregated for disposal. 
    Scrap/light weight metals means scrap steel parts, aluminum sheets, pipes, desks, chairs, bicycle frames, lawn mowers with engines drained, file cabinets, springs, sheet metal, hot water heaters, cleaned and emptied 55 gallon drums with the top and bottom covers removed, fencing, oil tanks and fuel tanks approved by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority for disposal and cleaned and rinsed in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations, and any other materials deemed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority in its sole discretion to be scrap/light weight metals, generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town. 
    Solid waste means unwanted and discarded solid materials, generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town, consistent with the meaning of that term pursuant to G.S. § 22a-260(7), excluding semi-solid, liquid materials collected and treated in a municipal sewerage system. 
    Town Manager means the official of the Town designated as such. 
    Transfer station means any waste processing/disposal area owned and operated by the Town for the disposition of solid waste. 
    Unacceptable waste means: 
(1)  Explosives, pathological or biological waste, hazardous chemicals or materials, paint and solvents, regulated medical wastes as defined in the EPA Standards for Tracking and Maintaining Medical Wastes, 40 CFR 259.30 (1990), radioactive materials, oil and oil sludges, dust or powders, cesspool or other human waste, human or animal remains, motor vehicles, liquid waste (other than liquid waste derived from food or food by-products), and hazardous substances of any type or kind (including without limitation those substances regulated under 42 USC 6921-6925 and the regulations thereto adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Recovery Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2806, et seq., USC 6901 et seq.), other than such insignificant quantities of the foregoing as are customarily found in normal household and commercial waste and as are permitted by state and federal law; 
(2)  Any item of waste that is either smoldering or on fire; 
(3)  Waste in quantities and concentrations which require special handling in their collection and/or processing such as bulk items, junked automobiles, large items of machinery and equipment and their component parts, batteries or waste oil; 
(4)  Any other items of waste that would be likely to pose a threat to health or safety, or damage the processing equipment of the Mid-Connecticut Facility (except for ordinary wear and tear), or be in violation of any judicial decision, order, or action of any federal, state or local government or any agency thereof, or any other regulatory authority, or applicable law or regulation; 
(5)  Any solid waste that is deemed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority in its sole discretion not to be in conformance with the requirements for acceptable waste or nonprocessible waste as set forth in the CRRA procedures; and 
(6)  Any other waste deemed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority in its sole discretion to be unacceptable waste, generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town. 
    White metals means large appliances or machinery, refrigerators, freezers, gas/electric stoves, dishwashers, clothes washers and dryers, microwaves, copiers, computers, vending machines, air conditioners, industrial equipment and venting hood fans, and any other material deemed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority in its sole discretion to be white metals, generated by and collected from residential, commercial, institutional, industrial and other establishments located within the corporate limits of the Town. 
Secs. 51-2-51-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOURCES AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 51-21. - Sources of solid waste. 
(a)  No person shall represent that solid waste generated outside of the Town originates from within the Town nor shall any person represent that solid waste generated from within the Town originates from outside of the Town. 
(b)  No person shall represent that solid waste generated by residents originates from nonresidential establishments and no person shall represent that solid waste generated by nonresidential establishments originates from residents. 
Sec. 51-22. - Responsibilities of residents; disposal of waste. 
(a)  Residents shall be responsible for segregating the types of solid waste specified in this section from the other types of solid waste specified in this section and disposing of such segregated types of solid waste in the manner set forth in this section. 
(b)  Residents shall dispose of acceptable waste by either: 
(1)  Contracting with a licensed hauler to collect and dispose of such acceptable waste; 
(2)  Delivering such acceptable waste to the transfer station; or 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(c)  Residents shall dispose of recyclables by either: 
(1)  Contracting with a licensed hauler to collect and dispose of such recyclables; 
(2)  Delivering such recyclables to the transfer station; or 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(d)  Residents shall dispose of bulky waste by either: 
(1)  Contracting with a licensed hauler to collect and dispose of such bulky waste; 
(2)  Delivering such bulky waste to the transfer station; or 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(e)  Residents shall dispose of unacceptable waste by either: 
(1)  Contracting with a licensed hauler to collect and dispose of such unacceptable waste; 
(2)  Delivering such unacceptable waste to a hazardous waste collection program; or 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (e)(1) and (2) of this section. 
Residents must dispose of unacceptable waste in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the option of delivering acceptable waste, recyclables and bulky waste to the transfer station may be suspended or curtailed by the Director of Public Works or his designee or terminated by the Town Manager. 
Sec. 51-23. - Nonresidential establishments responsibilities for disposal. 
(a)  Nonresidential establishments shall be responsible for segregating the types of solid waste specified in this section from other types of solid waste specified in this section and disposing of such segregated types of solid waste in the manner set forth in this section. 
(b)  Nonresidential establishments shall dispose of acceptable waste by contracting with a licensed hauler to collect and dispose of such acceptable waste. 
(c)  Nonresidential establishments shall dispose of recyclables by contracting with a licensed hauler to collect and dispose of such recyclables. 
(d)  Nonresidential establishments shall dispose of bulky waste by contracting with a licensed hauler to collect and dispose of such bulky waste. 
(e)  Nonresidential establishments shall dispose of unacceptable waste by contracting with a licensed hauler to collect and dispose of such unacceptable waste. Nonresidential establishments must dispose of unacceptable waste in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. 
Secs. 51-24-51-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 51-51. - By licensed haulers. 
    Only licensed haulers shall collect solid waste in the Town from residents and nonresidential establishments. 
Sec. 51-52. - Disposal by licensed haulers. 
(a)  Licensed haulers shall keep the types of solid waste specified in this section segregated from the other types of solid waste specified in this section and dispose of such segregated types of solid waste in the manner set forth in this section. 
(b)  Subject to subsection (f) of this section, licensed haulers shall dispose of acceptable waste collected from residents and nonresidential establishments within the Town by delivering such acceptable waste to a waste-to-energy facility, a transfer station or other disposal site owned by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority, as directed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority. 
(c)  Subject to subsection (f) of this section, licensed haulers shall dispose of all recyclables collected from residents and nonresidential establishments within the Town by delivering such recyclables to a recycling center or other disposal site owned by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority, as directed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority. 
(d)  Licensed haulers shall dispose of all bulky waste collected from residents and nonresidential establishments within the Town by delivering such bulky waste to a properly licensed disposal site that is authorized under all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations to receive and dispose of such bulky waste. 
(e)  Licensed haulers shall dispose of all unacceptable waste collected from residents and nonresidential establishments within the Town by delivering such unacceptable waste to a properly licensed disposal site that is authorized under all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations to receive and dispose of such unacceptable waste. 
(f)  To the extent that the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority does not accept all or any portion of acceptable waste or recyclables collected in the Town, licensed haulers shall dispose of such unaccepted acceptable waste or recyclables in a disposal site that is authorized under all applicable federal, state and local laws rules and regulations to receive and dispose of such unaccepted acceptable waste or recyclables. 
(g)  Licensed haulers shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority, including without limitation the CRRA Procedures, and shall take all actions necessary to maintain access to the facilities of the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority for the disposal of acceptable waste and recyclables collected from the residents and nonresidential establishments. Licensed haulers shall pay promptly all fees owed to the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority. 
Secs. 51-53-51-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSFER STATION 

Sec. 51-71. - Restricted use. 
(a)  Only residents with a valid permit issued pursuant to Section 51-73(c) shall have access to the transfer station and only for the purposes set forth in Section 51-22(b), (c) and (d). 
(b)  No nonresidential establishments shall have access to the transfer station. 
(c)  In addition to the power of the Director of Public Works or his designee of the Director of Public Works to suspend or curtail, and the power of the Town Manager to terminate, delivery of acceptable waste, recyclables and bulky waste to the transfer station as set forth in Section 51-22(f), the Town Council may restrict the amounts, frequency of deliveries, volume, weight, specific types or items of acceptable waste, recyclables and bulky waste that may be delivered to the transfer station and set the other terms and conditions under which such deliveries may take place in the regulations. 
(d)  The Town Council shall establish in the regulations the schedule of operation and access to the transfer station and may establish other regulations for the safe and efficient operation of the transfer station. 
(e)  The Town Council may establish in the regulations user fees for the transfer station that are in addition to the permit fee set forth in Section 51-73(c). 
(f)  No items deposited at the transfer station shall be removed from the transfer station except in accordance with Section 51-72 or except at the designated area for exchanges. 
Sec. 51-72. - Collections at the transfer station. 
(a)  The Town may contract with licensed haulers to collect acceptable waste from the transfer station. Subject to Section 51-72(e), licensed haulers that collect acceptable waste from the transfer station shall deliver such acceptable waste to a waste-to-energy facility, transfer station or other disposal site owned by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority, as directed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority. 
(b)  The Town may contract with licensed haulers to collect recyclables from the transfer station. Subject to Section 51-72(e), licensed haulers that collect recyclables from the transfer station shall deliver such recyclables to a recycling center or other disposal site owned by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority, as directed by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority. 
(c)  The Town may contract with licensed haulers to collect bulky waste from the transfer station. Licensed haulers that collect bulky waste from the transfer station shall deliver such bulky waste to a properly licensed disposal site that is authorized under all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations to receive and dispose of such bulky waste. 
(d)  Despite the expectation that no unacceptable waste shall be delivered to the transfer station, the Town may contract with licensed haulers to collect unacceptable waste that is improperly deposited at the transfer station. Licensed haulers that collect unacceptable waste from the transfer station shall deliver such unacceptable waste to a properly licensed disposal site that is authorized under all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations to receive and dispose of such unacceptable waste. 
(e)  To the extent that the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority does not accept all or any portion of acceptable waste or recyclables collected at the transfer station, licensed haulers shall dispose of such unaccepted acceptable waste or recyclables in a disposal site, that is authorized under all federal, state and local laws rules and regulations to receive and dispose of such unaccepted acceptable waste or recyclables. 
(f)  Licensed haulers shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority, including without limitation the CRRA procedures, and shall take all actions necessary to maintain access to the facilities of the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority for the disposal of acceptable waste and recyclables collected from the transfer station. Licensed haulers shall pay promptly all fees owed to the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority. 
Sec. 51-73. - Permit required for use of transfer station; application; fees; effective date of permit; penalties; appeal process. 
(a)  Use of transfer station. Residents wishing to use the transfer station as provided in this chapter must obtain a permit from the Town. 
(b)  Application for permit. In order to obtain a permit, residents must complete an application on such form as may be provided by the Town and submit such application, together with the permit fee required by the regulations to the Town. 
(c)  Fees. The Town Council may establish the fee for issuing permits in the regulations. 
(d)  Effective date of permits. Permits shall be effective from the date of first issue and shall expire on the earliest of: 
(1)  The following June 30; 
(2)  When the resident no longer resides in the Town; or 
(3)  The date the permit is revoked. 
(e)  Penalties. In addition to any other penalty provided by this chapter, any resident that violates any provision of this chapter, or the regulations or the terms of the permit may have the resident's permit revoked by the Town Manager after at least ten days written notice is sent by certified mail to the resident setting forth the effective date of the revocation and the reasons for the revocation. 
(f)  Appeal process. 
(1)  Any resident whose permit has been revoked or has received a notice of proposed revocation may petition the Town Manager for a hearing concerning the revocation. The petition shall be in writing and shall set forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. 
(2)  The Town Manager shall appoint a Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the resident written notice thereof. The hearing shall take place not more than ten days after the petition has been received by the Town Manager, unless the resident agrees in writing with the Hearing Officer to a later date for the hearing. At the hearing, the Hearing Officer may, by order, sustain or deny the petition in accordance with the findings of the hearing and shall promptly notify the resident of the decision. 
Secs. 51-74-51-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HAULER LICENSE 

Sec. 51-101. - Required; application; fees; performance bond; effective date of license; penalties. 
(a)  Required. A hauler wishing to become a licensed hauler must obtain a license from the Department of Public Works. 
(b)  Application for license. In order to obtain a license, a hauler must complete an application on such form as may be provided by the Department of Public Works and submit such application, together with any license fee required by the regulations and any performance bond required by the regulations to the Department of Public Works. 
(c)  Fees. The Town Council may establish the fee for issuing licenses in the regulations. 
(d)  Performance bond. The Town Council may require that a performance bond be posted by haulers as a condition to issuing licenses. 
(e)  Effective date of license. Licenses shall be effective from the date of issue until the earlier of the following June 30 or the date the license is revoked. 
(f)  Penalties. In addition to any other penalty provided by this chapter, any licensed hauler that violates any provision of this chapter, the regulations or the terms of the license, may have its license revoked by the Town Manager after at least ten days written notice is sent by certified mail to the licensed hauler setting forth the effective date of the revocation and the reasons for the revocation. 
(g)  Appeal process. 
(1)  Any hauler whose license has been revoked or has received a notice of proposed revocation may petition the Town Manager for a hearing concerning the revocation. The petition shall be in writing and set forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. 
(2)  The Town Manager shall appoint a Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the hauler written notice thereof. The hearing shall take place not more than ten days after the petition has been received by the Town Manager, unless the hauler agrees in writing with the Hearing Officer to a later date for the hearing. At the hearing, the Hearing Officer may, by order, sustain or deny the petition in accordance with the findings of the hearing and shall promptly notify the hauler of the decision. 
Secs. 51-102-51-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 51-121. - Declaration. 
    Upon the occurrence of any event relating to the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste that constitutes an immediate threat to the health or safety of the residents of the Town, the Town Manager may declare a solid waste emergency. 
Sec. 51-122. - Effect of emergency declaration. 
    Upon the declaration of an emergency pursuant to Section 51-121, the Director of Public Works is authorized to take all actions necessary or appropriate to remedy the event that caused the emergency declaration. 
Sec. 51-123. - Duration. 
    The declaration of an emergency pursuant to Section 51-121 shall last only so long as is necessary to remedy the cause of the emergency. 
Sec. 51-124. - Report. 
    The Town Manager and the Director of Public Works shall make a report to the Town Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council concerning the cause of the emergency declaration and the actions taken to remedy such emergency. 
Secs. 51-125-51-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CENTRAL CONNECTICUT SOLID WASTE AUTHORITY 

Sec. 51-140. - Statement of purpose. 
    Pursuant to G.S. § 7-273aa, which provides that any two or more Connecticut municipalities may, by concurrent ordinances of their legislative bodies, create a regional solid waste authority under the provisions of G.S. §§ 7-273aa to 7-273oo, inclusive ("chapter 103b"), to jointly manage solid waste and recycling services on behalf of its members, the purpose of this article is to create such a regional authority to be known as the Central Connecticut Solid Waste Authority ("CCSWA"). Upon adoption of this ordinance by two or more municipalities, CCSWA shall be created. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-141. - Creation of the regional solid waste authority. 
    CCSWA is hereby created as a regional authority under the provisions of G.S. chapter 103b and shall have all the rights, powers, duties and obligations of a regional authority pursuant to G.S. chapter 103b and G.S. chapters 446d and 446e. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-142. - Designation of regional solid waste authority. 
    The Town of Avon (the "municipality") hereby designates CCSWA as its regional solid waste authority, including its regional resource recovery authority, and adopts the provisions of G.S. chapter 103b in connection with this election to become a member of CCSWA; provided, however, that this designation and membership election shall not constitute a commitment of the municipality's solid waste or recycling streams, and provided further that the municipality agrees that it shall take no action, now or in the future, contrary to its currently existing legal obligations and commitments, including, without limitation, making any pledge of its municipal solid waste or recycling streams to a disposal or recycling option chosen through CCSWA which has an effective date commencing prior to the expiration date of any currently existing waste stream commitment to another disposal or recycling arrangement. By adopting this article, the municipality shall not be obligated now or in the future to make any such commitment of its solid waste or recycling streams, or to commit any funding toward CCSWA, without further express authorization by its legislative body. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-143. - Purpose of the authority. 
    The purpose of CCSWA shall be to solicit and jointly manage solid waste and recycling services on behalf of its members. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-144. - Principal address of the authority. 
    The principal address of CCSWA shall be 241 Main Street, Hartford, Connecticut 06106, c/o the Capitol Region Council of Governments. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-145. - Members of the authority. 
    The members of CCSWA shall be the municipalities, including the municipality, which adopt this ordinance. Each member municipality shall be assigned to one of four subregions of CCSWA: 
(1)  The Northwest Subregion, 
(2)  The Naugatuck Valley Subregion, 
(3)  The Greater Capitol Subregion, or 
(4)  The Shoreline Subregion. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-146. - Voting system for meetings of the authority's full membership. 
    The number of votes to be cast by each municipal member of CCSWA at any meeting of the authority's full membership shall be determined in accordance with the following five-tiered voting system based on the individual population of each municipal member compared to the total population of all CCSWA municipal members (all such population figures to be derived from the most recent annual data published by the Connecticut Department of Public Health): 
(a)  Each municipal member whose individual population is less than one percent of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have one vote; 
(b)  Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or greater than one percent, but less than two percent, of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have two votes; 
(c)  Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or greater than two percent, but less than five percent, of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have three votes; 
(d)  Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or greater than five percent, but less than ten percent, of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have four votes; and 
(e)  Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or greater than ten percent of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have five votes. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-147. - Appointment, removal and term of office of a municipal member representative. 
    Each municipal member shall appoint one representative to CCSWA, which shall be the current chief elected official of the municipality or that official's designee, and that representative shall exercise the voting powers established for that municipal member as set forth in this ordinance. As long as the method of appointment and removal and the term of office of each municipal member representative shall be consistent with the first sentence of this section, the details of such appointment, removal and term of office shall be as determined by the appointing municipality; provided however, that not more than half of the terms of all such municipal representatives shall expire within any one fiscal year. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-148. - Annual meeting and bylaws of the authority. 
    There shall be at least one annual meeting of all municipal members of CCSWA, to elect the members of the executive committee and enact such other business as shall be deemed advisable at such meeting, all as provided in the by-laws of CCSWA to be adopted after its formation. It shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of all CCSWA municipal members to enact the authority by-laws or adopt any amendments thereto, such vote to take place at a duly-called meeting of the full membership of CCSWA, with proxy voting to be permitted at such meeting. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-149. - Prohibition against member monetary compensation other than host community compensation. 
    The members and member representatives of CCSWA shall receive no monetary compensation solely for their service as members and member representatives of CCSWA; provided, however, that the ability of CCSWA, if it chooses to do so in its sole discretion, to pay host community compensation to municipal members which agree to host facilities owned or used by CCSWA within their municipal borders shall not be affected by this prohibition. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Sec. 51-150. - Executive committee of the authority. 
    The full membership of CCSWA shall elect an executive committee to manage the operations of CCSWA, provided, however, that the specific division of responsibilities for such management between the executive committee, the full membership of CCSWA and any other body or officer of CCSWA shall be consistent with the by-laws of CCSWA to be adopted after its formation. No member of CCSWA shall have more than one representative on the executive committee, and each member of the executive committee shall have one vote, without regard to the voting system established by section 51-146 for meetings of the authority's full membership. The members of such executive committee shall constitute an odd number, shall include at least one representative of each of the five voting tiers established pursuant to section 51-146 for meetings of the authority's full membership, and shall also be determined by considerations of geographical representation based on the four sub-regions established under section 51-145, all such matters and the terms of office and appointment of such executive committee members and other matters pertaining thereto to be specifically determined in a manner consistent with the by-laws of CCSWA to be adopted after its formation. 
(Ord. of 6-3-10) 
Chapter 53 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to streets and sidewalks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 53-1-53-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to prescribe the form of proceedings and mode of assessing benefits and appraising damages in taking land for public use, or in making public improvements to be paid for, in whole or in part, by special assessments, and prescribe the manner in which all benefits assessed shall be collected, G.S. § 7-148(c)(1)(G). 

Sec. 53-21. - Defined. 
    As used in this article, the term "highway improvement" shall include the following: construction of a new highway; laying out of new highways; changes in grade, improvement, repair or any other alteration of any existing highway; or the construction or alteration of sidewalks within highway rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 6, § I) 
Sec. 53-22. - Special assessment authorized. 
    The expenses of any highway improvement that may be defrayed by special assessment shall include the cost of surveys, plans, construction, legal services, publications, any interest or selling expenses attendant upon the issuance of bonds, and any other costs relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 6, § II) 
Sec. 53-23. - Resolution of necessity. 
    Whenever the Town Council shall, upon a finding of common convenience or necessity, determine to make a highway improvement the cost of which shall be defrayed in whole or in part by special assessment of benefits, said Town Council shall embody such determination in a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 6, § III) 
Sec. 53-24. - Documents to be on file after resolution adoption. 
    The said Town Council shall file with the Town Clerk for public examination: 
(1)  A copy of such resolution. 
(2)  An estimate of the expense of such highway improvements. 
(3)  A map and diagram showing the nature of the highway improvement, the route, location and dimensions of the same, and any grade and changes in grade, the location and dimensions of any drains, the boundaries of all lots and premises which may be assessed and the manner of such assessment. 
(4)  A statement as to what part of the expense, if any, shall be paid by general tax and what part by special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 6, § IV) 
Sec. 53-25. - Public hearing required; notice of public hearing. 
    Thereafter, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing with respect to such highway improvement at which interested persons may be heard thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least twice in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town; once not more than 20 days and once not less than ten days before such hearing. Said notice shall state the time, date and place of such hearing and that a map of such highway improvement is open to public examination in the office of the Town Clerk and it shall describe generally the highway improvement to be made and name every person who may be assessed for the benefits thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6, § V) 
Sec. 53-26. - Actions to be taken after public hearing. 
    After such hearing, or any adjournment thereof, the Town Council may make changes in the proposed highway improvement as shall seem reasonable or proper in view of any other reasons which may appear to the Town Council to be in the best interests of the Town, and shall determine whether or not to proceed with the construction of the highway improvement. 
(Ord. No. 6, § VI) 
Sec. 53-27. - Determination of special assessment, manner of payment, etc.; notice to property owners. 
    After such hearing, the Town Council shall fix and determine the special assessments for such highway improvement and shall provide the manner and time within which the same shall be paid, and shall file said assessments in the office of the Town Clerk and mail notice of the same to the persons assessed. After the highway improvement shall have been completed, if the expense thereof shall prove to be more or less than the estimated cost, the Town Council shall adjust said special assessments on a basis proportionate to the special assessments made and shall collect the deficiency or refund any overpayment, as the case may be, after filing the adjustments in the office of the Town Clerk and mailing notice of the same to the persons affected by such adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 6, § VII) 
Secs. 53-28-53-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS, OBSTRUCTIONS, AND DRIVEWAYS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate excavations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii), (iv). 

Sec. 53-41. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article may be punished by a fine of not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00, and each day such violation shall continue after notice to the offender may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 9, § IV) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 53-42. - Permit required. 
    Within the Town, no person shall excavate within the highway lines of any street or highway under the control of, or maintained by the Town, or dig below the surface of any street or highway, or place any obstruction thereon or install a driveway or do grading thereon without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Town Engineer or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 9, § I) 
Sec. 53-43. - Permit application, fee, term and bond; inspections; exemptions. 
(a)  The issuance and expiration of such permits shall be in accordance with the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  A permit will be issued only after receipt of the application in writing, signed by the applicant or his authorized representative, stating the nature of work to be performed, the location, and the person performing the work. 
(2)  The fee for issuing each permit, under the provisions of this article, shall be as established by regulation or Town Council policy; provided, however, that such fee may be waived in the case of any firm, corporation or agency which, by charter or franchise is legally authorized in the course of its normal activities, to make excavations or place obstructions in the limits of public highways in the Town. 
(3)  A cash or surety bond in an amount specified in a regulation or policy of the Town Council must be deposited on issuance of the permit, to ensure restoration of the road to a condition satisfactory to the Town Engineer. Notification of completion should be given to the Town Engineer, and after inspection and approval, he will arrange for release of bond in accordance with terms of permit issued. 
(4)  Excavations, construction and restoration of roads must be done by a bona fide contractor, and suitable barricades and warning lights must be provided to safeguard the public during the progress of work. One-half of the traveled part of the road shall be kept open at all times during construction. 
(5)  The Town Engineer or his authorized representative is empowered to inspect at any time any or all work being performed under a permit issued under the provisions of this article. If, in his opinion, the public safety and welfare so warrant, he may direct the permittee to restore any excavation or install or remove any obstruction within 12 hours of such notice and if such direction is not complied with, he may cause such work to be done at the responsibility and expense of permittee. 
(6)  Permits will expire six months after the date issued, unless canceled by completion and approval of work by the Town Engineer, or his authorized agent at a previous date. 
(b)  None of the provisions of this article shall apply to any work performed in connection with the maintenance, repair, replacement or relocation of existing utility poles owned by a public service company, nor to the erection of any temporary protective warning signs or devices, nor to installation of additional utility poles in connection with the extension of service by such company. 
(Ord. No. 9, § II) 
Sec. 53-44. - Repairs by Town. 
    In the event of unsatisfactory completion of any work performed under this article, the Town Engineer, or his authorized agent, will cause necessary repairs to be made, and such costs will be deducted from the bond posted. If costs exceed amount of the bond, permittee will be billed for the excess and amount will be due within 30 days from the date of billing. 
(Ord. No. 9, § III) 
Secs. 53-45-53-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPOSIT OF SNOW AND ICE IN PUBLIC WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to require adjacent landowners to remove snow and ice from sidewalks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v). 

Sec. 53-61. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to provide for the protection and promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by prohibiting the deposit, by any person, of snow or ice from private property into a public way. 
(Ord. No. 62, § I) 
Sec. 53-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Deposit means to place by shoveling, plowing, blowing, throwing, laying or by any other means. 
    Private property means all real property, exclusive of that owned or managed by the Town or the State. 
    Public way means the premises within the legal limits of any street, road or right-of-way owned or maintained by the Town, including but not limited to, the traveled portion of each. 
(Ord. No. 62, § II) 
Sec. 53-63. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be fined not more than $50.00 for the first violation and not more than $100.00 for each subsequent violation. The presence of snow or ice deposited within the public way in violation of this article for a period exceeding 24 hours shall constitute a separate offense under this article, as shall each successive 24-hour period thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 62, § VI) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 53-64. - Prohibited conduct. 
    No person shall deposit snow or ice into any public way. 
(Ord. No. 62, § III) 
Sec. 53-65. - Temporary deposits. 
    The deposit of snow or ice within a public way for a temporary period during the course of clearing on adjacent private property shall not be a violation of the provisions of this article, providing such snow or ice is immediately removed from the public way by the person making such deposit. The cessation of clearing activity shall be, prima facie, the termination of the temporary deposit period. 
(Ord. No. 62, § IV) 
Sec. 53-66. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to snow and ice removal conducted by the Town or its designated representative and the State. 
(Ord. No. 62, § V) 
Secs. 53-67-53-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 

Sec. 53-81. - Defined. 
    As used in this article, the term "sidewalk" or "sidewalks" shall mean a walk required for public necessity and convenience and situated within the limits of an easement for sidewalks owned by the Town. 
(Ord. No. 7, § I) 
Sec. 53-82. - Approval prior to construction. 
    No sidewalk shall be constructed within the limits of such a highway or easement without the consent of the Town Council and the approval of the location of the same by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 8-24. No sidewalk shall be constructed within the limits of any State highway within the Town without obtaining such approval from the State as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 7, § II) 
Sec. 53-83. - Construction specifications; variances. 
    Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Town Sidewalk and Highway Cross-Section and Specifications as adopted by the Town Council. The Town Engineer, for good cause shown may, in writing, permit a variance from said specifications where the conditions of the property, the usage thereof, traffic or other conditions warrant such variance for the convenience and safety of the public. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or bituminous concrete as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 7, § III) 
Sec. 53-84. - When construction authorized. 
    Sidewalks may be constructed within the limits of a public highway other than a State highway and within the limits of an easement by: 
(1)  The Town, when ordered by the Town Council; 
(2)  Abutting property owners, when ordered by the Town Council in accordance with State law; 
(3)  Abutting property owners, upon petition to the Town Council; 
(4)  Developers, when required by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the provisions of the subdivision and zoning regulations of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 7, § IV) 
Sec. 53-85. - Approval of construction and acceptance. 
    Upon completion of the construction of a sidewalk, the party responsible for such construction shall file with the Town Council a certification signed by an engineer licensed by the State stating that such sidewalk has been constructed in accordance with said specifications. The filing of such certification shall constitute an acceptance of such sidewalk by the Town as a public sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 7, § V) 
Sec. 53-86. - Cost of construction. 
(a)  Cost of sidewalk construction shall be borne by abutting property owners or developers unless otherwise provided for by the Town Council. 
(b)  When a sidewalk is to be constructed pursuant to Section 53-84(2) or (3), the Town may contract for said construction from abutting property owners pursuant to Article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7, § VI) 
Sec. 53-87. - Repairs. 
    Whenever any sidewalks shall be in need of repair or maintenance, the Town Manager shall give notice to the owner of the premises in front of which the sidewalk passes, to perform such repair or maintenance. Said notice shall contain a description of the repairs which are considered to be necessary to make the said sidewalk safe for travel, shall direct said owner to make the repairs at his own expense, and shall fix a reasonable time within which such repairs shall be made. Such notice may be delivered into the hands of said owner or sent by certified mail to his last known address. Repairs shall be made with the same material as that which previously existed. In the event that any owner, after being notified in accordance with the provisions of this section of the need for repair of the sidewalk in front of his property, shall neglect or refuse to make the repairs specified in said notice within the time therein provided, it shall be the duty of the Town Manager to proceed to have said repairs made at the expense of said owner and said expenses shall be a lien in favor of the Town against the adjoining premises in accordance with State law. 
(Ord. No. 7, § VII) 
Sec. 53-88. - Placement and removal of snow, obstructions or hazards; violations and penalties. 
(a)  The provisions of Section 7-163a of the Connecticut General Statutes are hereby adopted as set forth in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) hereof. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13a-149 of the Connecticut General Statutes or any other general statute or special act, the Town shall not be liable to any person for injury to person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the Town is the owner or person in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street, provided that the Town shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk under its possession and control. 
(b)  The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting his property as the Town had prior to the effective date of this article and shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said injury. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to remain upon any public sidewalk in the Town any article or material which constitutes an obstruction or hazard to the ordinary use of such public sidewalk, unless such obstruction or hazard is clearly and visibly marked or otherwise indicated by suitable means, except for a Town employee in the performance of his duty. 
(d)  Unless otherwise exempted under the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, the owner, or any person in possession or control of land abutting a public sidewalk (1) shall cause such sidewalk to be made safe by removing the ice therefrom or by covering ice with sand or other suitable substance within 12 hours from the time such sidewalk or any part thereof is covered with ice and (2) shall remove any and all snow, sleet and ice from such sidewalk or any part thereof within 24 hours after cessation of snow, sleet or rainfall. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to owners, agents or- occupants of buildings or land bordering sidewalks when; 
(1)  The Board of Education of the Town, by a vote of said Board, shall find that the safety of pupils who are required to walk to and from any public school in Avon shall so need a sidewalk, and when, upon the recommendation of the Board of Education to the Town Council, the Town Council causes the Town to construct a sidewalk within a highway or easement; then all costs of construction and maintenance for such a sidewalk, including the clearing of ice and snow therefrom, shall be paid for by the Town. 
(2)  The Town, by ordinance, has declared any sidewalk or portion thereof to be the responsibility of the Town for the removal of ice and snow and for injury to person or property caused by the presence of snow or ice. 
(f)  Each and every hour of failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00. Each day such violation shall continue after notice to the abutting owner may be deemed a separate offense. Whenever a corporation shall be the abutting owner that has failed to comply with the provisions of this section, the officers and/or directors of said corporation shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the fine herein provided. 
(g)  In the event of the failure of the owner, agent of the owner or the occupant of such premises to comply with the provisions of this section, and in addition to the penalty provided in subsection (f) of this section, any expense incurred by the Town in removing snow, sleet, ice and obstructions of any nature from such public sidewalk or in keeping the same safe and convenient for public travel, shall constitute a claim against the owner of the land adjacent to such public sidewalk and shall, upon the recording of a certificate of lien in the Town Clerk's office, as by statute provided, be a lien upon the premises adjoining such sidewalk in favor of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 7, § VIII; Amend. of 9-3-15; Amend. of 10-1-15) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Secs. 53-89-53-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STREET BUILDING NUMBERS 

Sec. 53-101. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to promote the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by regulating the assignment and posting of street numbers on any street or highway within the Town, such that the addresses of residences, places of business and building lots may be identified with the ease and speed necessary to enable the Town or its designated representatives to provide prompt emergency medical, police and firefighting services. 
(Ord. No. 58, § I) 
Sec. 53-102. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $40.00 and not more than $100.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 58, § V) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 53-103. - Assignment of numbers. 
(a)  The Office of the Assessor shall assign street numbers to all buildings within the Town. The assignment of street numbers pursuant to these provisions shall not constitute acceptance by the Town of any street or highway, or any portion thereof. 
(b)  The Office of the Assessor may change the street number assigned to any building or buildings. 
(c)  The Office of the Assessor shall maintain records showing the street numbers assigned to all buildings and such records shall be open for public inspection during the normal business hours of the Office of the Assessor. 
(Ord. No. 58, § II) 
Sec. 53-104. - Notice of number assignment. 
    The Town Manager shall cause to be mailed to the owner of each building for which a street number has been assigned, a notice designating the street number assigned to such building together with a copy of this article. 
(Ord. No. 58, § III) 
Sec. 53-105. - Posting of street numbers. 
(a)  Within 60 days of the receipt of the notice provided for in Section 53-104 the owner shall post, or cause to be posted, the assigned street number on the building to which such number has been assigned, or on the property of the owner on which such building is situated. A posting on a mailbox situated in a public way and not more than ten feet from the property line on which said building is located shall be a sufficient posting for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  If the assigned street number so posted under subsection (a) of this section, shall not be visible from a public street or highway, the owner shall further post or cause the further posting of, the assigned street number at or near the vehicular entrance to the premises posted under subsection (a) of this section, from the public street or highway. 
(c)  All street numbers posted pursuant to this article shall not be less than three inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 58, § IV) 
Chapter 55 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation, G.S. § 12-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 55-1-55-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 55-21. - Waiver. 
    The purpose of this section is to permit the Town to waive a taxpayer's annual property taxes when the amount due is very small and thereby to relieve the Town from the cost of processing related property tax bills. The Town hereby waives the annual property tax on the real and personal property of a taxpayer if the aggregate net assessment of the real and personal property of the taxpayer is $400.00 or less. 
(Ord. No. 73, §§ I, II) 
State Law reference- Optional waiver of certain property taxes, G.S. § 12-144c. 
Secs. 55-22-55-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS AND ABATEMENTS 

Sec. 55-31. - Solar energy. 
    The Town hereby authorizes the property tax exemption for solar energy heating or cooling systems set forth in G.S. § 12-81(56). 
(Ord. No. 48, § I) 
Sec. 55-32. - Veterans. 
(a)  Effective for taxes payable on the grand list of the Town of October 1, 2002, the Town hereby authorizes an increase, from $1,000.00 to $10,000.00, in the additional property tax exemption permitted under G.S. § 12-81f, for veterans who meet the qualifying income limitations set forth in G.S. § 12-81f. 
(b)  The Town hereby authorizes a property tax exemption for the residence, including the dwelling house and lot upon which the house is erected, of a qualifying disabled veteran who has received financial assistance for special housing under the provisions of Section 801 of Title 38 of the United States Code. Such exemption shall be subject to the conditions and qualification requirements of Title 38 of the United States Code and G.S. § 12-81(2l)(C). 
(Ord. No. 60, §§ I, II; Amend. of 10-4-12(2), eff. 10-31-12) 
Sec. 55-33. - Ambulances. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create, pursuant to G.S. § 12-81c, an exemption from personal property taxation for any ambulance-type motor vehicle used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for payment. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance-type vehicle means any motor vehicle specially equipped or modified for the purpose of transporting medically incapacitated individuals, including but not limited to, the inclusion of lift stretchers, beds or other special seating, and significant modification to accommodate medical or emergency equipment. The term exclusively means that the vehicle is used and devoted primarily and inherently for the purpose of transporting medically incapacitated individuals, and does not include vehicles used partly for other purposes. 
    Assessor means the Assessor of the Town or his designated representative. 
(c)  Application process. Applications for such exemption shall be filed annually for the review and approval of the Assessor, in such manner and including such information as required by the Assessor, not later than November 1, following the assessment date, with respect to which such exemption is claimed. This section shall be applicable with respect to the assessment year commencing October 1, 1986. 
(d)  Appeals. Any person denied such tax exemption following review of the application by the Assessor may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Tax Review, provided that a written petition is filed within the time prescribed by law for such appeals. 
(Ord. No. 61, §§ I-IV) 
Sec. 55-34. - Volunteer firefighter tax relief. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide tax relief for those who volunteer their services as firefighters for the Town and thereby to help retain the Town's existing volunteer firefighters and attract new firefighters. 
(b)  Establishment of tax relief program. Pursuant to G.S. § 12-81w, the Town hereby authorizes annual exemptions in the assessed value of the real or personal property of a volunteer firefighter. No such exemption shall exceed an amount which, when multiplied by the then-applicable mill rate of the Town, would provide a reduction in the property taxes of an eligible volunteer firefighter of more than $1,000.00. The Town may enter into inter-local agreements with other municipalities for the purpose of providing property tax relief to volunteer firefighters who live in one municipality but who volunteer their services in another municipality. 
(c)  Regulations. The Town Council shall, by the adoption of regulations, establish a range of exemptions and the eligibility criteria for such exemptions, up to the maximum amount permitted by this section. 
(Ord. No. 68, §§ I-III) 
Chapter 57 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic generally, G.S. § 14-1 et seq.; authority to relate traffic, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 57-1-57-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Parking, G.S. § 14-251 et seq. 

Sec. 57-21. - Impeding traffic prohibited; other prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in such a manner as will impede the free flow of traffic. Double parking, parking at the curb improperly, parking in permanently or temporarily designated "no parking zones," parking in restricted areas at times when parking is prohibited, parking on any street while snow removal operations are being conducted, or any parking impairing the free flow of traffic shall be interpreted as "impeding traffic." 
(b)  No person shall park overtime; park for an unreasonable length of time; park more than 12 inches from a curb; park in violation of zoning ordinances or fire, park and Board of Education rules and regulations; park by trespassing on private property including private roads; park in a loading zone; park in front of an entrance to a public building; park within 25 feet of an intersection or stop sign; park on a crosswalk; park within ten feet of a fire hydrant; park on a sidewalk; park on the wrong side of a street; park in a handicapped parking zone, and park so as to obstruct a driveway. 
(Ord. No. 20, § I) 
Sec. 57-22. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of this article or any ordinance, rule or regulation of the traffic authority which relates to parking, a police officer or such other person as may be authorized by the Chief of Police to give such notice, shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof stating that such vehicle has been parked unlawfully. 
(Ord. No. 20, § II) 
Sec. 57-23. - Penalties. 
(a)  The penalty for any violation of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Double parking, $10.00; 
(2)  Restricted areas, $10.00; 
(3)  Impeding snow removal operations, $10.00; 
(4)  Impeding traffic, $10.00; 
(5)  Overtime parking, $10.00; 
(6)  More than 12 inches from a curb, $10.00; 
(7)  Park by trespassing, $10.00; 
(8)  Loading zone, $10.00; 
(9)  Entrance to a public building, $10.00; 
(10)  Within 25 feet of intersection, $10.00; 
(11)  Within 25 feet of stop sign, $10.00; 
(12)  Crosswalk parking, $10.00; 
(13)  Within ten feet of fire hydrant, $15.00; 
(14)  Sidewalk parking, $10.00; 
(15)  Wrong side of street, $10.00; 
(16)  Obstructing driveway, $10.00; 
(17)  Handicapped parking, $25.00; 
(18)  No parking zones, $10.00; 
(19)  Fire lane, $25.00. 
    (b) The penalties in subsection (a) of this section apply, provided that the owner or operator of the vehicle in question pays the amount in person or remits the amount by mail to the Town police department as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, within eight days of the time the notice of the violation is attached to the vehicle or personally given to the owner or operator of the vehicle by a police officer or other authorized person. If such payment is not made within eight days of the attachment or delivery of notice of a violation, the penalty shall double. Failure to pay the appropriate fine within 30 days may result in the issuance of a State infraction as provided for in G.S. § 51-164m and n. Any such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $90.00 for each offense, except as otherwise required by state law. The registered owner of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be its operator. 
(Ord. No. 20, § III) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violation, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 57-24. - Towing and impounding of vehicles. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties described herein, a police officer may order any vehicle which is parked so as to impede traffic to be towed from the location in which it is parked to a vehicle pound, at the owner's or operator's expense. 
(b)  The Chief of Police shall create vehicle pound or pounds to which vehicles may be removed by a police officer or under the direction of a police officer. Such pound or pounds shall be storage garages or such other places as may be designated by the Chief of Police. Before any such garage or place shall be designated as a vehicle pound, the operator thereof shall furnish to the Chief of Police satisfactory evidence of insurance coverage to make the Town whole for any claims for damages paid by the Town arising from the towing or storage of any impounded vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 20, § IV) 
Chapter 62 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal water systems, G.S. § 7-234 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-31-62-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 62-51. - Compliance with division. 
    When the Town shall appropriate funds to extend or cause to have extended water mains, pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 7-137c, the procedures set forth in this division shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 31, § I) 
Sec. 62-52. - Guidelines for determining assessment of extension costs. 
    The Town shall assess owners of property abutting new mains for the cost of the extension. The sum to be assessed against each property owner shall be determined following the completion of the installation of the mains, in accordance with such assessment policies as the Town Council may adopt and the following guidelines: 
(1)  When the abutting property is industrial or commercial property, the sum to be assessed shall be based on lot frontage, plus a charge per square foot of building area, or other equitable basis, for a standard or minimum size main. 
(2)  When the abutting property is residential property, the property shall be assessed at unit rates based on the existing zone designation of the property being assessed, or other equitable basis. 
(3)  If residential or agricultural property or property zoned for residential or agricultural use abuts lines of construction of water mains to be used for industrial or commercial purposes or partly for industrial or commercial purposes, the proportionate share of the owners of such property shall be computed on a front-foot or other equitable basis for a standard or minimum size main. 
(4)  In the case of land zoned for other than commercial or industrial purposes or classified, pursuant to G.S. § 12-107a-e, as farmland, forest land or open space land on the last completed grand list of the Town, which exceeds by more than 100 percent of the size of the smallest lot permitted in the lowest density residential zone allowed under the Town's Zoning Regulations, assessment of such excess land shall be deferred until such time as the excess land shall be built upon or a building permit issued therefor or until approval of a subdivision plan of the excess property by the Planning and Zoning Commission, whichever event occurs first, at which time assessment may be made as provided in G.S. § 7-137c. The Town shall place a caveat on the land records in each instance where an assessment is deferred. 
(5)  Assessment of the total cost of the installation of the mains, including highway repairs caused by the installation, shall be proportioned in such a way as to ultimately leave the Town free of any cost of the extension of the water mains except where any portion of the water service is to be used for a municipal purpose, in which instance the Town shall contribute a fair portion of the expense representing the municipal share. 
(Ord. No. 31, § II) 
Sec. 62-53. - Hearing and notice. 
    Prior to making an assessment of benefits upon property owners abutting a water main, a hearing shall be held concerning the proposed assessment. Notice of the time and place for the assessment hearing shall be given to the persons abutting the main at least ten days before the time of hearing. The notice shall be given by depositing in a United States post office, postage prepaid, certified mail, a notice of the hearing, signed by the Town Clerk and addressed to such persons. In the case of an estate of a deceased person in process of settlement, notice to the administrator or an executor having charge thereof shall be deemed to be notice to the owners. 
(Ord. No. 31, § III) 
Sec. 62-54. - Notice of assessment. 
    A notice of assessment describing the abutting land shall be sent by certified mail to each property owner whose property abuts the main setting forth the sum assessed against the property owner for the installation of the main. A copy of the notice of assessment shall be simultaneously filed with the Town Clerk, who shall record it in the land records for the Town. Within 60 days of an assessment, the owner may appeal to the Superior Court from the valuation of the owner's assessment, in accordance with G.S. § 7-137c. 
(Ord. No. 31, § IV) 
Sec. 62-55. - Payment of assessments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, all sums assessed shall be due and payable in full within 60 days of billing. 
(b)  Except as provided in this subsection, any owner of abutting property assessed under this article may, within 60 days of the assessment date, elect to pay the assessed sum in five equal payments. The first installment shall be due within 60 days of the billing date and subsequent installments shall be due on the next four anniversary dates of the billing date. The Town Council may, upon a determination that special circumstances exist, authorize payment of an assessment in more than five, but not more than ten, annual installments. Assessments that are paid in installments shall be subject to interest at such rate as the Town Council shall determine. Interest on the unpaid balance shall be due and payable at the time of payment of each installment. 
(Ord. No. 31, § V) 
Sec. 62-56. - Service connection charge required. 
    Each property owner who makes a service connection to a main shall, at the time of connection, pay for the cost of the connection. 
(Ord. No. 31, § VI) 
Sec. 62-57. - Agency to which payment to be made. 
    All payments of sums assessed under this division shall be made to the Tax Collector of the Town. Where the property owner elects to pay the sum assessed in annual installments, the Tax Collector shall make annual billings of principal and interest at the time provided. 
(Ord. No. 31, § VII) 
Secs. 62-58-62-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal sewer systems, G.S. § 7-245 et seq. 

Sec. 62-86. - Collector of charges designated; handling of funds. 
(a)  Collector designated. The Collector of Revenues of the Town is hereby designated as collector of all municipal sewerage system benefit assessments, connection and use charges, interest payments and other municipal sewerage system charges and is hereby authorized to collect all such charges in accordance with the provisions of G.S. ch. 103 (G.S. § 7-273b et seq.). 
(b)  Handling of funds. All municipal sewerage system charges collected in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be kept separate from other funds of the Town and shall be used for the sewerage system, including the payment of debt incurred for the sewerage system and interest thereon, and for no other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 45, §§ I, II) 
Sec. 62-87. - Adjustments in sewer assessment payments for elderly or disabled property owners. 
    The Town hereby authorizes optional methods of payment of sewer assessments for eligible property owners in accordance with G.S. § 7-253a. 
(Ord. No. 53, § I) 
APPENDIX A - AQUIFER PROTECTION REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the Acquifer Protection Regulations, originally effective August 21, 2006. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

SECTION 1. - Title and authority. 
(a)  Aquifers are an essential natural resource and a major source of public drinking water for the State of Connecticut. Use of groundwater will increase as the population grows and opportunities for new surface water supplies diminish due to the rising cost of land and increasingly intense development. At the same time, numerous drinking water wells have been contaminated by certain land use activities, and others are now threatened. To address this problem, Connecticut has established the Aquifer Protection Area Program (Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-354a to § 22a-354bb) to identify critical water supply aquifers and to protect them from pollution by managing land use. Protection requires coordinated responsibilities shared by the state, municipality and water companies to ensure a plentiful supply of public drinking water for present and future generations. It is therefore the purpose of these regulations to protect aquifer protection areas within the Town of Avon by making provisions for: 
(1)  Implementing regulations consistent with state regulations and An Act Concerning Aquifer Protection Areas, Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-354a to § 22a-354bb ("the Act"); 
(2)  Delineating aquifer protection areas on the Town of Avon Zoning Map; 
(3)  Regulating land use activity within the aquifer protection area including: prohibiting certain new activities; registering existing regulated activities; and issuing permits for new regulated activities at registered facilities; and 
(4)  Administering and enforcing these regulations. 
(b)  These regulations shall be known as the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations (the "APA Regulations") of the Town of Avon. 
(c)  These regulations were adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of applicable State law and regulations. 
(d)  The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Avon is established as the Aquifer Protection Agency (the "Agency") in accordance with the "Ordinance for the Establishment of an Aquifer Protection Agency," (the "APA Ordinance") effective February 2, 2005, and shall implement the purposes and provisions of the APA Ordinance and the Act. 
(e)  The Agency shall administer all provisions of the Act and shall approve or deny registrations, issue permits, issue permits with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in aquifer protection areas in the Town of Avon pursuant to the Act. 
SECTION 2. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in these regulations, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Affected water company means "affected water company" as defined in § 22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(2)  Agency means the Avon Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(3)  Agriculture means "agriculture" as defined in the § 1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(4)  Applicant means, as appropriate in context, a person who applies for an exemption under § 22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, a permit under § 22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or a permit under Section 9 of the APA Regulations; 
(5)  Application means, as appropriate in context, an application for an exemption under § 22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, an application for a permit under § 22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or an application for a permit under Section 9 of the APA Regulations; 
(6)  Aquifer protection area means "aquifer protection area" as defined in § 22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and any extension of such area approved by the Commissioner pursuant to § 22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(7)  Area of contribution means "area of contribution" as defined in § 22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with § 22a-354b-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(8)  Bulk storage facility means property where oil or petroleum liquids are received by tank vessel, pipeline, railroad car or tank vehicle for the purpose of storage for wholesale distribution; 
(9)  Certified Hazardous Materials Manager means a hazardous materials manager certified by the Institute of Hazardous Materials Management and who is qualified by reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable laws and identify appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities; 
(10)  Commissioner means the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, or his or her agent; 
(11)  De-icing chemical means sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or calcium magnesium acetate; 
(12)  Domestic sewage means "domestic sewage" as defined in § 22a-430-3(a) the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(13)  Facility means property where a regulated activity is conducted by any person, including without limitation any buildings located on the property that are owned or leased by that person; and includes contiguous land owned, leased, or for which there is an option to purchase by that person; 
(14)  Floor drain means any opening in a floor or surface which opening or surface receives materials spilled or deposited thereon; 
(15)  Hazardous material means[:] 
(A)  Any hazardous substance as defined in 40 CFR 302.4 and listed therein at Table 302.4, excluding mixtures with a total concentration of less than 1% hazardous substances based on volume; 
(B)  Any hazardous waste as defined in § 22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(C)  Any pesticide as defined in § 22a-47 of the Connecticut General Statutes; or 
(D)  Any oil or petroleum as defined in § 22a-448 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(16)  Hazardous waste means "hazardous waste" as defined in § 22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(17)  Industrial laundry means a facility for washing clothes, cloth or other fabric used in industrial operations; 
(18)  Infiltration device means any discharge device installed below or above the ground surface that is designed to discharge liquid to the ground; 
(19)  ISO 14001 environmental management system certification means a current ISO 14001 environmental management system certification issued by an ISO 14001 environmental management system registrar that is accredited by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), American Society for Quality (ASQ), National Accreditation Board (ANAB); 
(20)  Level A mapping means the lines as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the Commissioner pursuant to § 22a-354c, § 22a-354d or § 22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes encompassing the area of contribution and recharge areas; 
(21)  Lubricating oil means oil that contains less than 1% chlorinated solvents and is used for the sole purpose of lubricating, cutting, grinding, machining, stamping or quenching metals; 
(22)  Municipality means "municipality" as defined in § 22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes; for the purpose of these regulations, "Municipality" means the Town of Avon. 
(23)  Owner means the owner or lessee of the facility in question; 
(24)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, limited liability company, municipality, agency, political or administrative subdivision of the state, or other legal entity of any kind; 
(25)  Pollution means "pollution" as defined in § 22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(26)  Pollution prevention means the use of processes and materials so as to reduce or minimize the amount of hazardous materials used or the quantity and concentration of pollutants in waste generated; 
(27)  Professional engineer means a professional engineer licensed in accordance with Chapter 391 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and who is qualified by reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable law and identify appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities; 
(28)  Publicly Owned Treatment Works means "publicly owned treatment works" as defined in § 22a-430-3 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(29)  Public service company means "public service company" as defined in § 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(30)  Public supply well means "public supply well" as defined in § 19-13-B51b of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(31)  Recharge area means "recharge area" as defined in § 22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with § 22a-354b-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(32)  Registered regulated activity means a regulated activity which has been registered under § 22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 8 of the APA Regulations, and is conducted at the facility identified in such registration; 
(33)  Registrant means a person, who or which, has submitted a registration for an existing regulated activity under § 22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 4 of the APA Regulations; 
(34)  Regulated activity means any of the following activities, which are located or conducted, wholly or partially, in an aquifer protection area, except as provided for in § 22a-354i-5(c) and § 22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or Section 4 of the APA Regulations: 
(A)  Underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum, to the extent such activity is not pre-empted by federal law, or hazardous material, except for (i) an underground storage tank that contains number two fuel oil and is located more than 500 feet from a public supply well subject to regulation under § 22a-354c or § 22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, or (ii) underground electrical facilities such as transformers, breakers, or cables containing oil for cooling or insulation purposes which are owned and operated by a public service company, 
(B)  Oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale or fleet use, 
(C)  On-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale, 
(D)  Repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of vehicles, involving the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including solvents, lubricants, paints, brake fluids, transmission fluids or the generation of hazardous wastes, 
(E)  Salvage operation of metal or vehicle parts, 
(F)  Waste water discharges to ground water other than domestic sewage and storm water, except for discharges from the following that have received a permit from the Commissioner pursuant to § 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes: 
(i)  A pump and treat system for ground water remediation; 
(ii)  A potable water treatment system; 
(iii)  Heat pump system; 
(iv)  Non-contact cooling water system; 
(v)  Swimming pools. 
(G)  Car or truck washing, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(H)  Production or refining of chemicals, including without limitation hazardous materials or asphalt, 
(I)  Clothes or cloth cleaning service which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including without limitation dry-cleaning solvents, 
(J)  Industrial laundry activity that involves the cleaning of clothes or cloth contaminated by hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(K)  Generation of electrical power by means of fossil fuels, except for: 
(i)  Generation of electrical power by an emergency engine as defined by § 22a-174-22(a)(2) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or 
(ii)  Generation of electrical power by means of natural gas or propane. 
(L)  Production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical equipment involving the use, storage or disposal of any hazardous material or involving metal plating, degreasing of parts or equipment, or etching operations, 
(M)  Embalming or crematory services which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(N)  Furniture stripping operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(O)  Furniture finishing operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(P)  Storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste subject to a permit under § 22a-449(c)-100 to § 22a-449(c)-110, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, 
(Q)  Biological or chemical testing, analysis or research which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and provided that on-site testing of a public supply well by a public water utility is not a regulated activity, 
(R)  Pest control services which involve storage, mixing or loading of pesticides or other hazardous materials, 
(S)  Photographic finishing which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(T)  Production or fabrication of metal products which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including: 
(i)  Metal cleaning or degreasing with industrial solvents; 
(ii)  Metal plating; or 
(iii)  Metal etching. 
(U)  Printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(V)  Accumulation or storage of waste oil, anti-freeze or spent lead-acid batteries which are subject to a general permit issued under § 22a-208(i) and § 22a-454(e)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes, 
(W)  Production of rubber, resin cements, elastomers or plastic, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(X)  Storage of de-icing chemicals, unless such storage takes place within a weather-tight, waterproof structure for the purpose of retail sale or for the purpose of deicing parking areas or access roads to parking areas, 
(Y)  Accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing, burning, transfer or composting of solid waste which is subject to a permit issued by the Commissioner pursuant to § 22a-207b, § 22a-208a, and § 22a-208c of the Connecticut General Statutes, except for a potable water treatment sludge disposal area, 
(Z)  Dyeing, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning or finishing of leather, which activity involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(AA)  Production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated wood, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, and 
(BB)  Pulp production processes that involve bleaching. 
(35)  Release means "release" as defined in § 22a-133k-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(36)  State Aquifer Protection Regulations means § 22a-354i-1 to § 22a-354i-10, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
(37)  Storage means the holding or possession of any hazardous material; 
(38)  Storage tank means a stationary device which is designed to store hazardous materials, and is constructed of non-earthen materials including without limitation concrete, steel, fiberglass or plastic; 
(39)  Topographic feature means an object, whether natural or man-made, located on the earth's surface and of sufficient size that it appears on a 1:24,000 scale topographic quadrangle map drawn by the United States Geological Survey; 
(40)  Underground when referring to a storage tank or storage tank component means that ten percent or more of the volumetric capacity of such tank or component is below the surface of the ground and that portion which is below the surface of the ground is not fully visible for inspection; 
(41)  Vehicle or "vehicles" means a "vessel" as defined by § 15-170 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and any vehicle propelled or drawn by any non-muscular power, including without limitation an automobile, aircraft, all-terrain vehicle or snowmobile; 
(42)  Waters means "waters" as defined in § 22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(43)  Well field means "well field" as defined in § 22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes; and 
(44)  Zoning district map means any map showing zoning districts adopted pursuant to § 8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
SECTION 3. - Delineation of aquifer protection area boundaries. 
(a)  The Agency shall delineate the aquifer protection areas on the Town of Avon Zoning Map. Such delineation shall consist of the combined areas of contribution and recharge areas as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the Commissioner. 
(1)  Such boundaries shall be delineated within 120 days after being notified by the Commissioner that an aquifer protection area is located partially or entirely within the Town of Avon. 
(2)  Notice of such delineation shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the affected area. Such notice shall include at least the following: 
(A)  A map or detailed description of the subject aquifer protection area; and 
(B)  The name, telephone number, and address of a representative of the Agency who may be reached for further information. 
(b)  In order to clarify the location of an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency may apply to the Commissioner to extend such boundary to coincide with the nearest property line, municipal boundary or topographic feature pursuant to § 22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. Such extension shall, at a minimum, fully encompass the aquifer protection areas bounded by the approved level A mapping but shall not exceed the distance necessary to clarify the location of the aquifer protection area or to facilitate the administration of regulations pertaining thereto. An aquifer protection area boundary may not be extended without prior written approval of the Commissioner. 
(1)  Any request by the Agency to the Commissioner for extension of an aquifer protection area boundary shall include at least the following: 
(A)  A map to scale delineating: 
(i)  The aquifer protection area boundary mapped under section 3(a) of the APA regulations; and 
(ii)  The proposed extension of the aquifer protection area boundary. 
(B)  A certification by the chairperson or duly authorized agent of the Agency that notice of such request has been provided to all owners of property within the proposed extended aquifer protection area and all affected water companies in accordance with the following: 
(i)  Such notice shall include at least the following: 
(aa)  A map showing the aquifer protection area boundaries and the proposed extension of such boundaries, 
(bb)  The name, address, and telephone number of a representative of the Agency who may be contacted for further information, and 
(cc)  A statement that any person may, not later than 30 days after said notification, submit to the Agency written comments on such proposed boundary extension; 
(ii)  Such notice shall be effectuated by the following: 
(aa)  Delivery of notice by certified mail to those individuals and entities identified in subsection (b)(1)(B) of this section, or 
(bb)  The publication of a notice in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the affected area; and posting of notice near the proposed boundaries of the subject aquifer protection area of at least four signs each of which shall be at least four square feet in size (2' × 2'); and 
(iii)  A summary of comments received by such Agency regarding the proposed boundary extension and the Agency's response. 
(2)  Not later than 60 days after receiving the Commissioner's written approval of a request to extend an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency shall cause such boundary to be delineated in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  No person may challenge the boundaries of the aquifer protection area under the APA Regulations unless such challenge is based solely on a failure by the Agency to properly delineate the boundaries in accordance with § 22a-354n of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(d)  A map of the location and boundaries of the aquifer protection areas, or regulated areas, shall be available for inspection in the Office of the Avon Town Clerk. 
(e)  If the Level A mapping is amended in accordance with § 22a-354b-1(i) or § 22a-354b-1(j) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, the Agency shall cause the amended aquifer protection area boundary to be delineated in accordance with subsections (a) or (b) of this section. 
SECTION 4. - Prohibited and regulated activities. 
(a)  All regulated activities are prohibited in aquifer protection areas, except as specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The following regulated activities are not prohibited in aquifer protection areas: 
(1)  A registered regulated activity which is conducted in compliance with § 22a-354i-9 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or section 12 of the APA Regulations; and 
(2)  A regulated activity which has received a permit issued pursuant to § 22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 9 of the APA Regulations. 
(c)  The following are not regulated activities: 
(1)  Any activity conducted at a residence without compensation; 
(2)  Any activity involving the use or storage of no more than 21/2 gallons of each type of hazardous material on-site at any one time, provided the total of all hazardous materials on-site does not exceed 55 gallons at any one time; 
(3)  Any agricultural activity regulated pursuant to § 22a-354m(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(4)  Any activity provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor, 
(B)  Such activity involves no more than 10% of the floor area in the building where the activity takes place, 
(C)  Any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times, 
(D)  All waste waters generated by such activity are lawfully disposed through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and 
(E)  Such activity does not involve (i) repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (iii) above ground storage of more than 110 gallons of hazardous materials; 
(5)  Any activity solely involving the use of lubricating oil provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such activity does not involve cleaning of metals with chlorinated solvents at the facility, 
(B)  Such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor, 
(C)  Any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times, and 
(D)  Such activity does not involve: 
(i)  Repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles, 
(ii)  Underground storage of any hazardous material, or 
(iii)  Above ground storage of more than 110 gallons of such lubricating oil and associated hazardous waste; and 
(6)  Any activity involving the dispensing of oil or petroleum from an above ground storage tank or tanks with an aggregate volume of 2,000 gallons or less provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such dispensing activity takes place solely on a paved surface which is covered by a roof, 
(B)  The above ground storage tank(s) is a double-walled tank with overfill alarms, and 
(C)  All associated piping is either above ground, or has secondary containment. 
(d)  Determination of a non-regulated activity. 
(1)  Any person proposing to carry out a non-regulated activity, as set forth in section 4(c) of these regulations, in an aquifer protection area shall, prior to commencement of such activity, notify the Agency or its duly authorized agent on a form provided by the Agency. Such form shall provide sufficient information to enable the Agency or its duly authorized agent to properly determine that the proposed activity is a regulated activity or a non-regulated activity within the aquifer protection area. 
(2)  If such activity is determined to be a non-regulated activity, then no further action under the APA Regulations is necessary. 
SECTION 5. - Activities regulated by the State. 
(a)  The Commissioner shall exclusively regulate activities within aquifer protection areas that are specified in § 22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall regulate all other regulated activities. CGS § 22a-354p(g) gives the Commissioner the sole authority for aquifer protection registration and permits for: 
(1)  Any person to whom the Commissioner has issued an individual permit under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) or under the state pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) pursuant to section 22a-430 or any person to whom the Commissioner has issued a permit under the provisions of the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) (42 USC 6901 et seq.) for a treatment, storage or disposal facility, 
(2)  Any public service company, as defined in Section 16-1, providing gas, electric, pipeline, water or telephone service, 
(3)  Any large quantity generator, as defined in regulations adopted by the Commissioner under Section 22a-449, or 
(4)  Any state department, agency or instrumentality, except any local or regional board of education. 
(b)  Any person conducting regulated activities that are within the authority of the Commissioner shall submit a registration or obtain a permit or exemption from the Commissioner prior to engaging in such activity. The Commissioner shall process applications for those regulated activities. 
(c)  The Agency may submit an advisory decision to the Commissioner for consideration on any permit regulated under this section in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-354p(g). 
SECTION 6. - Application for an exemption from prohibition or regulation. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a regulated activity may seek an exemption from the Commissioner pursuant to § 22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. Any person seeking an exemption from the Commissioner shall concurrently submit a copy of the application for an exemption to the Agency and any affected water company. 
(b)  The Agency may submit written comments to the Commissioner on any exemption regulated under this section in accordance with § 22a-354i-6(c) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies within 60 days of the agency receipt of copy of the application. 
SECTION 7. - General registration, permit application and transfer procedures. 
(a)  All applications for permits and registrations shall contain sufficient information for a fair and informed determination of the issues. The Agency may request additional information from the applicant for this purpose. 
(b)  The day of receipt of a registration, permit application or transfer form shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Agency or its duly authorized agent, provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt, or within 35 days after such submission, whichever is sooner. 
(c)  At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant or registrant to provide additional information about the regulated activity. Requests for additional information shall not stay the time limitations for registrations and permits as set forth in Sections 8 and 9 of the APA Regulations. 
(d)  All permit applications and registrations shall be open for public inspection. 
(e)  Incomplete permit applications and registrations may be denied without prejudice. 
(f)  No permit or registration issued under Sections 8 or 9 of the APA Regulations shall be assigned or transferred except with written approval by the Agency. 
SECTION 8. - Registration requirements. 
(a)  Any person engaged in a regulated activity which substantially commenced, or was in active operation within the past five years, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued, either: 
(A)  Before the effective date of the State Aquifer Protection Regulations, or 
(B)  Before the date an applicable aquifer protection area is designated on the zoning map, whichever occurs later, shall register the activity in accordance with this section unless such person has pending an application for an exemption pursuant to § 22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
(1)  The Commissioner shall process registrations for those regulated activities specified in § 22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall process registrations for all other regulated activities. 
(2)  If the regulated activity is not specified in § 22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the person engaged in such activity shall submit a registration to the Agency not later than 180 days after adoption of regulations pursuant to § 22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes, or the designation the aquifer protection area pursuant to § 22a-354i-2 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, whichever occurs later. Said person shall simultaneously file a copy of the registration with the Commissioner, Commissioner of Public Health and the affected water company. 
(b)  All registrations shall be provided on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be accompanied by the correct registration fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA Regulations. Such registration forms may be obtained from Town of Avon Planning Department. Such registration forms shall include at least the following information in writing or on maps or drawings: 
(1)  The name, business telephone number, street address and mailing address of the: 
(A)  Registrant; if the registrant is a corporation or limited partnership, the full name of the facility and such corporation or limited partnership as registered with the Connecticut Secretary of State, and any officer or governing or managing body of any partnership, association, firm or corporation, 
(B)  Owner of such facility if different than the registrant, and 
(C)  Manager or operator overseeing the operations of such facility; 
(2)  The location of such facility, using street address or other appropriate method of location, and a map showing the property boundaries of the facility on a 1:24,000 scale United States Geological Survey topographic quadrangle base; 
(3)  An identification of the regulated activity or activities conducted at the facility, as described in 2(a)(34) of the APA Regulations, which regulated activity or activities shall consist of any regulated activity which substantially commenced, was in active operation, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued within the past five years; and 
(4)  A certification by the registrant that the subject regulated activity is in compliance with the best management practices set forth in Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations, as follows, signed after satisfying the statements set forth in the following certification: 
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this registration and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in this document or certification may be punishable as a criminal offense under § 53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law." 
(c)  When deemed necessary to protect a public supply well subject to regulation under § 22a-354c or § 22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Agency may: 
(1)  Require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval a storm water management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA Regulations. If so required, the storm water management plan shall be implemented by the registrant immediately upon its approval; or 
(2)  Require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval the materials management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations. If so required, the materials management plan shall be implemented by the registrant immediately upon its approval. 
(d)  If the Agency determines that a registration is incomplete, it shall reject the registration and notify the registrant of what additional information is required and the date by which it shall be submitted. 
(e)  If the registration is determined to be complete, and the regulated activity is eligible for registration, the Agency shall send written notification of such registration to the registrant. Such registration shall be determined to be complete and eligible if the registrant has not otherwise received a notice of rejection from the Agency, not later than 180 days after the date the registration is received by the Agency. 
(f)  The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all registrations: 
(1)  The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the registrant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the registration may be modified, suspended or revoked; 
(2)  All registrations issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity; 
(3)  A complete registration shall expire five years from the date of receipt of such registration by the Agency; 
(4)  The registrant shall apply to the Agency to renew the registration on a form prescribed by the Agency for a facility prior to expiration of such registration; and 
(5)  If a registered regulated activity is out of business or inactive when registration renewal is required, a five-year allowance shall be in effect from the date the registration expires. If the registrant has not applied to renew the registration within five years of the date the registration expires, the facility is no longer eligible for registration. 
(g)  If a regulated activity which is eligible for registration in accordance with subsection (a) of this section fails to be registered or if the registrant of an active registered activity fails to apply for renewal prior to expiration, the Commissioner or municipal aquifer protection agency, as appropriate, may accept a late registration at their discretion, subject to the limitations in subsection (f)(5) of this section. 
(h)  Any person wishing to assume the benefits under a registration for regulated activities shall apply to transfer such registration on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency. 
SECTION 9. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Any person may apply for a permit to add a regulated activity to a facility where a registered regulated activity occurs. 
(b)  The Agency shall process permit applications for those registrants whose registrations were processed by the Agency pursuant to Section 8 of the APA Regulations. The Commissioner shall process permit applications for regulated activities specified in § 22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes and for those registrants that have registered pursuant to § 22a-354i-7(b)(1) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
(c)  Action shall be taken on permit applications within 35 days after the completion of a public hearing or in the absence of a public hearing within 65 days from the date of receipt of the application. 
(d)  An application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be accompanied by the correct application fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA Regulations. Such permit application forms may be obtained from the Town of Avon Planning Department. Simultaneously with filing an application, the applicant shall send a copy of the application to the Commissioner, the Commissioner of Public Health and the affected water company. An application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The information as required for a registration under Section 8(b) of the APA Regulations shall be provided for the proposed regulated activity; 
(2)  A confirmation and certification that the existing and proposed activity: 
(A)  Remains and shall remain in compliance with Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations, 
(B)  Shall not increase the number of underground storage tanks used for storage of hazardous materials, and 
(C)  Remains and shall remain in compliance with all local, state, and federal environmental laws; 
(3)  A materials management plan in accordance with Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations; 
(4)  A storm water management plan in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA Regulations; 
(5)  The following environmental compliance information with respect to environmental violations which occurred at the facility where the regulated activities are conducted, within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application: 
(A)  Any criminal conviction involving a violation of any environmental protection law, 
(B)  Any civil penalty imposed in any state or federal judicial proceeding, or any penalty exceeding $5,000.00 imposed in any administrative proceeding, and 
(C)  Any judicial or administrative orders issued regarding any such violation together with the dates, case or docket numbers, or other information which identifies the proceeding. For any such proceeding initiated by the state or federal government, the Agency may require submission of a copy of any official document associated with the proceeding, the final judgment or order; 
(6)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the Agency regarding potential threats to the ground water and proposed safeguards; and 
(7)  The following certification signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application, after satisfying the statements set forth in the certification: 
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this document and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in the submitted information is punishable as a criminal offense under § 53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law." 
(e)  The Commissioner, any affected water company or the Commissioner of Public Health may, not later than 30 days after receiving a copy of an application for a permit under this section, submit to the Agency written comments on such application. The Agency shall give due consideration to any such comments, and shall provide a copy of the decision to the Commissioner, the affected water company and the Commissioner of Public Health. 
(f)  To carry out the purposes of the Act, the Agency may grant an application as filed, grant it upon such terms, conditions, limitations or modifications necessary, or deny it. The Agency shall state upon the record the reason for its decision. 
(g)  The Agency may hold a public hearing on an application for a permit in accordance with Section 10 of the APA regulations. 
(h)  The Agency shall not issue a permit unless a complete application has been received and the applicant demonstrates to the Agency's satisfaction that all requirements of this section of the APA regulations have been satisfied and all of the following standards and criteria have been met: 
(1)  The proposed regulated activity shall take place at a facility where a registered regulated activity occurs; 
(2)  The proposed regulated activity shall not increase the number, or storage capacity of underground storage tanks used for hazardous materials except for the replacement of an existing underground storage tank in accordance with Section 12(a)(3) of the APA Regulations; 
(3)  The materials management plan and storm water management plan have been satisfactorily prepared in accordance with Sections 12(a) and 12(b) of the APA Regulations; 
(4)  The applicant has submitted a confirmation and certification that all regulated activities remain and shall remain in compliance with all local, state and federal environmental laws in accordance with subsection (d)(2) of this section; 
(5)  The applicant's compliance record does not indicate: 
(A)  That any noncompliance resulted from indifference to or disregard for the legal requirements, 
(B)  An unwillingness or inability to devote the resources necessary to comply and remain in compliance, or 
(C)  That instances of noncompliance have led to serious environmental harm, harm to human health or safety, or a substantial risk of such harm. 
(6)  The proposed regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with Section 12 of the APA Regulations; 
(7)  The existing regulated activity is being conducted in accordance with Section 12 of the APA Regulations; and 
(8)  The certification required under subsection (d)(7) of this section has been signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application. 
(i)  The Agency may impose reasonable conditions or limitations on any permit issued under this section to assure protection of the ground water, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Best management practices in addition to those set forth in Section 12 of the APA Regulations; and 
(2)  Ground water monitoring. 
(j)  The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all permits: 
(1)  The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked; 
(2)  All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity; 
(3)  The permit shall expire ten years from the date of issuance of such permit by the Agency; and 
(4)  A person shall apply to the Agency to renew the permit on a form prescribed by the Agency prior to expiration of such permit. Such renewal shall be granted upon request by the Agency unless a substantial change in the permitted activity is proposed, or enforcement action with regard to the regulated activity has been taken, in which case, a new permit application shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(k)  The Agency shall notify the applicant or permittee within 15 days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in issuance or denial of a permit to be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality in which the aquifer protection area is located. 
(l)  A permittee may request a modification of a permit from the Agency. Such request shall be on a form prescribed by the Agency, and shall include the facts and reasons supporting the request. The Agency may require the permittee to submit a new application for a permit or renewal in lieu of a modification request. 
(m)  A person wishing to assume the benefits under a permit for regulated activities shall apply to transfer such permit on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency. 
SECTION 10. - Public hearings regarding permit applications. 
(a)  If the Agency decides to hold a public hearing regarding an application for a permit to conduct a regulated activity within an aquifer protection area, such hearing shall commence no later than 65 days after the receipt of such application. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing, in a newspaper having a general circulation in each city/town where the affected aquifer, or any part thereof, is located. 
(c)  The Agency shall send to any affected water company, at least ten days before the hearing, a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any affected water company may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any such hearing. 
(d)  All applications, maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. 
(e)  At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard. 
(f)  The hearing shall be completed within 45 days of its commencement. 
(g)  In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. 
(h)  The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision in accordance with Section 9(k) of the APA Regulations. 
SECTION 11. - Bond and insurance relevant to permit applicants. 
(a)  An applicant may be required to file a bond as a condition of the permit. 
(b)  Any bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit. 
SECTION 12. - Best management practices. 
(a)  Every regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Hazardous materials may be stored above ground within an aquifer protection area only in accordance with the following conditions: 
(A)  Hazardous material shall be stored in a building or under a roof that minimizes storm water entry to the hazardous material storage area, except that a roof is not required for a bulk storage facility as defined in Section 2 of the APA Regulations, 
(B)  Floors within a building or under a roof where hazardous material may be stored shall be constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from deterioration due to spillage of any such material, 
(C)  A structure which may be used for storage or transfer of hazardous material shall be protected from storm water run-on, and ground water intrusion, 
(D)  Hazardous material shall be stored within an impermeable containment area which is capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of such hazardous material present in such area, or 10% of the total volume of all such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released hazardous material from the containment area, 
(E)  Hazardous material shall not be stored with other hazardous materials that are incompatible and may create a hazard of fire, explosion or generation of toxic substances, 
(F)  Hazardous material shall be stored in a container that has been certified to meet state or federal specifications for containers suitable for the transport or storage of such material, 
(G)  Hazardous material shall be stored only in an area that is secured against unauthorized entry by the public, and 
(H)  The requirements of this subdivision are intended to supplement, and not to supersede, any other applicable requirements of federal, state, or local law, including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976. 
(2)  No person shall increase the number of underground storage tanks used to store hazardous materials; 
(3)  An underground storage tank used to store hazardous materials shall not be replaced with a larger tank unless (A) there is no more than a 25% increase in volume of the larger replacement tank, and (B) the larger replacement tank is a double-walled tank with co-axial piping, both meeting new installation component standards pursuant to § 22a-449(d)-1(e) and § 22a-449(d)-102 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and with interstitial monitoring; 
(4)  No person shall use, maintain or install floor drains, dry wells or other infiltration devices or appurtenances which allow the release of waste waters to the ground, unless such release is permitted by the Commissioner in accordance with § 22a-430 or § 22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes; and 
(5)  A materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with the following: 
(A)  A materials management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information with respect to the subject-regulated activity: 
(i)  A pollution prevention assessment consisting of a detailed evaluation of alternatives to the use of hazardous materials or processes and practices that would reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, and implementation of such alternatives where possible and feasible, 
(ii)  A description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of pollution to the aquifer, which shall include the following: 
(aa)  A process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are stored, disposed and used, and where hazardous wastes are generated and subsequently stored and disposed, 
(bb)  An inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or will be manufactured, produced, stored, utilized or otherwise handled, and 
(cc)  A description of waste, including waste waters generated, and a description of how such wastes are handled, stored and disposed, 
(iii)  The name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of the individual(s) responsible for implementing the materials management plan and the individual(s) who should be contacted in an emergency, 
(iv)  A record-keeping system to account for the types, quantities, and disposition of hazardous materials which are manufactured, produced, utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which are discharged or emitted; such record-keeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency, and 
(v)  An emergency response plan for responding to a release of hazardous materials. Such plan shall describe how each such release could result in pollution to the underlying aquifer and shall set forth the methods used or to be used to prevent and abate any such a release; 
(B)  When a materials management plan is required under either Section 8(c) or 9(d) of the APA Regulations, such materials management plan shall be completed and certified by a professional engineer or a certified hazardous materials manager, or, if the facility where the regulated activity is conducted has received and maintained an ISO 14001 environmental management system certification, then the registrant may complete and certify the materials management plan; and 
(C)  The materials management plan shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency. 
(b)  The development and implementation of a storm water management plan required for regulated activities in accordance with Sections 8(c) and 9(d) of the APA Regulations, shall be as follows: A storm water management plan shall assure that storm water run-off generated by the subject regulated activity is (i) managed in a manner so as to prevent pollution of ground water, and (ii) shall comply with all of the requirements for the general permit of the discharge of storm water associated with a commercial activity issued pursuant to § 22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
SECTION 13. - Other State, Federal And Local Laws. 
(a)  Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirement for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Avon, State of Connecticut and the Government of the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses are the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(b)  No person shall conduct any regulated activity within an aquifer protection area which requires zoning or subdivision approval without first having obtained a valid certificate of zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, special exception or variance, or other documentation establishing that the proposal complies with the Town of Avon zoning or subdivision regulations. 
SECTION 14. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Agency may appoint a duly authorized agent to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices of violation or enforcement orders. 
(b)  If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which violates any provision of these regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may: 
(1)  Issue a notice of violation. 
(A)  The notice of violation shall state the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and the necessary action required to correct the violation including without limitation halting the activity in the aquifer protection area. 
(B)  The Agency may request that the person appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit or registration. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of an order under subsection (2) of this section or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law. 
(2)  Issue a written order. 
(A)  Such order shall be issued by certified mail, return receipt requested to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to cease such activity immediately or to correct such facility or condition. The Agency shall send a copy of such order to any affected water company by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(B)  Within ten days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. Any affected water company may testify at the hearing. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and, within ten days of the completion of the hearing, notify the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. 
(3)  Suspend or revoke registration or permit. 
(A)  The Agency may suspend or revoke a registration or a permit if it finds, after a hearing, that the registrant or permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the registration or the permit. Prior to revoking or suspending any registration or permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the registrant or the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct that warrants the intended action. 
(B)  The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the registrant or permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its registration or permit. The Agency shall notify the registrant or permittee of its decision by certified mail within 15 days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of a suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Avon. 
(c)  An order issued pursuant to subsection (b)(2) shall be effective upon issuance, shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises, or withdraws the order, and shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(d)  A court may assess criminal and or civil penalties to any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of the APA regulations in accordance with § 22a-354s(b) and § 22a-354s(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
SECTION 15. - Amendments. 
(a)  These regulations may be amended, changed or repealed in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations. 
(b)  If a complete application is filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the APA regulations as of the date of its filing, the permit issued shall not be required to comply with any changes in regulations taking effect on or after the date that the filing date. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the establishment, amendment, or change of the boundaries of the aquifer protection area or to any changes in the APA Regulations necessary to make the regulations consistent with Chapter 446i of the Connecticut General Statutes as of the date of the Agency's decision. 
SECTION 16. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeal of the Agency's regulation, order, decision or action shall be made in accordance with § 22a-354q of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
SECTION 17. - Conflict and severance. 
(a)  If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations, the provision that imposes the most stringent standards shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part that can be given effect without such valid part or parts. 
(b)  If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations and the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern. 
SECTION 18. - Registration and permit application fees. 
(a)  All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by certified check or money order payable to the Town of Avon at the time the registration or permit application is filed with the Agency. 
(b)  No registration or permit application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct registration/application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. 
(c)  The registration or permit application fee is nonrefundable. 
(d)  Registration or permit application fees shall be based on the following schedule: 
Fee Schedule 
Facility Size Registrations: Small 
(less than 1 acre) Medium 
(1-5 acres) Large 
(more than 5 acres) Industrial 100.00 200.00 300.00 Commercial 100.00 200.00 300.00 Other 100.00 200.00 300.00  
Facility Size Permits: Small 
(less than 1 acre) Medium 
(1-5 acres) Large 
(more than 5 acres) Industrial 100.00 200.00 300.00 Commercial 100.00 200.00 300.00 Other 100.00 200.00 300.00 Materials Management Plan Reviews 100.00 200.00 300.00 Storm water Management Plan Reviews 100.00 200.00 300.00 Public Hearing 250.00 250.00 250.00 Facility Inspection/Monitoring $5.00 per each % of impervious surface $10.00 per each percent of impervious surface $15.00 per each % of impervious surface Regulation Petition 100.00 100.00 100.00 Transfer of Registration or Permit 50.00 50.00 50.00  
(e)  Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Avon are exempt from all fee requirements. 
(f)  The registrant or applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this section. The Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that: 
(1)  The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment or to the public health and safety and the registrant or applicant would reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the registration or permit application fee; or 
(2)  The amount of the registration or permit application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town for reviewing and processing the application. 
(g)  Extra assessments. 
In the event that additional expenses, including but not limited to outside consultants, experts, or legal advisors are incurred in processing the registration or permit application the applicant/registrant may be assessed an additional fee not to exceed $3,000.00 to cover said costs. Said fees are to be estimated by the duly authorized agent and submitted with the application fee and held until the application is completely processed after which time any residual funds pertaining to this assessment are to be returned to the applicant/registrant. 
For the purpose of this assessment, an "outside consultant" means a professional who is not an employee of the Town of Avon including but not limited to engineering, environmental, hydrogeology and hazardous materials management professionals. 
(h)  The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this section. 
SECTION 19. - Effective date of regulations. 
    The APA Regulations, APA boundaries and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon 
(1)  The Commissioner's determination that such regulations are reasonably related to the purpose of ground water protection and not inconsistent with the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies § 22a-354i-1 through § 22a-354i-10; and 
(2)  Filing in the Office of the Town Clerk. 
SECTION 20. - Instructions for completing the municipal registration form for regulated activities in aquifer protection areas.[2] 
(a)  Introduction . The Aquifer Protection Area Program was established to protect large public water supply wells from contamination through land use controls. In accordance with the Town of Avon Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, section 9, new activities using significant quantities of hazardous materials are prohibited from locating within aquifer protection areas, while existing facilities are required to register their use. Registration allows the facility to continue to operate at that site, including changing or expanding operations on the site. Basic best management practices for handling and storage of hazardous materials are required. The facility must develop and implement a materials management plan, which is maintained at the facility and submitted to the Aquifer Protection Agency, upon request. Guidance for developing such plans is available from the Town of Avon and the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). 
    Any questions that you may have regarding the local aquifer protection area program should be directed to the Town of Avon, Planning & Community Development, at (860) 409-4328. 
(b)  Who may register a regulated activity in an aquifer protection area? Any person engaged in a regulated activity, as defined in section 2(a)(34) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations (see appendix A of these instructions), which 
(1)  Was active on, or 
(2)  Has been active within the past five years of, or 
(3)  Held a municipal building permit before, 
the date an applicable aquifer protection area was designated shall register the regulated activity. 
(c)  Do I register with the DEP or the municipal Aquifer Protection Agency? You must register with the DEP if the regulated activity is to be conducted at a facility that: 
(1)  Holds one or more of the following permits: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) or Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facility (TSDF); 
(2)  Is a public service company; 
(3)  Is a large-quantity hazardous waste generator; or 
(4)  Is a state agency, 
as specified in section 22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS). 
    To register with the DEP, complete and submit to DEP the registration form for regulated activities in aquifer protection areas (DEP-APA-REG-100). This form is available on the web at www.ct.gov/dep/aquiferprotection or by calling DEP at (860) 424-3020. 
    All other regulated activities shall register with the local municipal Aquifer Protection Agency in the town in which the facility is located by completing and submitting the municipal registration form for regulated activities in aquifer protection areas. If a facility is located in more than one municipality, the facility must register with each municipality. 
    The Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection may exempt a regulated activity from registering if it is determined that such activity does not and will not pose a threat to any public supply well due to the nature of the hazardous materials used. Any questions that you may have regarding exemptions should be directed to DEP at (860) 424-3020. 
(d)  Time frame for registration. If the regulated activity is specified in section 2(a)(34) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, the person engaged in such activity shall submit a registration to the Aquifer Protection Agency not later than 180 days after municipal adoption of regulations pursuant to CGS section 22a-354p; or the designation of the aquifer protection area pursuant to RCSA [Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies] section 22a-354i-2, whichever occurs later, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the commissioner. 
A complete registration will expire five years from the date of receipt of a registration. 
Any person proposing to continue a previously registered regulated activity must apply for renewal of the existing registration by submitting a sufficient registration at least 180 days prior to the expiration date of the existing registration. 
If a registration renewal is not submitted prior to the expiration date of the existing registration, then the existing registration is deemed to have expired. 
If you are applying for a modification of an active, valid registration, you may be required to submit certain parts of, or an entire, registration. For further information concerning modifications, please contact the Town of Avon, Planning & Community Development, at (860) 409-4328. 
If you are registering a vacant site where currently no regulated activity is taking place, you must certify that applicable best management practices are being met at the site. 
(e)  How to apply. Your registration must include the following: 
 A municipal registration form for regulated activities in aquifer protection areas and all supporting documents, 
 The applicable registration fee, paid by check or money order, made payable to the "Town of Avon ". 
You must submit the above materials together as a package to: 
Town of Avon 
Planning & Zoning Commission/Aquifer Protection Agency 
60 West Main Street 
Avon, Connecticut 06001-3743 
The registrant shall mail a copy of the completed registration form to the following: 
(1)  Commissioner of the DEP, 
(2)  The commissioner of public health, and 
(3)  The affected water company. 
See appendix C of these instructions for specific DEP, Department of Public Health and water company contacts. 
When submitting your registration, label your supporting documents as directed on your registration form and always include, on each document, the applicant's name. When additional space is necessary to answer a question stated in the registration, please insert additional sheets by the appropriate question. Label each sheet with the applicant's name, along with the corresponding part number and question number indicated on the registration form. You should retain a copy of all documents for your files. 
(f)  Part I: registration type. Check the appropriate box to specify if the registration is for a new registration, a renewal of an existing registration, or a modification of an existing registration. If you are applying for a renewal or modification of an existing registration, or if a permit has been obtained for a new regulated activity at the facility, please identify the previous or existing registration or permit number in the space provided. Please note that if you are seeking a modification, you should consult the Town of Avon, Planning & Community Development, prior to submitting a registration to determine whether completing a registration form is necessary. 
(g)  Part II: fee information. A fee, based on the schedule in section 18, must be submitted for each registration you are seeking. Each separate facility (or noncontiguous property) requires a separate registration and fee. The registration will not be processed without the fee. The payment should be in the form of a check or money order made payable to "Town of Avon". 
(h)  Part III: registrant information . When completing this part, please use the following standards: 
  Name -Provide the full, legal company/firm name. If identifying an entity registered with the Secretary of the State, fill in the name exactly as it is shown on such registration. If identifying an individual, provide the full legal name (include title and suffix) in the following format: title (Ms., Dr., etc.); first name; middle initial; last name; suffix (Jr., P.E., Ph.D., etc.) 
  Phone -Unless otherwise indicated, the phone number provided should be the number where the individual can be contacted during the daytime business hours. 
  Contact person -Provide the name of the specific individual within the company whom Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency may contact. 
(1)  Registrant -Fill in the registrant's name, mailing address and phone number. Check the boxes describing the registrant's interest in the property or facility. Provide the company name. Indicate if there are coregistrants and if so, provide the required information for each registrant. 
(2)  Primary contact -If you have authorized a consultant, engineer, attorney or other individual to act for you during the processing of this registration, complete this section. The municipality will direct copies of all correspondence and inquiries to this primary contact. 
(3)  Attorney -It is not required that an applicant be represented by an attorney or any other agent. If you do have an attorney representing you for this process, complete this section. 
(4)  Facility operator -If the registrant is not the operator of the affected facility complete this section. 
(5)  Facility owner -If the registrant is not the owner of the affected facility complete this section. 
(6)  Engineers or consultants -List any engineers or other consultants employed or retained to assist in preparing the registration or to design, construct or operate the proposed activity. Be sure to identify the service that is being provided by each. 
(i)  Part IV: facility information. 
(1)  The facility name should be the name by which the facility is commonly known and/or uniquely identified. 
The "facility" (as defined in section 2(a)(13) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations) means property where a regulated activity is conducted by any person, including, without limitation, any buildings located on the property that are owned or leased by that person; and includes contiguous land owned, leased, or for which there is an option to purchase by that person. 
The information provided as the location address should be the address of the property at which the regulated activity takes place. Include the street address and municipality. If the property does not have a street number, describe the location in terms of the distance and direction from an obvious landmark such as an intersection with another roadway, a bridge, or a river. For example, "... on River Street, approximately 1,000 feet north of its intersection with Bear Swamp Road." 
(2)  Check off all regulated activities conducted at the facility. Note that the descriptions of regulated activities listed in the registration form are simplified. The full descriptions, which include some exceptions, are provided in section 2(a)(34) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, reproduced in this document as appendix A. These regulated activities are further modified by exceptions listed in section 4(c) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, also included in appendix A of these instructions, which exempts residential activities, volumes of hazardous materials below given thresholds, agricultural activities, as well as several other minor categories. 
(j)  Part V: best management practices. Registrants must certify that the regulated activities at the facility are in compliance with the best management practices (BMPs) specified in section 12 of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, in order to complete the registration form. Such BMPs are attached as appendix B of these instructions. Most facilities will already be in compliance with the very basic BMPs in section 12 of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations. Please note however, that development and implementation of a materials management plan is also required by section 12 of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations. A brief guidance document and sample plan is available from the Town of Avon Aquifer Protection Agency or on the DEP web site at www.ct.gov/dep/aquiferprotection. A materials management plan must be maintained at the facility and made available for inspection if requested by a representative of DEP or the Town of Avon Aquifer Protection Agency. 
The registrant must check the box by each of the five BMPs as verification that the facility is in compliance with all of the BMPs. The registrant and the operator, if different from the registrant, must sign the certification. 
(k)  Part VI: supporting documents. Check the appropriate box by each attachment as verification that all applicable attachments have been submitted. 
Please label all attachments as referenced in the registration form and these instructions and be sure to include the name of the registrant. 
The following attachment is required for all registrations: 
Attachment A: a facility boundary map. Submit, as attachment A, an eight-and-one-half-inch x 11-inch copy of the relevant portion of a United States Geological Survey (USGS) quadrangle map, at a scale of 1:24,000, indicating the exact location of the facility (property) boundaries, in accordance with section 2(a)(13) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations. See figure A at the end of these instructions for an example of how a USGS map must be labeled when submitted. If the site boundary is too small to show on a map with a scale of 1:24,000, then submit a local property or assessor's map at a scale which clearly shows the facility boundaries. See figure B at the end of these instructions as an example. 
It is important that you accurately locate the facility on this map. An inaccurate description of the facility location may delay the processing of your registration. Refer to the definition of "facility" in part IV, item (1) of these instructions. 
Please note: This map is a critical piece of the registration. Facilities that have registrations for existing regulated activities are allowed to continue to operate, expand and change with minimal restrictions, as well as apply for permits to add new regulated activities within this boundary. New regulated activities are prohibited at unregistered facilities in aquifer protection areas. 
Attachment B: materials management plan. Submit a materials management plan, as attachment Bony if requested by the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency. Otherwise a copy of the materials management plan must be maintained on site. A materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with section 12(a)(5) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations. 
Attachment C: stormwater management plan. Submit a stormwater management plan, as attachment C, only if requested by the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency. If requested, a stormwater management plan shall be implemented in accordance with section 12(a) 5(b) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations to assure that stormwater runoff generated by the subject regulated activity is managed to prevent pollution of groundwater. 
(l)  Part VII: registrant certification . After the registration has been completed it must be reviewed and signed by both the registrant and the individual(s) who actually prepared the registration. By their signature, they certify that, to the best of their knowledge and belief, the information contained in the application, including all attachments, is true, accurate and complete. 
The certification of the registration package shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  For an individual(s) or sole proprietorship: by the individual(s) or proprietor, respectively; 
(2)  For a corporation: by a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president; 
(3)  For a limited liability company (LLC): a manager, if management of the LLC is vested in a manager(s) in accordance with the company's "articles of organization", or a member of the LLC if no authority is vested in a manager(s); 
(4)  For a partnership: by a general partner; 
(5)  For a municipal, state, or federal agency or department: by either a principal executive officer, a ranking elected official, or by other representatives of such applicant authorized by law. 
A registration will be considered incomplete unless all required signatures are provided. 
(Amend. of 3-29-2010(1)) 


Appendix A: Regulations of Town of Avon 
Section 2(a)(34) 
Definition of a regulated activity 
(34)  "Regulated activity" means any of the following activities, which are located or conducted, wholly or partially, in an aquifer protection area, except as provided for in sections 22a-354i-5(c) and 22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies: 
(A)  Underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum, to the extent such activity is not preempted by federal law, or hazardous material, except for: 
(i)  An underground storage tank that contains number two fuel oil and is located more than 500 feet from a public supply well subject to regulation under section 22a-354c or section 22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, or 
(ii)  Underground electrical facilities such as transformers, breakers, or cables containing oil for cooling or insulation purposes which are owned and operated by a public service company. 
(B)  Oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale or fleet use, 
(C)  On-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale, 
(D)  Repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of vehicles, involving the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including solvents, lubricants, paints, brake fluids, transmission fluids or the generation of hazardous wastes, 
(E)  Salvage operations of metal or vehicle parts, 
(F)  Wastewater discharges to groundwater other than domestic sewage and stormwater, except for discharges from the following that have received a permit issued by the Commissioner pursuant to section 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes: 
(i)  A pump and treat system for groundwater remediation, 
(ii)  A potable water treatment system, 
(iii)  Heat pump system, 
(iv)  Noncontact cooling water system, or 
(v)  Swimming pools, 
(G)  Car or truck washing, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(H)  Production or refining of chemicals, including, without limitation, hazardous materials or asphalt, 
(I)  Clothes or cloth cleaning service which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including, without limitation, dry-cleaning solvents, 
(J)  Industrial laundry service which involves the cleaning of clothes or cloth contaminated by hazardous material, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(K)  Generation of electrical power by means of fossil fuels, except for: 
(i)  Generation of electrical power by an emergency engine as defined by section 22a-174-22(a)(3) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or 
(ii)  Generation of electrical power by means of natural gas or propane, 
(L)  Production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical equipment involving the use, storage or disposal of any hazardous material or involving metal plating, degreasing of parts or equipment, or etching operations, 
(M)  Embalming or crematory services which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(N)  Furniture stripping operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(O)  Furniture finishing operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(P)  Storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste subject to a permit under sections 22a-449(c)-100 to 22a-449(c)-110, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, 
(Q)  Biological or chemical testing, analysis or research which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and provided that on-site testing of a public supply well by a public water utility is not a regulated activity, 
(R)  Pest control services which involve storage, mixing or loading of pesticides or other hazardous materials, 
(S)  Photographic finishing which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all wastewater from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(T)  Production or fabrication of metal products which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including: 
(i)  Metal cleaning or degreasing with industrial solvents, 
(ii)  Metal plating, or 
(iii)  Metal etching, 
(U)  Printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(V)  Accumulation or storage of waste oil, antifreeze or spent lead-acid batteries which are subject to a general permit issued under sections 22a-208(i) and 22a-454(e)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes, 
(W)  Production of rubber, resin cements, elastomers or plastic, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(X)  Storage of deicing chemicals, unless such storage takes place within a weather-tight water-proof structure for the purpose of retail sale or for the purpose of deicing parking areas or access roads to parking areas, 
(Y)  Accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing, burning, transfer or composting of solid waste which is subject to a permit issued by the Commissioner pursuant to sections 22a-207b, 22a-208a, and 22a-208c of the Connecticut General Statutes, except for a potable water treatment sludge disposal area, 
(Z)  Dying, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning or finishing of leather, which activity involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(AA)  Production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated wood, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, 
(BB)  Pulp production processes that involve bleaching. 
Appendix A: 
Regulations of Town of Avon 
Section 4(c) 
(c)  The following are not regulated activities: 
(1)  Any activity conducted at a residence without compensation; 
(2)  Any activity involving the use or storage of no more than two and one-half gallons of each type of hazardous material on site at any one time, provided the total of all hazardous materials on site does not exceed 55 gallons at any one time; 
(3)  Any agricultural activity regulated pursuant to section 22a-354m(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(4)  Any activity provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor, 
(B)  Such activity involves no more than ten percent of the floor area in the building where the activity takes place, 
(C)  Any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times, 
(D)  All wastewaters generated by such activity are lawfully disposed through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and 
(E)  Such activity does not involve: 
(i)  Repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including, without limitation,, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles, 
(ii)  Underground storage of any hazardous material, or 
(iii)  Above-ground storage of more than 110 gallons of hazardous materials; 
(5)  Any activity solely involving the use of lubricating oil provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such activity does not involve cleaning of metals with chlorinated solvents at the facility, 
(B)  Such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor, 
(C)  Any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times, and 
(D)  Such activity does not involve: 
(i)  Repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including, without limitation,, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles, 
(ii)  Underground storage of any hazardous material, or 
(iii)  Above-ground storage of more than 110 gallons of such lubricating oil and associated hazardous waste; and 
(6)  any activity involving the dispensing of oil or petroleum from an above-ground storage tank or tanks with an aggregate volume of 2,000 gallons or less provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such dispensing activity takes place solely on a paved surface which is covered by a roof, 
(B)  The above-ground storage tank (or tanks) is a double-walled tank with overfill alarms, and 
(C)  All associated piping is either above ground, or has secondary containment. 
Appendix B: 
Regulations of Town of Avon 
Section 12 
Best Management Practices (BMPs) for Regulated Activities 
    The following are the State BMPs; Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies Section 22a-354i-9(A): 
(a)  Every regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Hazardous materials may be stored above ground within an aquifer protection area only in accordance with the following conditions: 
(A)  Hazardous material shall be stored in a building or under a roof that minimizes stormwater entry to the hazardous material storage area, except that a roof is not required for a bulk storage facility as defined in section 22a-354i-1(6) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, 
(B)  Floors within a building or under a roof where hazardous material may be stored shall be constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from deterioration due to spillage of any such material, 
(C)  A structure which may be used for storage or transfer of hazardous material shall be protected from stormwater run-on, and groundwater intrusion, 
(D)  Hazardous material shall be stored within an impermeable containment area which is capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of such hazardous material present in such area, or ten percent of the total volume of all such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released hazardous material from the containment area, 
(E)  Hazardous material shall not be stored with other hazardous materials that are incompatible and may create a hazard of fire, explosion or generation of toxic substances, 
(F)  Hazardous material shall be stored only in a container that has been certified by a State or Federal agency or the American Society of Testing Materials as suitable for the transport or storage of such material, 
(G)  Hazardous material shall be stored only in an area that is secured against unauthorized entry by the public, and 
(H)  The requirements of this subdivision are intended to supplement, and not to supersede, any other applicable requirements of Federal, State, or Local law, including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended; 
(2)  No person shall increase the number of underground storage tanks used to store hazardous materials; 
(3)  An underground storage tank used to store hazardous materials shall not be replaced with a larger tank unless: 
(A)  There is no more than a 25 percent increase in volume of the larger replacement tank, and 
(B)  The larger replacement tank is a double-walled tank with coaxial piping, both meeting new installation component standards pursuant to 22a-449(d)-1(e) and 22a-449(d)-102 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and with interstitial monitoring; 
(4)  No person shall use, maintain or install floor drains, dry wells or other infiltration devices or appurtenances which allow the release of wastewaters to the ground, unless such release is permitted by the Commissioner in accordance with sections 22a-430 or 22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes; and 
(5)  A materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with the following: 
(A)  A materials management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information with respect to the subject regulated activity: 
(i)  A pollution prevention assessment consisting of a detailed evaluation of alternatives to the use of hazardous materials or processes and practices that would reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, and implementation of such alternatives where possible and feasible, 
(ii)  A description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of pollution to the aquifer, which shall include the following: 
(a)  A process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are stored, disposed and used, and where hazardous wastes are generated and subsequently stored and disposed, 
(b)  An inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or will be manufactured, produced, stored, utilized or otherwise handled, and 
(c)  A description of waste, including wastewaters generated, and a description of how such wastes are handled, stored and disposed, 
(iii)  The name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of the individual(s) responsible for implementing the materials management plan and the individual(s) who should be contacted in an emergency, 
(iv)  A recordkeeping system to account for the types, quantities, and disposition of hazardous materials which are manufactured, produced, utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which are discharged or emitted; such recordkeeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency, and 
(v)  An emergency response plan for responding to a release of hazardous materials. Such plan shall describe how each such release could result in pollution to the underlying aquifer and shall set forth the methods used or to be used to prevent and abate any such a release; 
(B)  When a materials management plan is required under either section 22a-354i-7(d) or 22a-354i-8(c), such materials management plan shall be completed and certified by a professional engineer or a certified hazardous materials manager, or, if the facility where the regulated activity is conducted has received and maintained an ISO 14001 environmental management system certification, then the registrant may complete and certify the materials management plan; and 
(C)  The materials management plan shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency. 
(b)  The development and implementation of a stormwater management plan required for regulated activities in accordance with sections 8(c) and 9(d) of the APA regulations, shall be as follows: A stormwater management plan shall assure that stormwater runoff generated by the subject regulated activity is: 
(i)  Managed in a manner so as to prevent pollution of groundwater, and 
(ii)  Shall comply with all of the requirements for the general permit of the discharge of stormwater associated with a commercial activity issued pursuant to section 22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Appendix C: Contacts 
Department of Environmental Protection 
Copies of forms being submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection shall be directed to: 
AQUIFER PROTECTION PROGRAM 
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
79 ELM STREET 
HARTFORD, CT 06106-5127 
Department of Public Health 
Copies of forms being submitted to the Department of Public Health shall be directed to: 
DRINKING WATER DIVISION 
CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
410 CAPITOL AVENUE, MS #51 WAT 
HARTFORD, CT 06134-0308 
Water Company 
Copies of forms shall be sent to the affected water company. A listing of the possible water company contacts is as follows: 
AVON WATER COMPANY 
14 WEST MAIN STREET 
AVON, CT 06001 
CONNECTICUT WATER COMPANY 
UNIONVILLE OFFICE 
25 NEW BRITAIN AVENUE 
UNIONVILLE, CT 06085 









Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Use these instructions to complete the registration form for regulated activities in Aquifer Protection Areas. These instructions are not a substitute for the requirements of any relevant statutes or regulations. You should review all applicable laws prior to completing the registration form. Remember, it is your responsibility to comply with all applicable laws. 
A completed registration form must be submitted for each separate facility (or noncontiguous property). 

SECTION 21. - Instructions for completing the municipal permit application form to add a regulated activity to a registered facility in an aquifer protection area.[3] 
(a)  Introduction. The Aquifer Protection Area Program was established to protect large public water supply wells from contamination through land use controls. In accordance with the Town of Avon Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, section 9, new activities using significant quantities of hazardous materials are prohibited from locating within Aquifer Protection Areas, while existing facilities are required to register their use. Registration allows the facility to continue to operate at that site. In addition, a registrant may apply for a permit to add (or change to) a new regulated activity. Basic best management practices for handling and storage of hazardous materials are required. The facility must develop and implement a materials management plan and a stormwater management plan which are maintained at the facility and submitted to the Aquifer Protection Agency. Guidance for developing such plans is available from the Town of Avon and the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). 
Any questions that you may have regarding the local Aquifer Protection Area should be directed to the Town of Avon, Planning & Community Development, at (860) 409-4328. 
(b)  Who may apply for a permit to add a regulated activity to a registered facility? Any person may apply for a permit to add or change a regulated activity at a facility that currently holds a registration for regulated activities in Aquifer Protection Areas. 
(c)  Do I apply for a permit with the DEP or the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency? You must apply to DEP for a permit to add or change a regulated activity if the registered facility: 
(1)  Holds one or more of the following State permits: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) or Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facility (TSDF); 
(2)  Is a public service company; 
(3)  Is a large-quantity hazardous waste generator; or 
(4)  Is a state agency, 
as specified in Section 22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS). 
To obtain a permit from DEP, complete and submit to DEP the permit application to add a regulated activity to a registered facility in an Aquifer Protection Area (DEP-APA-APP-200). This form is available on the web at www.ct.gov/dep/aquiferprotection or by calling DEP at (860) 424-3020. 
All other registered facilities must apply for a local permit to add a regulated activity with the municipal Aquifer Protection Agency in the town in which the facility is located by completing and submitting the municipal permit application to add a regulated activity to a registered facility in an Aquifer Protection Area. If a facility is located in more than one municipality, the facility must apply with each municipality. 
(d)  Time frame for permits. A permit to add a regulated activity to a registered facility must be obtained prior to commencement of the new regulated activity. To allow sufficient time for processing, such permit application should be submitted to Town of Avon, Planning & Community Development, at least 180 days prior to the anticipated commencement date of such regulated activity. 
A permit will expire ten years from the date of issuance of the permit. 
Any person proposing to continue a previously permitted regulated activity must apply for renewal of the existing permit by submitting a sufficient application at least 180 days prior to the expiration date of the existing permit. 
If a renewal application is not submitted prior to the expiration date of the existing permit, then the existing permit is deemed to have expired. 
If you are applying for a modification of an active, valid permit, you may be required to submit certain parts of, or an entire, application. For further information concerning modifications, please contact the Town of Avon Aquifer Protection Agency. 
(e)  How to apply. Your application must include the following: 
 A Municipal Permit Application Form to Add a Regulated Activity to a Registered Facility in an Aquifer Protection Area and all supporting documents, 
 The applicable application fee, based on the schedule in Section 18, paid by check or money order, made payable to the "Town of Avon". 
You must submit the above materials together as a package to: 
Town of Avon 
Planning & Zoning Commission/Aquifer Protection Agency 
60 West Main Street 
Avon, Connecticut 06001-3743 
The applicant shall mail a copy of the completed permit application form to the following: 
(1)  Commissioner of the DEP, 
(2)  The Commissioner of Public Health, and 
(3)  The affected water company. 
See appendix C of these instructions for specific DEP, Department of Public Health and water company contacts. 
When submitting your application, label your supporting documents as directed on your application form and always include, on each document, the applicant's name. When additional space is necessary to answer a question stated in the application, please insert additional sheets by the appropriate question. Label each sheet with the applicant's name, along with the corresponding part number and question number indicated on the application form. You should retain a copy of all documents for your files. 
(f)  Part I: application type. Check the appropriate box to specify if the application is for a new permit, a renewal of an existing permit, or a modification of an existing permit. Please provide the existing aquifer protection registration number in the space provided. If you are applying for a renewal or modification of an existing permit, or if a permit has been obtained for a new regulated activity at the facility, please provide the existing aquifer protection permit number in the space provided. Please note that if you are seeking a modification, you should consult the Town of Avon Aquifer Protection Agency prior to submitting an application to determine whether completing an application form is necessary. 
(g)  Part II: Fee information. A fee, based on the schedule in section 18, must be submitted for each permit you are seeking. Each separate facility (or noncontiguous property) requires a separate application and fee. The application will not be processed without the fee. The payment should be in the form of a check or money order made payable to "Town of Avon". 
(h)  Part III: applicant information . When completing this part, please use the following standards: 
  Name -Provide the full, legal company/firm name. If identifying an entity registered with the Secretary of the State, fill in the name exactly as it is shown on such application. If identifying an individual, provide the full legal name (include title and suffix) in the following format: Title (Ms., Dr., etc.); first name; middle initial; last name; suffix (Jr., P.E., Ph.D., etc.) 
  Phone -Unless otherwise indicated, the phone number provided should be the number where the individual can be contacted during the daytime business hours. 
  Contact person -Provide the name of the specific individual within the company whom the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency may contact. 
1.  Applicant -Fill in the applicant's name, mailing address and phone number. Check the boxes describing the applicant's interest in the property or facility. Provide the company name. Indicate if there are coapplicants and if so, provide the required information for each applicant. 
2.  Primary contact -If you have authorized a consultant, engineer, attorney or other individual to act for you during the processing of this application, complete this section. The municipality will direct copies of all correspondence and inquiries to this primary contact. 
3.  Attorney -It is not required that an applicant be represented by an attorney or any other agent. If you do have an attorney representing you for this application, complete this section. 
4.  Facility operator -If the applicant is not the operator of the affected facility complete this section. 
5.  Facility owner -If the applicant is not the owner of the affected facility complete this section. 
6.  Engineers or consultants -List any engineers or other consultants employed or retained to assist in preparing the application or to design, construct or operate the proposed activity. Be sure to identify the service that is being provided by each. 
(i)  Part IV: registrant information. Registrant-Complete the following if different than the applicant: Fill in the registrant's name, mailing address and phone number. Check the boxes describing the registrant's interest in the property or facility. Provide the company name. Indicate if there are coregistrants and if so, provide the required information for each registrant. 
(j)  Part V: Facility information. 
1.  The facility name should be the name by which the facility is commonly known and/or uniquely identified. 
The "facility" (as defined in section 2(a)(13) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations) means property where a regulated activity is conducted by any person, including, without limitation, any buildings located on the property that are owned or leased by that person; and includes contiguous land owned, leased, or for which there is an option to purchase by that person. 
The information provided as the location address should be the address of the property at which the regulated activity takes place. Include the street address and municipality. If the property does not have a street number, describe the location in terms of the distance and direction from an obvious landmark such as an intersection with another roadway, a bridge, or a river. For example, "... on River Street, approximately 1,000 feet north of its intersection with Bear Swamp Road." 
2.  In the appropriate column of the table, check all regulated activities that: 
a)  Are registered at the facility, 
b)  Are registered and will continue to be conducted at the facility, 
c)  Are not registered, but are proposed to be conducted at the facility as a permitted activity. 
Note that the descriptions listed in the application form are simplified. The full descriptions, which include some exceptions, are provided in section 2(a)(34) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, reproduced in this document as appendix A. These regulated activities are further modified by exceptions listed in 
Section 4(c) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, also included in appendix A of these instructions, which exempts residential activities, volumes of hazardous materials below given thresholds, agricultural activities, as well as several other minor categories. 
(k)  Part VI: best management practices . Applicants must certify that the regulated activities at the facility are in compliance with the best management practices (BMPs) specified in section 12 of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations in order to complete the application form. A copy of the BMPs is attached as appendix B of these instructions. Most registered facilities will already be in compliance with the basic BMPs in section 12 of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations. Please note however, that development and approval of a materials management plan and a stormwater management plan are required by section 12(a)(5) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations. A brief guidance document and sample plans are available from the Town of Avon Aquifer Protection Agency or on the DEP web site at www.ct.gov/dep/aquiferprotection. The materials management plan and stormwater management plan must be submitted with the application. In addition, the plans must be maintained at the facility and made available for inspection if requested by the Town of Avon Aquifer Protection Agency. 
The applicant must check the box by each of the five BMPs as verification that the facility is in compliance with all of the BMPs. The applicant and the operator, if different from the applicant, must sign the certification. 
(l)  Part VII: supporting documents. Check the appropriate box by each attachment as verification that all applicable attachments have been submitted. 
Please label all attachments as referenced in the application form and these instructions and be sure to include the name of the applicant. 
Attachment A: a facility boundary map. Submit a copy of the registered facility boundary map as it was submitted with the original registration, as attachment A. (If unavailable, contact the Town of Avon, Planning & Community Development, at (860) 409-4328, for a copy.) 
Note: The permitted activities must take place within the registered facility boundary. 
Attachment B: materials management plan . Submit a materials management plan, required by section 12(a)(5) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, as attachment B. A copy of the materials management plan must be maintained on site. A materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with section 12(a)(5) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations. 
Attachment C: stormwater management plan . Submit a stormwater management plan, required by section 12(a)(5)(B) of the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, as attachment C. A copy of the stormwater management plan must be maintained on site. A stormwater management plan shall be implemented to assure that stormwater runoff generated by the subject regulated activity is managed in a manner so as to prevent pollution of ground water and shall comply with all of the stormwater management plan requirements of the DEP's general permit for the discharge of storm water associated with a commercial activity. 
Attachment D: environmental compliance information form . Provide the applicant's record of compliance with the environmental laws of Connecticut, any other state and the Federal government. The applicant's environmental compliance record may be considered by the agency when reviewing a permit application. All permit applications must include a completed environmental compliance information form as attachment D. 
(m)  Part VIII: applicant certification. After the application has been completed it must be reviewed and signed by both the applicant and the individual(s) who actually prepared the application. By their signature, they certify that, to the best of their knowledge and belief, the information contained in the application, including all attachments, is true, accurate and complete. 
The certification of the application package shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  For an individual(s) or sole proprietorship: by the individual(s) or proprietor, respectively; 
(2)  For a corporation: by a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president; 
(3)  For a limited liability company (LLC): a manager, if management of the LLC is vested in a manager(s) in accordance with the company's "articles of organization" or a member of the LLC if no authority is vested in a manager(s); 
(4)  For a partnership: by a general partner; 
(5)  For a municipal, state, or federal agency or department: by either a principal executive officer, a ranking elected official, or by other representatives of such applicant authorized by law. 
An application will be considered incomplete unless all required signatures are provided. 
(Amend. of 3-29-2010(2)) 
Appendix A: Regulations of Town of Avon 
Section 2(a)(34) 
Definition of a regulated activity 
(34)  "Regulated activity" means any of the following activities, which are located or conducted, wholly or partially, in an aquifer protection area, except as provided for in sections 22a-354i-5(c) and 22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies: 
(A)  Underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum, to the extent such activity is not preempted by federal law, or hazardous material, except for: 
(i)  An underground storage tank that contains number two fuel oil and is located more than 500 feet from a public supply well subject to regulation under section 22a-354c or section 22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, or 
(ii)  Underground electrical facilities such as transformers, breakers, or cables containing oil for cooling or insulation purposes which are owned and operated by a public service company. 
(B)  Oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale or fleet use, 
(C)  On-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale, 
(D)  Repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of vehicles, involving the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including solvents, lubricants, paints, brake fluids, transmission fluids or the generation of hazardous wastes, 
(E)  Salvage operations of metal or vehicle parts, 
(F)  Wastewater discharges to groundwater other than domestic sewage and stormwater, except for discharges from the following that have received a permit issued by the Commissioner pursuant to section 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes: 
(i)  A pump and treat system for groundwater remediation, 
(ii)  A potable water treatment system, 
(iii)  Heat pump system, 
(iv)  Noncontact cooling water system, or 
(v)  Swimming pools, 
(G)  Car or truck washing, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(H)  Production or refining of chemicals, including, without limitation, hazardous materials or asphalt, 
(I)  Clothes or cloth cleaning service which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including, without limitation, dry-cleaning solvents, 
(J)  Industrial laundry service which involves the cleaning of clothes or cloth contaminated by hazardous material, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(K)  Generation of electrical power by means of fossil fuels, except for: 
(i)  Generation of electrical power by an emergency engine as defined by section 22a-174-22(a)(3) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or 
(ii)  Generation of electrical power by means of natural gas or propane, 
(L)  Production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical equipment involving the use, storage or disposal of any hazardous material or involving metal plating, degreasing of parts or equipment, or etching operations, 
(M)  Embalming or crematory services which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(N)  Furniture stripping operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(O)  Furniture finishing operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(P)  Storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste subject to a permit under sections 22a-449(c)-100 to 22a-449(c)-110, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, 
(Q)  Biological or chemical testing, analysis or research which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all wastewaters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and provided that on-site testing of a public supply well by a public water utility is not a regulated activity, 
(R)  Pest control services which involve storage, mixing or loading of pesticides or other hazardous materials, 
(S)  Photographic finishing which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all wastewater from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, 
(T)  Production or fabrication of metal products which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including: 
(i)  Metal cleaning or degreasing with industrial solvents, 
(ii)  Metal plating, or 
(iii)  Metal etching, 
(U)  Printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(V)  Accumulation or storage of waste oil, antifreeze or spent lead-acid batteries which are subject to a general permit issued under sections 22a-208(i) and 22a-454(e)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes, 
(W)  Production of rubber, resin cements, elastomers or plastic, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(X)  Storage of deicing chemicals, unless such storage takes place within a weather-tight water-proof structure for the purpose of retail sale or for the purpose of deicing parking areas or access roads to parking areas, 
(Y)  Accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing, burning, transfer or composting of solid waste which is subject to a permit issued by the Commissioner pursuant to sections 22a-207b, 22a-208a, and 22a-208c of the Connecticut General Statutes, except for a potable water treatment sludge disposal area, 
(Z)  Dying, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning or finishing of leather, which activity involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, 
(AA)  Production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated wood, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, 
(BB)  Pulp production processes that involve bleaching. 
Appendix A: 
Regulations of Town of Avon 
Section 4(c) 
(c)  The following are not regulated activities: 
(1)  Any activity conducted at a residence without compensation; 
(2)  Any activity involving the use or storage of no more than two and one-half gallons of each type of hazardous material on site at any one time, provided the total of all hazardous materials on site does not exceed 55 gallons at any one time; 
(3)  Any agricultural activity regulated pursuant to section 22a-354m(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(4)  Any activity provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor, 
(B)  Such activity involves no more than ten percent of the floor area in the building where the activity takes place, 
(C)  Any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times, 
(D)  All wastewaters generated by such activity are lawfully disposed through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and 
(E)  Such activity does not involve: 
(i)  Repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including, without limitation,, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles, 
(ii)  Underground storage of any hazardous material, or 
(iii)  Above-ground storage of more than 110 gallons of hazardous materials; 
(5)  Any activity solely involving the use of lubricating oil provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such activity does not involve cleaning of metals with chlorinated solvents at the facility, 
(B)  Such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor, 
(C)  Any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times, and 
(D)  Such activity does not involve: 
(i)  Repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including, without limitation,, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles, 
(ii)  Underground storage of any hazardous material, or 
(iii)  Above-ground storage of more than 110 gallons of such lubricating oil and associated hazardous waste; and 
(6)  any activity involving the dispensing of oil or petroleum from an above-ground storage tank or tanks with an aggregate volume of 2,000 gallons or less provided all the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  Such dispensing activity takes place solely on a paved surface which is covered by a roof, 
(B)  The above-ground storage tank (or tanks) is a double-walled tank with overfill alarms, and 
(C)  All associated piping is either above ground, or has secondary containment. 
Appendix B: 
Regulations of Town of Avon 
Section 12 
Best Management Practices (BMPs) for Regulated Activities 
    The following are the State BMPs; Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies Section 22a-354i-9(A): 
(a)  Every regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Hazardous materials may be stored above ground within an aquifer protection area only in accordance with the following conditions: 
(A)  Hazardous material shall be stored in a building or under a roof that minimizes stormwater entry to the hazardous material storage area, except that a roof is not required for a bulk storage facility as defined in section 22a-354i-1(6) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, 
(B)  Floors within a building or under a roof where hazardous material may be stored shall be constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from deterioration due to spillage of any such material, 
(C)  A structure which may be used for storage or transfer of hazardous material shall be protected from stormwater run-on, and groundwater intrusion, 
(D)  Hazardous material shall be stored within an impermeable containment area which is capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of such hazardous material present in such area, or ten percent of the total volume of all such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released hazardous material from the containment area, 
(E)  Hazardous material shall not be stored with other hazardous materials that are incompatible and may create a hazard of fire, explosion or generation of toxic substances, 
(F)  Hazardous material shall be stored only in a container that has been certified by a State or Federal agency or the American Society of Testing Materials as suitable for the transport or storage of such material, 
(G)  Hazardous material shall be stored only in an area that is secured against unauthorized entry by the public, and 
(H)  The requirements of this subdivision are intended to supplement, and not to supersede, any other applicable requirements of Federal, State, or Local law, including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended; 
(2)  No person shall increase the number of underground storage tanks used to store hazardous materials; 
(3)  An underground storage tank used to store hazardous materials shall not be replaced with a larger tank unless: 
(A)  There is no more than a 25 percent increase in volume of the larger replacement tank, and 
(B)  The larger replacement tank is a double-walled tank with coaxial piping, both meeting new installation component standards pursuant to 22a-449(d)-1(e) and 22a-449(d)-102 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and with interstitial monitoring; 
(4)  No person shall use, maintain or install floor drains, dry wells or other infiltration devices or appurtenances which allow the release of wastewaters to the ground, unless such release is permitted by the Commissioner in accordance with sections 22a-430 or 22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes; and 
(5)  A materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with the following: 
(A)  A materials management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information with respect to the subject regulated activity: 
(i)  A pollution prevention assessment consisting of a detailed evaluation of alternatives to the use of hazardous materials or processes and practices that would reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, and implementation of such alternatives where possible and feasible, 
(ii)  A description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of pollution to the aquifer, which shall include the following: 
(a)  A process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are stored, disposed and used, and where hazardous wastes are generated and subsequently stored and disposed, 
(b)  An inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or will be manufactured, produced, stored, utilized or otherwise handled, and 
(c)  A description of waste, including wastewaters generated, and a description of how such wastes are handled, stored and disposed, 
(iii)  The name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of the individual(s) responsible for implementing the materials management plan and the individual(s) who should be contacted in an emergency, 
(iv)  A recordkeeping system to account for the types, quantities, and disposition of hazardous materials which are manufactured, produced, utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which are discharged or emitted; such recordkeeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency, and 
(v)  An emergency response plan for responding to a release of hazardous materials. Such plan shall describe how each such release could result in pollution to the underlying aquifer and shall set forth the methods used or to be used to prevent and abate any such a release; 
(B)  When a materials management plan is required under either section 22a-354i-7(d) or 22a-354i-8(c), such materials management plan shall be completed and certified by a professional engineer or a certified hazardous materials manager, or, if the facility where the regulated activity is conducted has received and maintained an ISO 14001 environmental management system certification, then the registrant may complete and certify the materials management plan; and 
(C)  The materials management plan shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the Municipal Aquifer Protection Agency. 
(b)  The development and implementation of a stormwater management plan required for regulated activities in accordance with sections 8(c) and 9(d) of the APA regulations, shall be as follows: A stormwater management plan shall assure that stormwater runoff generated by the subject regulated activity is: 
(i)  Managed in a manner so as to prevent pollution of groundwater, and 
(ii)  Shall comply with all of the requirements for the general permit of the discharge of stormwater associated with a commercial activity issued pursuant to section 22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Appendix C: Contacts 
Department of Environmental Protection 
Copies of forms being submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection shall be directed to: 
AQUIFER PROTECTION PROGRAM 
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
79 ELM STREET 
HARTFORD, CT 06106-5127 
Department of Public Health 
Copies of forms being submitted to the Department of Public Health shall be directed to: 
DRINKING WATER DIVISION 
CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
410 CAPITOL AVENUE, MS #51 WAT 
HARTFORD, CT 06134-0308 
Water Company 
Copies of forms shall be sent to the affected water company. A listing of the possible water company contacts is as follows: 
AVON WATER COMPANY 
14 WEST MAIN STREET 
AVON, CT 06001 
CONNECTICUT WATER COMPANY 
UNIONVILLE OFFICE 
25 NEW BRITAIN AVENUE 
UNIONVILLE, CT 06085 







Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Use these instructions to complete the application form for regulated activities in Aquifer Protection Areas. These instructions are not a substitute for the requirements of any relevant statutes or regulations. You should review all applicable laws prior to completing the application form. Remember, it is your responsibility to comply with all applicable laws. 
A completed application form must be submitted for each separate facility (or noncontiguous property). 

APPENDIX B - INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS OF THE TOWN OF AVON[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, originally adopted June 29, 1974, subsequently amended May 1, 2007, effective May 9, 2007. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of wetlands and watercourses, G.S. § 22a-42 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Title and Authority. 
    1.1. The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the State of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the State for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the State. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the State by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the State's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the State and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the State, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn. 
    1.2. These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Avon." 
    1.3. The Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Avon was established in accordance with Ordinance #44, adopted July 1, 1991 (which modified the original establishment of the Inland Wetlands Commission which occurred July 1, 1976), and shall implement and enforce the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the Town of Avon. 
    1.4. These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations. 
    1.5. The Agency shall issue, or issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in the Town of Avon in accordance with these regulations. The Agency shall enforce these regulations in accordance with their terms and with all other applicable provisions of law. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    2.1. As used in these regulations. 
a.  Act means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
b.  Agency means the Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Avon. 
c.  Agent means an individual designated by the Inland Wetlands Commission to carry out specified functions and purposes. 
d.  Bogs are areas of very poor drainage, little to no surface outflow, and acidic soils, and are often characterized by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits. 
e.  Clear-cutting means the harvest of timber in a fashion that removes all trees down to a two-inch diameter, measured at a height of four feet above the ground. 
f.  Commissioner of Environmental Protection means the Commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 
g.  Continual flow means a flow of water that persists for an extended period of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession. 
h.  Deposit includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit. 
i.  Discharge means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of the state whether or not such substance causes pollution. 
j.  Essential to the farming operation means that the proposed activity is necessary and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm. 
k.  Farming shall have the meaning set forth in Section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
l.  Feasible means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering principles. 
m.  License means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of these regulations. 
n.  Management practice means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected. 
o.  Marshes are areas that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered. 
p.  Material means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste. 
q.  Municipality means the Town of Avon. 
r.  Nurseries means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or experimentation. 
s.  Permit has the same meaning as license. 
t.  Permittee means the person to whom a permit has been issued. 
u.  Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof. 
v.  Pollution means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the State by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, land clearing or excavation activity. 
w.  Prudent means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity. Cost may be considered in deciding what is prudent, but a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent. 
x.  Regulated activity means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration, or pollution of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in Section 22a-40 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating, constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water on any land within 100 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland or watercourse is a regulated activity. The Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland review area or in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area is a regulated activity if it finds, after a hearing for which the landowner is provided adequate notice, that such activity is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses in a substantial and detrimental manner. 
Wetlands and watercourses are generally shown on a map entitled Inland Wetlands and Watercourses, Town of Avon, Connecticut, which map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk. In each instance, however, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses shall be determined by the Inland Wetlands Commission or its duly authorized agent based upon the actual type of soil or character of the area. 
y.  Remove includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze, dragline or blast. 
z.  Rendering unclean or impure means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste. 
aa.  Significant impact means a substantial effect on the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics, or on the functions or values, of a wetland or watercourse, which effect is caused by regulated activities that may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Any activity involving deposition or removal of material directly in or from a wetland or watercourse, and any other activity involving direct disturbance of a wetland or watercourse. 
2.  Any activity that substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system. 
3.  Any activity that substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or watercourse to support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform other functions. 
4.  Any activity that has the potential to cause substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse. 
5.  Any activity that causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or of groundwater levels of a regulated area. 
6.  Any activity that has substantial potential to cause pollution of a wetland or watercourse. 
7.  Any activity that damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value. 
bb.  Soil scientist means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the Federal Office of Personnel Management. 
cc.  Swamps are areas that possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey and that are dominated by wetland trees and shrubs. 
dd.  Submerged lands means lands that are inundated by water on a seasonal or more frequent basis. 
ee.  Town means the Town of Avon. 
ff.  Waste means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, that may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands or watercourses of the Town. 
gg.  Watercourses means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation. 
hh.  Wetlands means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 3. - Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses. 
    3.1. The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Town of Avon, Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk or in the Town of Avon Planning Department. In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types and location of watercourses. The Agency may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses. 
    3.2. Any person may petition the Agency for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map amendment. Such proof may include, but not be limited to aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping or other available information. The Agency may require such person to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with Section 15 of these regulations. 
    3.3. The Agency shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the Town. The Agency may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available. 
    3.4. All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in Section 15 of these regulations. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 4. - Permitted Uses as of Right and Nonregulated Uses. 
    4.1. The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of right: 
a.  Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the authority of, the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale; 
b.  Boat anchorage or mooring; 
c.  Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted anywhere in the Town of Avon. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse; 
d.  Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by Section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as provided in Sections 22a-401 and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes and; 
e.  Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subdivision, "maintenance" means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place. 
    4.2. The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as nonregulated uses in wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse: 
a.  Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife; and 
b.  Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated. 
    4.3. All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting, clearing, or grading, as well as any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations, shall require a permit from the Agency in accordance with Section 6 of these regulations, or for certain regulated activities located outside of wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized agent in accordance with Section 12 of these regulations. 
    4.4. To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation or use or a nonregulated operation or use shall, prior to commencement of such operation or use, notify the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation or use is a permitted or nonregulated use of a wetland or watercourse. The Agency shall rule that the proposed operation or use or portion of it is a permitted or nonregulated operation or use or that the proposed operation or use is a regulated activity and a permit is required. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 5. - Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection. 
    5.1. The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated activities undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education, pursuant to Sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
    5.2. The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
    5.3. The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under Section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit for construction, alteration, repair or removal of a dam issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under Section 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving any such dam repair or removal order or any such permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from the Agency for any action necessary to comply with the order or to carry out the activities authorized by the permit. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 6. - Regulated Activities to be Licensed. 
    6.1. Except as may be provided in Section 5 of these regulations, no person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Avon. 
    6.2. Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Agency, except as may be provided in Section 5 of these regulations, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 14 of these regulations and any other remedies as provided by law. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 7. - Application Requirements. 
    7.1. Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct such activity, shall apply for a permit or for renewal of a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The application shall contain the information described in this section and any other information the Agency may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained from the Town of Avon Planning Department. 
    7.2. If an application to the Town of Avon Planning and Zoning Commission for site plan approval or a special permit or special exception involves a regulated activity, or if an application for subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    7.3. The application shall contain the information described in this section and any other information the Agency may reasonably require in order to determine whether the proposed activity complies with these regulations. 
    7.4. A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a proposed activity constitutes a regulated activity under these regulations. 
    7.5. All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings: 
a.  The applicant's name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone numbers; if the applicant is a limited liability company or a corporation, the managing member's or responsible corporate officer's name, address, and telephone number shall also be provided; 
b.  The name, mailing address and telephone number of each owner of the land upon which the subject activity is proposed, and the written consent of at least one such owner if the applicant is not an owner; 
c.  The nature of the applicant's interest in the land; 
d.  The geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands and watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation; 
e.  The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures that may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources; 
f.  Alternatives that would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives shall be diagrammed on a site plan or drawing; 
g.  A site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity that are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and that may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses; 
h.  Names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners; 
i.  Statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information; 
j.  Authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject land, at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application to evaluate the site; and for the life of the permit for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the approved permit. 
k.  A completed DEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the information provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in accordance with Section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
l.  Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what the applicant is proposing; and 
m.  Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established by ordinance or by these regulations, whichever is applicable. 
    7.6. At the discretion of the Agency or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a significant impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following, may be required: 
a.  Site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses, and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or by another properly qualified person; 
b.  Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan; 
c.  Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist's field delineation shall be depicted on the site plans; 
d.  A description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities and wetland functions; 
e.  A description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application and each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent; 
f.  Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and 
g.  Management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed activity. 
    7.7. The applicant shall certify whether: 
a.  Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality; 
b.  Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within an adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; 
c.  Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or drainage system within an adjoining municipality; or, 
d.  Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within an adjoining municipality. 
    7.8. Seven copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Town Staff. Additional copies shall be provided upon request. 
    7.9. Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in accordance with Section 8 of these regulations at least 65 days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the information required under Section 7 of these regulations provided: 
a.  The applicant may ask that the Agency incorporate documentation and records from the prior application; however, the Agency may decline to do so if such incorporation would hinder public review of the pending application; 
b.  The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit; 
c.  The application shall state, if applicable, the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit; 
d.  The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued; 
e.  The Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing, and may allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity; 
    7.10. Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued, provided no permit may be valid for more than ten years. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 8. - Application Procedures. 
    8.1. All petitions, applications, requests or appeals shall be submitted to the Inland Wetlands Commission in care of the Town of Avon Planning Department. 
    8.2. Complete applications must be submitted to the Town of Avon Planning Department on or before the third Friday prior to the date of the regularly scheduled meeting in order to be placed on the agenda for full review by the Commission. Any additional information must be provided a minimum of seven days in advance of the meeting. 
    8.3. The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-7d(f), notify the Clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which: 
a.  Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the Agency is within 500 feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; 
b.  A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; 
c.  A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or 
d.  Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. 
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan. 
    8.4. When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company as defined in Section 25-32a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format prescribed by said Commissioner, provided such water company or said Commissioner has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the Town of Avon and with the Agency. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of the application. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health, through a representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of such notice shall be provided to the Agency. 
    8.5. The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following the day of submission to the Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal, or 35 days after such submission, whichever is sooner. 
    8.6. At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations. 
    8.7. All applications shall be open for public inspection. 
    8.8. Incomplete applications may be denied. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 9. - Public Hearings. 
    9.1. The Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless (1) the Agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses; (2) a petition signed by at least 25 persons who are 18 years of age or older and who reside in the Town of Avon, requesting a hearing is filed with the Agency not later than 14 days after the date of receipt of such application; or (3) the Agency finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The Agency may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the Agency on or before the 14 th day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing shall be held no later than 65 days after the receipt of such application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard. 
    9.2. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located. 
    9.3 Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owner(s) of record of property which abut the subject parcel(s) and those property owners which are directly on the opposite side of the street of the subject parcel(s), by United States Post Office Certificate of Mailing by the applicant no less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Said notice shall be in such form as is prescribed by the Agency. The applicant shall, at the time of the hearing, submit the name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of record and shall present proof of the measures taken to comply with this section. If the Agency determines that the applicant has in good faith taken reasonable measures to comply with this section, the failure of any person entitled to notice hereunder to receive such notice shall not invalidate any decision made by the Agency. In all cases, actual notice of a public hearing shall be the equivalent of the receipt of notice as required hereunder. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07; Amend. of 7-10-12, eff. 7-18-12) 
Sec. 10. - Considerations for Decision. 
    10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application: 
a.  The application and its supporting documentation. 
b.  Reports from other agencies, staff, and commissions including but not limited to the Town of Avon: 
1.  Planning and Zoning Commission; 
2.  Natural Resources Commission; 
3.  Engineering Department; 
4.  Building Department; 
5.  Health Department (FVHD). 
c.  The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the Natural Resources Conservation Service, the Central Connecticut Regional Planning Agency or other regional organizations; agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity; or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations. 
d.  Non-receipt of comments from agencies and commissions listed in subdivisions 10.1.b and c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Agency. 
e.  For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and testimony. 
    10.2. Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to: 
a.  The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses; 
b.  The applicant's purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed regulated activity, which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses. 
c.  The relationship between the short-term and long-term impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses. 
d.  Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources that would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation measures that may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources; 
e.  The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable use of property that is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity; and 
f.  Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity that are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and that may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses. 
    10.3. In the case of an application that received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in subsection 10.2 of this section. The finding and the reasons therefor shall be stated on the record in writing. 
    10.4. In the case of an application that is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity that have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives that the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he or she is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity. 
    10.5. For purposes of Section 10 of these regulations, (1) "wetlands and watercourses" includes aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) "habitats" means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs. 
    10.6. The Agency shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses. 
    10.7. In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 11. - Decision Process and Permit. 
    11.1. The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources. 
    11.2. No later than 65 days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within 35 days after its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within 35 days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within 65 days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days, or may withdraw the application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application. An application deemed materially incomplete by the Agency shall be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Agency. 
    11.3. The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision. 
    11.4. The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within 15 days after the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such 15-day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter. 
    11.5. If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which requires a special permit, special exception or subdivision approval under Sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Agency shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town of Avon Planning and Zoning Commission within 15 days of the date of the decision thereon. 
    11.6. Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which zoning site plan approval, a special permit or special exception, or subdivision approval is also required under Section 8-3, 8-25 or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, shall be valid for five years provided the Agency may establish a specific time period within which any regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit issued by the Agency for any other activity shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years, provided that the permit shall be valid for five years unless the Agency expressly specifies a shorter duration. 
    11.7. No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of the Agency or, if the permit was originally issued by the Agency's authorized agent, by such agent. 
    11.8. If a bond or other security is required in accordance with Section 13 of these regulations, the Agency may refrain from issuing the permit until such bond or security is provided. 
    11.9. General provisions in the issuance of all permits: 
a.  The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant, and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked. 
b.  All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of Avon, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity. 
c.  If the activity authorized by the Agency's permit also involves an activity which requires zoning or subdivision approval, a special permit or special exception, or a variance under Sections 8.3(g), 8-3c, 8-6, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained. 
d.  In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses. 
e.  Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Agency, which consent shall be provided upon submission of a proper registration form from the new permittee, as well as such additional surety and information as the Agency may reasonably require to assure compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 12. - Action by Duly Authorized Agent. 
    12.1. The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or renew a permit for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourses, provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to Section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Agency and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these regulations, as well as any other information the agent may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may approve or renew a permit for such an activity at any time. 
    The following is a non-exclusive list of activities that may be approved by the duly authorized agent: 
a.  Clearing and/or grubbing that results in the removal of vegetation from a contiguous area that is less than 400 square feet; and provided that such activity is a minimum of 25 feet from a wetland or watercourse. 
b.  Filling, grading or excavating of a contiguous area that is less than 400 square feet; and provided that such activity is a minimum of 25 feet from a wetland or watercourse. 
c.  Necessary repair of an existing septic system, existing driveway or existing structure; and provided that such appurtenances are not located in a wetland or watercourse. 
d.  Addition to an existing house, provided that the proposed addition is less than 400 square feet; and provided that such addition is a minimum of 25 feet from a wetland or watercourse. 
e.  Decks added to an existing house provided that such deck is less than 400 square feet; and provided that such deck is a minimum of 25 feet from a wetland or watercourse. 
f.  Detached structures such as an outbuilding, gazebo, or other similar structures, or an above ground pool provided that such structure is less than 400 square feet; and provided that such structure is to be located with a minimal frost protection such as concrete piers or gravel (not a full-foundation); and provided that such structure is located a minimum of 25 feet from a wetland or watercourse. 
    12.2. Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of such approval, publish, at the applicant's expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of Avon. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency within 15 days after the publication date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Agency or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of these regulations. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 13. - Performance Security. 
    13.1. The applicant, upon approval of the application by the Agency and as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit, may be required by the Agency to file performance security in favor of the Town of Avon in such form and amount as the Agency deems appropriate. Such security may include, without limitation, a letter of credit, passbook account, cash bond, or surety bond. The performance security shall guarantee full performance by the applicant of the terms and conditions of the approval, including any maintenance requirements stated in the approval. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 14. - Enforcement. 
    14.1. The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act on its behalf with the authority to issue notices of violation or enforcement orders and to carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Agency or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under Section 10.2 of these regulations. 
    14.2. The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated activities for which permits have been issued with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit. 
    14.3. In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner. 
    14.4. If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may: 
a.  Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten calendar days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
b.  Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in Section 14.4.a or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law. 
    14.5. The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within 15 days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 15. - Amendments. 
    15.1. These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of Avon may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes available. 
    15.2. An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable Inland Wetlands Regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in Inland Wetland Regulations, including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt. 
    15.3. These regulations and the Town of Avon Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map may be amended in the manner specified in Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least 35 days before the public hearing on their adoption. 
    15.4. Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Town of Avon, Connecticut," shall contain at least the following information: 
a.  The petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number; 
b.  The address, or location, of the land affected by the petition; 
c.  The petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition; 
d.  Map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations; and 
e.  The reasons for the requested action. 
    15.5. Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Town of Avon, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Agency. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition shall include: 
a.  The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s) agent or other representative; 
b.  The names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land; 
c.  Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on the subject land. Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and 
d.  Map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries. 
    15.6. Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified individual. 
    15.7. A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of Avon at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days, nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection. 
    15.8. The Agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map within 65 days after receipt of such petition. The hearing shall be completed within 35 days after commencement. The Agency shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within 65 days after completion of such hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days, or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition. 
    15.9. The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why any change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 16. - Appeals. 
    16.1. Appeal of actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
    16.2. Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 17. - Conflict and Severance. 
    17.1. If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. 
    17.2. If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 18. - Other Permits. 
    18.1. Nothing in these regulations shall obviate any requirements for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Avon, the State of Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 19. - Fees. 
    19.1. Method of Payment. All required fees shall be submitted to the Agency by cash, check or money order payable to the Town of Avon at the time the application is filed with the Agency. 
    19.2. No application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct application fee is paid in full. 
    19.3. The application fee is not refundable. 
    19.4. The Agency shall charge land use application fees as set forth in Ordinance #55 (referenced as Appendix B). 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
Sec. 20. - Effective Date of Regulations. 
    20.1. These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Avon. 
(Amend. of 5-1-07) 
[APPENDIX A-WETLANDS ACTIVITY REPORTING FORM] 

[APPENDIX B-WETLANDS PERMIT APPLICATION] 



APPENDIX C-APPLICATION CHECKLIST 
I. SUBMITTAL. 
    For an application to be fully reviewed by the Avon Inland Wetlands Commission, all of the items indicated in Section II must be submitted to the Clerk of the Commission by 4:30 p.m. on the Friday (3) three weeks before the date of a regularly scheduled meeting. Revised plans must be submitted by 4:30 p.m. on the Wednesday before the date of the meeting. PLEASE TYPE APPLICATIONS. 
II. COMPLETE APPLICATION. 
    A complete application must include the following: 
    ___ Completed Application Form 
    ___ Application Fee (see Fee Schedule) 
    ___ Completed Checklist 
    ___ Site Plan (see Section III) 
    ___ Environmental Information (see Section IV, if required) 
III. SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS. 
    An application must include eleven (11) complete sets of maps showing the information indicated in Sections A through C. The Commission may waive some of these requirements when, in their opinion, they are not necessary due to the likely minor impact of the proposed activity on a wetland or watercourse. All maps must conform to the following guidelines: 
    Sheet Size: 24" x 36" 
    North Arrow 
a.  Name of project 
b.  Names of owner and applicant 
c.  Type of drawing 
d.  Date of drawing 
e.  Subsequent dates of revision with description 
f.  Names and addresses of engineers and surveyors 
(when appropriate) 
A.  Location Map. 
    The purpose of the location map is to identify the particular parcel under application in relation to surrounding parcels and streets. This map may be combined with the overall site development plan or submitted on a separate 81/2 x 11 sheet. The scale of the location map should be 1" = 200', but cannot be less than 1" = 1000'. The location map shall identify parcels of abutting property owners and all streets within 500' of the property. 
B.  Overall Site Development Plan. 
    The purpose of the overall site development plan is to illustrate for the Commission the proposed development of the site and to identify the locations of the specific regulated activities requested. The entire parcel must be shown on the overall site development plan. The scale of the overall site development plan should be 1"= 40', but cannot be less than 1"=200'. The following information shall be shown on this plan: 
1.  Extent of all regulated areas on the parcel and the surrounding area identified. 
2.  Location of each regulated activity as requested in application identified by the activity number from Page 2 of the application. 
3.  Survey information including distances, angles, and bearings. 
C.  Detailed Regulated Activity Plans. 
    The purpose of the detailed regulated activity plans is to provide specific information for the Commission on each of the activities requested. Each activity requested in the application must have at least one corresponding detailed plan. The scale of the detailed regulated activity plan cannot be less than 1" = 40'. The following information shall be shown on these plans: 
1.  Title of drawing including the activity number from Page 2 of the application. 
2.  Extent of the regulated area affected by the proposed activity identified by screening or shading. 
3.  Detail of the regulated activity proposed. 
4.  Existing and proposed structures including location and elevation. 
5.  Existing and proposed contours at 2' intervals. 
6.  Location of vegetation, existing and proposed. 
IV. ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION. 
    The purpose of the environmental information is to provide the Commission with additional documentation which they may reference while reviewing the application. While not all information is required of all applicants, it is desirable to provide this information: 
A.  Erosion and sedimentation control plans and planting schedules for erodible areas. 
B.  Drainage calculations indicating discharge volume for design storms. 
C.  Description of wetlands (if required). 
D.  Description of water bodies (if required). 
E.  Description of wetland impacts (if required). 
F.  Description of retention structures (if required). 
G.  Proposed construction procedures (if required). 
APPENDIX D-BOND FORMS 
TO: The Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Avon 
FROM: 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That 
(hereinafter referred to as "Principal"), as Principal and 
(hereinafter referred to as "Surety"), duly authorized by law to become surety on bonds in the State, as Surety, are held and firmly bound unto the Town of Avon, Connecticut in the penal sum of ________ DOLLARS, lawful money of the United States, to be paid to said Town of Avon, Connecticut, to which payment well and truly to be made and done, Principal and Surety bind themselves, their heirs, administrators, executors, successors and assigns, as the case may be, jointly and severally, and firmly by these presents. 
    The condition of this obligation is such that: 
    WHEREAS, Principal under date of ________ made application to the Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Avon to do certain work or to carry on certain activities within designated wetlands. 
    WHEREAS, the Town of Avon, acting through its Inland Wetlands Commission, has granted said application, has conditioned the grant of such application upon the performance of the work or the carrying on of the activities in accordance with the Inland Wetlands Regulations of the Town of Avon, and in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in the approval of the application by the Inland Wetlands Commission dated ________ and more precisely shown and set forth on a plan entitled: 
    to which approval and plan reference is hereby made and which approval and plan are made a part hereof. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, if the Principal shall hereafter perform such work or activities in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands Regulations of the Town of Avon, and the terms and conditions of approval of the application by the Inland Wetlands Commission, then this obligation shall be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Principal has (hereunto set hand and seal) (caused this instrument to be signed and its corporate seal to be affixed hereto by its ________, duly authorized), and the Surety has caused this instrument to be signed and its corporate seal to be hereunto affixed by its attorney-in-fact hereunto duly authorized this day of ________, 20___. 
PERFORMANCE BOND 
WHEREAS, The Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Avon on ________, approved Inland Wetlands Application (#___) for ________, owned by ________, which plans are on file with the Avon Inland Wetlands Commission; and 
    WHEREAS, the Avon Inland Wetlands Commission now requires the filing of a Performance Bond in the amount of ________ to assure completion of construction of improvements within the application as shown on said plan and accompanying documents in accordance with the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Avon Inland Wetlands Commission and said conditional approval by the Commission; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, I, ________, do hereby deposit with the Town of Avon Passbook Number ___ for regular savings account issued by ________, which savings account contains ________ and assign said passbook and the amount in savings account to the Town of Avon as bond for faithful completion of said improvements within one (1) year from the date hereof in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the Avon Inland Wetlands Commission and to the full satisfaction of the Avon Inland Wetlands Commission. This bond shall remain in full force and effect, and up to ________ in the savings account may be used by the Avon Inland Wetlands Commission to complete said improvements. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have executed this bond at Avon, Connecticut, this _______ day of ________, 20___. 
Signed, Sealed, and Delivered 
in the Presence of: 
___________ ___________ 
___________ ___________ 
APPENDIX E-SAMPLE CONSERVATION RESTRICTION 
DECLARATION OF RESTRICTIONS 
    We, ___________, of the Town of Avon, County of Hartford, and State of Connecticut, do hereby declare the following restrictions on a parcel of land located at ___________, Avon, Connecticut, bounded and described as follows: 
(boundary description) 
    Said area is shown as "Conservation Area" on a map entitled "(title of map, scale, date)". 
    The Grantors declare the following restrictions to be restrictions on the use of said area and said restrictions to be binding upon the Grantors, their heirs and assigns. 
    There shall be no construction of any kind, no filling, no tree cutting, no moving of living trees, or any other activity which would harm the existing natural vegetation, wildlife, and hydrological functions of the "Conservation Area". 
    Nothing in this restriction shall in any way limit the Town of Avon from performing its municipal functions, including but not limited to installation and repair of utilities and reasonable improvements to bodies of water situated within the "Conservation Area". 
    Nothing in this restriction shall in any way limit the Grantor, heirs, or assigns from planting such trees, bushes, and shrubbery as are ecologically appropriate or removing debris within the "Conservation Area". 
    THE DECLARATION OF THIS RESTRICTION DOES IN NO WAY GRANT THE PUBLIC THE RIGHT TO ENTER SUCH AREA FOR ANY PURPOSE. 
Signed this _______ day of ________, 20___. 
Witnessed By 
___________ ___________ 
___________ ___________ 
State of Connecticut 
ss. Avon 
County of Hartford 
    The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _______ day of ________, 20___. 
      Commissioner of the Superior Court   
APPENDIX C - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision regulations. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, G.S. § 8-25. 

SECTION ONE - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1.01. - Authority. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Avon, Connecticut, in exercise of its powers as authorized by the Connecticut General Statutes, hereby adopts these regulations which shall hereafter be known, cited, and referred to as the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Avon. These Regulations supersede Regulations previously in effect and adopted October 14, 1957. [These] Subdivision Regulations became effective in the Town of Avon on October 14, 1957. 
1.02. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations"; the word "regulations" means "these regulations." A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a "building" includes a "structure"; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
    1.02.01 Words and terms defined. 
    1.02.01.1 Applicant. The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises when the applicant is other than the owner. 
    1.02.01.2 Bond. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Commission. 
    1.02.01.3 Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town. 
    1.02.01.4 Construction plan. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plot and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Commission as a condition of the approval. 
    1.02.01.5 Developer . The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises when the applicant is other than the owner. 
    1.02.01.6 Easement. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
    1.02.01.7 Lot, plot, parcel. A plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one principal building determining the land use form and the accessory buildings, structures or uses customarily incident to it, including such open spaces as are required by the Zoning Regulations. A piece of land saleable as a unit. In the case of public, institutional, commercial, or industrial lots, a group of buildings under the same ownership may be considered as occupying one and the same lot. 
    1.02.01.8 Reserve strip. A privately owned strip of land which controls access to land dedicated, or to be dedicated, to public use. 
    1.02.01.9 Resubdivision. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change (a) affects any street layout shown on such map; (b) affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or (c) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map. 
    1.02.01.10 Streets. 
i.  Collector streets. A street intended to move traffic from local streets to secondary arterials. A collector street serves a neighborhood or large subdivision and should be designed so that a minimum of residential properties face onto it. 
ii.  Dead-end street (permanent). A street having only one intersection with another street and having a turnaround entirely surrounded on its frontage with separate lots. 
iii.  Dead-end street (temporary). A street having one intersection with another street and designed to be extended into adjoining undeveloped land, with a temporary turnaround. 
iv.  Limited local street. A permanent dead-end street not exceeding 1,000 feet in length, serving no more than 12 lots. 
v.  Local street. A street intended to provide access to other roads from individual residential properties. 
vi.  Primary arterial street. A street intended to move traffic to and from such major attractors as central business districts, regional shopping centers, major industrial areas, and similar traffic generators and/or as a route for traffic between communities or large areas. 
vii.  Secondary arterial street. A street intended to collect and distribute traffic in a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these streets service minor traffic generating areas such as community-commercial areas, primary and secondary educational plants, major recreational areas, churches, and offices and/or designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the system of primary arterials. 
    1.02.01.11 Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation, or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivision. 
1.03. - Purposes. 
    These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
i.  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of Avon; 
ii.  To guide the future growth and development of the Town of Avon in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Development; 
iii.  To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; 
iv.  To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the Town; 
v.  To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements and facilities; 
vi.  To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the community so that proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed streets, especially in regard to safe intersections and be so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs; 
vii.  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land; 
viii.  To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision; 
ix.  To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the community in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land; 
x.  To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Town and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features; 
xi.  To encourage energy efficient patterns of development and land use, use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation. 
1.04. - Jurisdiction. 
    These regulations shall apply to the subdivision and resubdivision of land, as herein defined, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Avon. No subdivision or resubdivision of land shall be made by any person, firm, or corporation until an application for such subdivision or resubdivision has been submitted to and approved by the Avon Planning and Zoning Commission and a map thereof has been endorsed by the Commission and filed by the applicant in the Office of the Avon Town Clerk. 
1.05. - Interpretation, conflict, separability, and waiver. 
    1.05.01 Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
    1.05.02 Conflict. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provisions of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
    1.05.03 Separability. If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. 
    1.05.04 Waiver. The Commission may waive certain requirements under these regulations by a three-quarters vote of all the members of the Commission if it finds that all of the following conditions have been satisfied: 
i.  The waiver has been specifically requested by the applicant; 
ii.  Conditions exist which affect the subject land adversely and are not generally applicable to other land in the area; 
iii.  In the absence of a waiver, one or more requirements of these regulations cannot be satisfied; 
iv.  The requested waiver is the minimum deviation from the requirements of these regulations necessary to permit subdivision or resubdivision of the subject land; and 
v.  The granting of the waiver will not have a significant adverse effect on adjacent property or on public health, safety and welfare. 
In granting a waiver, the Commission shall state upon its records the reasons for which any waiver was granted. 
1.06. - Amendments. 
    For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare, the Commission may from time to time amend these regulations in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. When the Commission votes to amend any section of these regulations, the effective date of the change(s) shall be 30 days from the date that the vote was taken unless an alternate effective date is chosen by the Commission. 
1.07. - Conditions. 
    Regulations of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is a valid exercise of police power delegated by the State to this municipality. The developer has the duty to comply with reasonable conditions imposed by the Commission to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
1.08. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation making any subdivision or resubdivision of land without the approval of the Commission shall be subject to penalties in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
1.09. - Self-imposed restrictions. 
    If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the Zoning Regulations, or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be indicated on the Subdivision Map. 
1.10. - Plats straddling municipal boundaries. 
    Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in another local government, the Commission may request assurance that the access is legally established, and that the access road is adequately improved, or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines. 
1.11. - Character of the land. 
    Land which the Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development, due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the Commission, upon recommendation of the Town Engineer and Director of Health, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
SECTION TWO - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE 

2.01. - Submission. 
    All applications, maps, plans, documents, and data required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Planning Administrator's Office. The date of receipt of such applications shall be determined in accordance with the General Statutes of the State. 
2.02. - Public hearings. 
    [Public hearings] shall be held on applications for: 
i.  Resubdivisions, 
ii.  Subdivisions of five or more lots on an existing street, 
iii.  Any number of lots requiring the layout and construction of new streets. 
    The Commission may hold a public hearing on any application where it deems that the public interest might best be served by so doing. 
2.03. - Informal consideration. 
    Prior to submission of a formal application for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision, the applicant may prepare an informal plan of the subdivision or resubdivision for informal review by the Commission. If the plan is presented in preliminary rather than final form, any alterations or changes recommended by the Commission may be made more readily and economically by the applicant. Neither the informal plan nor the informal review by the Commission, however, shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for and approving subdivisions or resubdivisions of land under the provisions of Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
    2.03.01 Informal plan. The informal plan should show sufficient information to allow the Commission to make a general planning review under the standards of these regulations. The Commission recommends that the informal plan meet the standards for a site development plan under Paragraph 4.02. 
    2.03.02 Review. When an informal plan is submitted, the Commission will hold a discussion with the applicant and may recommend any changes or improvements in the plan in order to guide the applicant in preparing maps and plans for formal application. 
2.04. - Application requirements. 
    In order to make formal application for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision, the applicant shall submit the following: 
    2.04.01 Application. Application for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the Commission. (Application blanks are available at the Planning and Zoning Commission Clerk's Office.) The application shall be signed by the applicant or his lawful agent; and, if the subdivision or resubdivision is proposed by a person, firm or corporation other than the owner of the land to be subdivided or resubdivided, the application shall also be signed by the owner of the land or his lawful agent. 
    2.04.02 [Repealed.] 
    2.04.03 Record subdivision map . A record subdivision or resubdivision map shall be submitted with the application and shall conform to all of the requirements of Paragraph 4.05 of these regulations. 
    2.04.04 Construction plans . Plan and profile drawings and typical cross sections, and prints or copies thereof, of all proposed streets, storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, bridges, culverts, and other structures and improvements required by these regulations shall be submitted with the application and shall conform to all the requirements of Paragraph 4.03 of these regulations. 
    2.04.05 Site development plan. A site development plan and prints and copies thereof shall be submitted with the application and shall conform to all of the requirements of Paragraph 4.02 of these regulations. 
    2.04.06 Grading plan. [A grading plan,] meeting the standards of Paragraph 4.04, shall be submitted. 
    2.04.07 Sanitation report. Every application for approval of a subdivision must include satisfactory evidence that the site has suitable physical characteristics to adequately satisfy all the requirements of both the Town and the Connecticut State Department of Health for subsurface sewage disposal or that the proposed lots can be connected to an operational public sanitary sewer. When it is proposed to connect to public sanitary sewers, a sewer feasibility study, as required by the Town Engineer, shall accompany the subdivision application. 
    2.04.08 Hydrological report. Design of the storm drainage system to include special structures shall be supported by a hydrological report prepared by a Civil Engineer licensed as a P.E. in the State of Connecticut. This report shall, at the minimum, include the following: 
    2.04.08.1 Base map used to determine watershed and drainage patterns. 
    2.04.08.2 Methodology used to compute runoff and pipe sizes. 
    2.04.09 Easements and deeds . Copies of all easements and deeds necessary to carry the subdivision plan into effect, including instruments proposed to be executed or delivered after approval of the application. 
    2.04.10 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan meeting the standards of Paragraph 4.07 shall be submitted. 
    2.04.11 Cost estimate. An engineer's estimate of the cost of construction of public improvements. Estimates shall be made on forms provided by the Town Engineer's office. 
    2.04.12 State highway agreement. A copy of any agreement made with the State Department of Transportation for any street intersection with the State Highway. 
    2.04.13 Permits and agreements. Copies of State and Federal permits and copies of proposed agreements with utility companies. 
    2.04.14 Additional data. Other data and information may be required from the applicant in order to establish that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of these regulations. 
    2.04.15 Floodplains. For all subdivision proposals located below the 500-year floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) where the 500-year flood elevation data is not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis performed by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer that generates 500-year floodplain elevations. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Amend. of 9-9-08(1); eff. 9-17-08) 
2.05. - Consideration of proposed subdivisions. 
    After the above application requirements have been met to the satisfaction of the Commission, the Commission shall consider the application in accordance with the following procedures: 
    2.05.01 Hearing. Public hearings shall be held as required by Section 2.02 of these regulations. Notice of any public hearing shall be given as required by law. Every applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to appear before the Commission to discuss his application. 
    2.05.02 Review by others. Plans and maps shall be transmitted to the[:] 
(1)  Town Sanitarian; 
(2)  Town Engineer; 
(3)  Fire Chief; 
(4)  Traffic Authority for their reports and recommendations. 
When appropriate, the Commission may refer the application to other local, regional, or state agencies for their review and recommendations. 
    2.05.03 Decision. The Commission shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove any subdivision application or maps and plans submitted therewith within 65 days after the date of the public hearing thereon or if no public hearing is held, within 65 days after the submission thereof. An extension of time not to exceed a further period of 65 days may be had with the consent of the applicant. 
    2.05.04 Approval . The Commission shall give approval to the subdivision if it shall find that the subdivision map and plans and accompanying certificates, documents, and data conform to the requirements and are consistent with the purposes of these regulations. 
    2.05.04.1 In granting approval, the Commission may attach such conditions that it deems necessary to modify the subdivision map, plans, or documents, and to preserve [the purpose and intent of these regulations.] 
2.06. - Filing and recording. 
    Any plan for subdivision shall, upon approval, or when taken as approved by reason of the failure of the Commission to act, be filed or recorded by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk, within 90 days of the date such plan is delivered to the applicant and any plan not so filed or recorded within the prescribed time shall become null and void, except that the Commission may extend the time for such filing for two additional periods of 90 days upon request of the applicant and the plan shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time. All such plans shall be delivered to the applicant for filing or recording promptly after the time for taking an appeal from the action of the Commission has elapsed and in the event of an appeal, promptly upon the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal, or judgment in favor of the applicant. No such plan shall be recorded or filed by the Town Clerk until its approval has been endorsed thereon by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission; and the filing or recording of a subdivision plan without such approval shall be void. 
2.07. - [Completion of requirements.] 
    Prior to filing and recording the map in accordance with the above section (Section 2.06), a Certificate of Completion for all required subdivision improvements, together with a statement from the Town Engineer reflecting that the public improvements called for in the subdivision plan have been completed, shall be submitted. In lieu of the completion of such work and installation previous to the filing of the Subdivision Map, the Commission may accept a bond in accordance with the provisions of Section III, together with an acquisition agreement for a public right-of-way, in such form as may be prescribed by the Commission. 
2.08. - Conditional approval. 
    In lieu of completing the required subdivision improvements or posting a bond for the improvements, as required in Section 2.07, an applicant may request, and the Commission may authorize, the filing of the plan with a conditional approval endorsed thereon. Such approval shall be conditioned on: 
1.[(1)]  The actual construction, maintenance and installation of any improvements or utilities prescribed by the Commission, evidenced by a Certificate of Completion issued by the Town Engineer and approved by the Commission, or 
2.[(2)]  The furnishing of a bond, in accordance with the provisions of Section III, in form and amount acceptable to the Town Engineer and approved by the Commission. 
Upon occurrence of either of the events described in (1) or (2) above, the Commission shall authorize the filing of a plan with final approval endorsed thereon. 
Any such conditional approval, which has not earlier become final, shall lapse two years from the date upon which it was granted. The Commission may grant renewal of such conditional approval for an additional two years at the end of any two-year period. 
SECTION THREE - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

3.01. - Bonds. 
    In lieu of requiring the completion of public improvements previous to the final approval of a subdivision plan, the Commission may accept a bond in an amount and with surety or other security and conditions satisfactory to it. 
    3.01.01 Definition. For the purposes of this section, a bond shall mean one of the following: 
(1)  A surety bond; 
(2)  A bond secured by a passbook savings account; or 
(3)  A bond secured by an irrevocable letter of credit. Such bonds shall be subject to the approval of the Commission. 
    3.01.02 [Bonding.] The bond shall secure to the Town the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities within one year from the day of approval of the subdivision plan. The Commission may extend the completion date for public improvements for additional periods. As a condition for such extension, the Commission may require the increase in the amount of the bond. 
    3.01.03 Form. Bond shall be duly executed on forms provided or approved by the Town, with proper reference to all maps and plans showing the streets, drainage and other improvements covered by the bond. Forms and other data shall be provided as follows: 
    3.01.03.1 Surety bonds shall be accepted only from those companies licensed to do business in the State of Connecticut. They shall be accompanied by the power of attorney of the person executing the bond for the company. 
    3.01.03.2 Bonds secured by a passbook savings account shall be accompanied by: 
i.  The savings account passbook; 
ii.  A withdrawal slip in the amount of the bond, properly endorsed and made payable to the Town; and 
iii.  A letter from the bank acknowledging that the account has been assigned to the Town for the period established for the construction or installation of public improvements, plus six months. 
    3.01.03.3 Bonds secured by irrevocable letter of credit shall be provided by a bank or other similar reputable institution or individual, subject to the approval of the Commission. The letter of credit shall be in such form and accompanied by such documents as may be prescribed by the Commission. 
3.02. - Failure to complete improvements. 
    Where a bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such bond, the Town may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time of the bond is declared to be in default. 
3.03. - Partial release. 
    When and if the Town Engineer determines that a substantial portion of the public improvements called for in the final plan approved by the Commission has been completed, he may recommend one or more partial releases of a portion of the surety, the balance to be sufficient to guarantee completion of the public improvements. Such partial release shall be authorized by the Town Manager's office upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. Releases shall be granted in amounts in excess of $1,000.00. In no event shall a bond be released below 10% of the actual cost of improvements. 
3.04. - Final release. 
    Bonds will not be released until the following conditions have been met: 
i.  The Town Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; 
ii.  The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Town Engineer, through submission of detailed "as-built" plans, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision. "As-built" plans shall include a site development plan, a grading plan, and a construction plan as described in Section IV. Such plans shall show any modification or changes made during construction. In addition, the grading plan shall show location of all water main gates, curb stops, sewer lateral "Y's" and sewer laterals at property lines. 
iii.  All public improvements called for in the final plan have been accepted by the Town. A maintenance bond, as described in Paragraph 3.02 [3.05.01], shall be filed with the Town. 
iv.  All documents required by the "Acquisition Agreement for a Public Right-of-Way" have been furnished [to] the Commission and all conditions and requirements of the Commission's approval of the subdivision application have been satisfied. 
3.05. - Maintenance of improvements. 
    The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks, if required, until acceptance of said improvements by the Town. 
    3.05.01 Maintenance bond. The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the Town prior to dedication in an amount determined by the Town Engineer in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements, for a period of one year after the date of their acceptance by the Town. In no case shall the maintenance bond be less than 10% of the cost of improvements and shall be of such form as described in Section 3.01(1) of these regulations. 
3.06. - Completion of road improvements prior to issuance of a zoning permit or building permit. 
    No zoning permit or building permit for any home to be constructed on an approved subdivision lot shall be issued until such time that, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, provision has been made for passage at all times for emergency vehicles. At the discretion of the Town Engineer, a cash bond in an amount to be determined by the Town Engineer may be required to guarantee these improvements. In an instance where a zoning permit or zoning permits have been issued and the Town Engineer determines that the roadway is not passable to emergency vehicles, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to cause such permit(s) to be immediately revoked and the Town Engineer shall be authorized to use the cash bond to make necessary repairs to the roadway. 
3.07. - Completion of improvements prior to issuance of Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy. 
    No Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy for any home constructed on an approved subdivision lot will be issued until such time that the binder course of pavement is installed in accordance with the approved plan and inspected and approved by the Town Engineer. At the time the binder course of pavement is installed, all structures, including sewer manholes and catch basin grates, must be set to the elevation of the binder course of pavement. Prior to installation of the wearing course of pavement, all structures shall be adjusted to the elevation of the final course of pavement. A note specifying these requirements shall be added to each sheet of the record plans. 
SECTION FOUR - STANDARDS FOR MAPS AND PLANS 

4.01. - General requirements. 
    The maps and plans required by these regulations shall show the information and be prepared in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. All such maps and plans shall be prepared by, and shall bear the name and seal of, a land surveyor and/or engineer licensed as such by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State. Pertinent survey data and computations shall be presented by the applicant to the Town Engineer for review if requested by him. 
4.02. - Site development plan. 
    The site development plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 100' on a sheet 24" x 36". The plan shall show existing conditions and the proposed layout of lots, streets and improvements for the proposed subdivision and all contiguous land of the applicant that may be subdivided in the future, in order to allow the Commission to complete a general planning review of the proposed subdivision including its relationship to the future subdivision of contiguous land of the applicant. Six, black or blue line prints shall be submitted. The plan shall show at least the following information: 
i.  Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any previous subdivision in the Town of Avon. 
ii.  Name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided; name and address of the applicant if different from the owner. 
iii.  Date, scale, north point, key map at 1" = 1000'. 
iv.  Existing and proposed property and street lines; indication of adjoining property lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet; and the names of all adjacent subdivisions or property owners. 
v.  Existing and proposed watercourses and ponds, conservation areas, and easements and rights-of-way; base flood elevation data, wetland soils, other land subject to potential flooding; the location and limits of all swamps, flood plains. 
vi.  Existing contours at an interval not exceeding two feet based on field or aerial survey and using official Town, State or U.S. benchmarks, which shall be noted on the plan. 
vii.  Proposed lots and lot numbers, existing and proposed open spaces for parks, playgrounds, stream protection and other open spaces. 
viii.  Existing permanent buildings and structures. 
ix.  Principal wooded areas and the approximate location of any large, isolated trees. 
x.  Any ledge outcrops and existing stone walls and fences within the subdivision. 
xi.  Approximate dimensions on all proposed property and street lines; approximate lot area and the total acreage of land included in the subdivision. 
xii.  Proposed width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; the proposed width of all pavement; and proposed street names. 
xiii.  Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal boundary line and zoning districts. 
xiv.  Existing and proposed storm drains, catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs and other structures; and existing and proposed water mains, sanitary sewers, and related facilities. 
xv.  Spot elevations on both existing and proposed roads to indicate tentative grading. 
xvi.  The approximate location of any test holes, test pits and borings. 
xvii.  The limits of any areas proposed for regrading by excavation or filling; and the limits of any areas proposed to be reserved and protected from excavation or filling. 
4.03. - Construction plans. 
    Four sets of blue or black line print plans and profile drawings of all proposed streets, storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, and other structures shall be submitted on a sheet size of 24" x 36," and drawn to a horizontal scale of 1" = 40' and a vertical scale of 1" = 4'. Profile drawings and elevations shall be based on Town, State or U.S. benchmarks or other permanent benchmarks approved by the Town Engineer; the benchmarks used shall be noted on the plan. All construction plans, plans for streets, storm drainage, water supply, and other utilities and structures shall be designed by, and bear the seal of, a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. Plan-profile drawings shall show at least the following information in accordance with good engineering practice and as appropriate for the particular subdivision or resubdivision. 
i.  Title of the subdivision or resubdivision, date, scale, Town and State. 
ii.  For streets, the existing grades at the center lines and both street lines and the proposed grade at the center line and both street lines; width of pavement, and typical cross section of roads with specifications. 
iii.  Depth, invert, slope and size of all pipes, ditches, culverts, manholes, catch basins, headwalls and watercourses; typical ditch and watercourse cross sections. 
iv.  Approximate location of lot lines intersecting the street line; lot numbers and street names. 
v.  Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and special structures to include street lights. 
vi.  Detail drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes, and other special structures. 
vii.  Notation and details on erosion and sedimentation control methods to be employed. 
4.04. - Grading plan. 
    The area shown on the grading plan may be limited to the portion of the subdivision or resubdivision affected by the proposed major regrading, cuts, fills, or soil or rock removal. Four, blue or black line prints of the grading plan shall be submitted. The grading plan shall be drawn on sheets 24" x 36" and to the scale of 1" = 40' or larger, and shall bear the seal of an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. Contours and elevations shall be based on the same benchmarks as provided in Paragraph 4.03. The grading plan shall show at least the following information. 
i.  Title of the subdivision or resubdivision. 
ii.  Name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided; name and address of the applicant if different from the owner. 
iii.  Date, scale, north point, Town and State. 
iv.  Layout of existing and proposed lot lines and street lines. 
v.  Existing and proposed contours at an interval not exceeding two feet based on field and aerial survey. 
vi.  Existing and proposed drainage and watercourses. 
vii.  Existing permanent buildings and structures, including well and septic locations. 
viii.  Location of all test holes, test pits or borings. 
ix.  Cross section drawings covering proposed excavation areas. 
x.  Notations and details on erosion and sedimentation control methods to be employed. 
4.05. - Record subdivision map. 
    The subdivision map shall be prepared with an accuracy meeting, or exceeding, standards for a "Class A-2 Transit Survey" as defined by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. The map shall be clearly and legibly drawn and submitted in six copies of blue or black line prints. The map shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 40'. The map shall show the following: 
i.  Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any previous subdivision in the Town of Avon. 
ii.  Name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided; name and address of the applicant if different from the owner. 
iii.  Date, scale, north point, Town and State. 
iv.  Existing and proposed property and street lines; indication of adjoining property lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet; and the names of all adjacent subdivisions or property owners. 
v.  Existing and proposed watercourses and ponds, conservation areas, and easements and rights-of-way; the location and limits of all easement or reservation areas for the protection of swamps, flood plains, other land subject to potential flooding. 
vi.  Existing and proposed open spaces for parks, stream protection and other open spaces; the square footage or acreage of all lots and open spaces, the total acreage of land included in the subdivision, and proposed lots and lot numbers. The applicant shall contact the Tax Assessor who will assign a multi-digit parcel identification number for each lot. 
vii.  Existing permanent buildings and structures. 
viii.  Dimensions on all lines to the hundredth of a foot; all bearings or deflection angles on all straight lines, and the central angle, tangent distance and radius of all arcs. 
ix.  The width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; street names. 
x.  Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal boundary line. 
xi.  A location map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to existing streets in the Town at a scale of 1" = 1,000'. 
xii.  An index map if the proposed subdivision is divided into sections or is of such size that more than one sheet is required, showing the entire subdivision with lots, lot numbers, street, street names, and delineation of areas covered by the section or sheet. 
xiii.  The survey relationship of proposed streets to nearby monumented Town streets or State highways, where practical. 
xiv.  The error of closure, which shall not exceed 1 in 5,000. 
xv.  The words, "Approved by the Avon Planning and Zoning Commission" with a designated place for endorsement by an authorized commissioner, and date of approval. 
4.06. - Approved maps. 
    Upon approval of the subdivision, final plans shall be submitted as follows: 
i.  Record subdivision map. Two sets drawn on Mylar drafting film and one computerized map in digital format acceptable to the Town Engineer. 
ii.  Construction and grading plan. Four blue or black line paper sets. 
iii.  Prior to the Town of Avon's acceptance of roads and sanitary sewers, a Mylar map and a digital map of all "as-built" information will be required. Files created in AutoCAD shall be submitted in .dwg format. Files created from MicroStation shall be created in .dxf format. Along with the digital file, a list of proposed layer names and their meanings shall be submitted. 
4.07. - Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
    A Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is more than one-half acre. For purposes of this section, [a] disturbed areas [area] shall mean an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed. 
    4.07.01 A single-family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations. 
    4.07.02 A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
i.  A narrative describing the development; the schedule of major activities on the land (including start and completion dates, sequence of grading and construction activities, sequence for installation of erosion and sediment control measures, and sequence for final stabilization measures); the design criteria, construction details, and ongoing maintenance program for erosion and sediment control measures and the storm water management system. 
ii.  A site plan map showing topographic data (including soil types, wetlands and watercourses); existing structures and the proposed development; proposed area alterations; location of and detailed information concerning erosion and sediment control measures and storm water control facilities; the sequencing of all construction phases; and the sequence of installing and details of erosion and sediment control features. 
    4.07.03 The Commission, through the Town Planner, shall certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the requirements and purpose of these regulations or shall deny certification where the proposal does not comply. Certification is necessary prior to any approval of a relevant development application by the Commission. 
    4.07.04 The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, that are a condition of certification of any modified site plan, may be required to be covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission. 
    4.07.05 Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan. The Commission may require submission of progress reports by the applicant/developer to ensure compliance with this section. 
    4.07.06 Minimum site development standards. 
    4.07.07 Installation . Required erosion and sediment control procedures shall be installed at the earliest possible date relative to the normal sequencing of construction operations. 
    4.07.08 Maintenance. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed at all times during construction, that reasonable procedures are followed to minimize erosion and sedimentation, and that any proposed measures or problems are inspected, reviewed, and maintained on a regular basis. 
    4.07.09 Restoration. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed at all times during construction, that reasonable procedures are followed to minimize erosion and sedimentation, and that any proposed measures or problems are inspected, reviewed, and maintained on a regular basis. 
    4.07.10 Minimum standards. The Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended, shall be the minimum standards by which plans shall be reviewed for certification. The Town Planner may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant based upon technically sound alternatives. 
SECTION FIVE - DESIGN STANDARDS 

5.01. - General improvements. 
    Subdivisions and resubdivisions, including related streets, drainage, and other improvements required by these regulations, shall be planned, designed, and constructed in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. 
    5.01.01 Plan of development. Subdivisions shall be planned and designed in general conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of Development, adopted by the Commission under Chapter 125 of the Connecticut General Statutes for the Town [Repealed-See now G.S. § 8-18 et seq.], particularly with regard to: 
i.  Location and classification of streets. 
ii.  Sanitary sewer, water supply and drainage system service area. 
iii.  Reservation of land for parks, recreation, and open space. 
    5.01.02 Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The principal road in the subdivision shall bear the same name as the subdivision. 
    5.01.03 Open Spaces. In order to preserve open spaces and to establish parks and playgrounds, the Commission may require the applicant to dedicate a maximum of ten percent of the total tract proposed for subdivision. The applicant may propose that certain areas be set aside for such purposes, but the Commission need not accept such proposal and may, instead, require the dedication of other areas of the subdivision for such purposes. Any dedication proposed by an applicant must include at least ten percent of the "developable land" within the subdivision. For purposes of this section, the term "developable land" shall exclude (1) areas classified as inland wetlands or watercourses in accordance with the Town's Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, (2) areas within the 100-year floodplain as shown on current Federal Insurance Rate Maps, and (3) areas having slopes in excess of 25 percent. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the applicant from proposing, or the Commission from accepting, the dedication of areas that do not constitute developable land, provided the proposed dedication also includes at least ten percent of the developable land area. Each reservation of open spaces, parks and playgrounds shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography, and general character for the particular purposes envisioned by the Commission. The Commission may reject any proposed dedication of land if it determines that such dedication would not provide significant open space or recreational benefits to the Town. The Commission shall reserve the right to determine the legal manner by which such open space and recreational areas shall be dedicated. Such manner may include, but shall not be limited to, the conveyance of fee interests or lesser interests, such as conservation easements, to the Town or to a land trust or other nonprofit conservation organization. 
    5.01.03.1 Fees in lieu of open space. With the approval of the Commission, the subdivider may pay a fee to the Town or pay a fee to the Town and transfer land (which may include land outside the boundaries of the subdivision) to the Town in lieu, of or in addition to, any requirement to provide open space. The Commission may refuse such fee if it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are desirable areas on the subdivision which will provide valuable open space areas consistent with the goals set forth in Section 5.01.03 and which would be more beneficial to the Town than the acceptance of a fee or a fee plus land elsewhere. Fee-in-lieu-of-open-space procedures shall be as follows: 
i.  Such payment or combination of payment and the fair market value of land transferred shall be equal to not more than ten percent of the fair market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision. 
ii.  The fair market value shall be determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the subdivider, the cost of which appraisal is to be paid by the applicant. Each such appraisal shall be prepared in conformance with the current version of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice and with such other standards as may be required by State law. The Commission shall reserve the right to determine whether such standards have been met. If the Commission finds that any appraisal was not prepared in conformance with such standards, it may reject such appraisal. 
iii.  A fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is the number of approved lots in the subdivision, shall be made at the time of the sale of each approved lot in the subdivision and placed in a fund established by the Town to be used for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes. 
iv.  When fees are provided in lieu of open space land, the developer shall execute a lien acceptable to the Town Attorney, which shall be recorded on the Avon Land Records. 
(Amend.. of 4-4-2006; Amend. of 10-24-06, eff. 11-1-06) 
    5.01.04 Monuments. Permanent reference monuments shall be placed within the subdivision as required herein. 
    5.01.04.1 Town Road right-of-way merestones, perimeter boundary and lot corners shall conform to Class A-2 of Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Maps, as amended. A registered land surveyor in the State of Connecticut will certify to the correctness. 
    5.01.04.2 A minimum of two vertical and horizontal control points will be set within the Town right-of-way at positions designated by the Town Engineer. Horizontal coordinates will be from the Connecticut State Coordinate System with tie-in requirements as above. Vertical control will be U.S.G.S. mean sea level datum. The markers used for horizontal and vertical control shall consist of a merestone w/ [with] a brass cap as shown in Appendix C. 
    5.01.04.3 A registered land surveyor will certify to the horizontal and vertical accuracy of the points set. Class A-2 of the Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Maps prepared by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc., January, 1945. 
    5.01.04.4 Highway lines will be monumented by standard Town of Avon merestones at all points, PC, PT, PRC. The maximum distance between highway merestones will be 500' on tangent or curved sections of the highway line. Highway merestones will be set to the accuracy of Class A-2 of the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. The proposed highway line will be tied into existing highway lines by distance and bearing. Additional highway merestones may be required at locations on the highway line as required by the Town Engineer. 
    5.01.04.5 All lot corners shall be permanently located by iron or steel stakes at least three-quarter inch in diameter and 30 inches in length. 
    5.01.05 Street trees. Shade trees of varieties acceptable to the Commission shall be provided along existing and proposed streets by planting new trees or preserving existing trees. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one per 50' on either side of the right-of-way. Such trees shall be located between the building line and ten feet inside the lot line. New trees shall be not less than 3-31/2 inches in caliper and shall be guaranteed for one season's growth by the developer. 
5.02. - Lot improvements and access. 
    5.02.01 Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the Zoning Regulations and Health Codes and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street. 
    5.02.01.1 Double frontage. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots may be required where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
    5.02.01.2 Lot access. Where driveway access from a major or secondary arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazard on such street. 
    5.02.01.3 Rear lots. The development of rear lots shall be subject to the following special requirements: 
i.  Rear lots shall be avoided in new subdivisions, where possible. Such lots will be approved only under unusual conditions and the number shall be kept to a minimum. 
ii.  If an accessway will serve more than one rear lot, then that accessway shall be built to conform to standards for Town roads except with regard to width of pavement and curbs which may be modified at the discretion of the Commission on recommendation from the Town Engineer. 
    5.02.02 Lot arrangements on existing streets. Lots proposed for existing streets shall, in addition to meeting other applicable standards of these regulations, be arranged to conform with the following: 
    5.02.02.1 Where no street lines have been established on an existing street, front property lines for subdivision lots shall not be closer than 25 feet from the center of the road or 50 feet from and parallel to an established street line on the opposite side of the street. The Commission may require that the title to all land between the center of the road and the front property lines of the subdivision lots shall be dedicated to the Town of Avon in accordance with the legal requirements for such a procedure: 
i.  Where the grade of the existing or proposed road will be materially higher or lower than the proposed lots fronting on it, the Commission may, for reason of providing adequate sight distance on driveways, alleviating excessive or hazardous slope, or excessive runoff, require any lot or any part of such lot to be regraded as necessary to be in harmony with the road grade. 
ii.  Where the finished grading of a lot fronting on an existing street will cause drainage problems in that street, the developer shall, at his expense, install drains in the street or make such other provision as may be necessary to correct the condition. 
5.03. - Lot dimensions. 
    Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Zoning Regulations. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the Zoning District, the Commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. 
5.04. - Lot grading and drainage. 
    Where substantial regrading of the lot is required in order to provide a buildable site, grading plans shall be submitted for Commission approval. Such plans shall demonstrate practical methods for controlling potential erosion and stabilizing areas of cuts and fills on individual lots. The plan shall employ standards and methods equal to, or exceeding, those set forth in Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control by the Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation in cooperation with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, DEP Bulletin 34[,] 2002, and as amended. 
    5.04.01 Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. Lots shall be graded such that finished slopes do not exceed 3:1 unless the Commission determines that steeper slopes will result in less environmental impact. 
    5.04.02 Water bodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The Commission may approve an alternative plan whereby responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is assured. 
5.05. - Streets; generally. 
    No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on, and access from, another existing public street which is suitably improved and paved; or a street shown upon a map approved by the Commission and recorded in the Town Clerk's office. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the appropriate regulations and specifications, or be secured by a performance bond. 
    5.05.01 Street grading and improvement. Streets shall be graded and improved and conform to [the] Town of Avon construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the Town Engineer. 
    5.05.01.1 Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these regulations. 
    5.05.02 Traffic Circulation Plan. All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established in the Traffic Circulation Plan of the Comprehensive Plan of Development. Additionally, all thoroughfares shall be properly related to specific traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
    5.05.03 Street extensions. Where required by the Commission, rights-of-way shall be provided for extending streets to adjoining unsubdivided property. Land in such rights-of-way shall be deeded to the Town as part of the street right-of-way to ensure its availability for future street connections. The Commission may require these streets and improvements to be constructed as part of the subdivision. 
    5.05.03.1 Where a proposed subdivision abuts an approved subdivision containing a future street right-of-way, the developer of the proposed subdivision shall construct the street and all required improvements from the proposed subdivision street to the approved street in the existing subdivision. 
    5.05.03.2 New streets shall be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision to provide access to adjoining property, and shall intersect with other streets designated as such by the Commission or as shown on the Street Map of Avon, as amended, part of the Comprehensive Plan of Development. 
    5.05.03.3 Where a temporary turnaround is provided on a street that is to be extended in the future, the 50-foot street right-of-way to the subdivision boundary shall be deeded to the Town, and the segments of the turnaround outside the 50-foot street shall be deeded to the abutting lot owners subject to an easement to the Town for street purposes. When such street is extended beyond the turnaround, the subdivider constructing the extended street shall remove the road construction in the segments of the temporary turnaround, fill with earth and loam and seed in an appropriate manner. 
    5.05.04 Street names. All street names shall be shown on subdivision plans and shall be approved by the Commission. Proposed street names shall be substantially different from any present names, to avoid confusion in sound or spelling. Streets that become extensions of existing streets shall generally bear the same name. 
    5.05.05 Street lighting facilities. The applicant shall be required to install one lighting pole at each intersection, together with any additional lighting poles as the Commission may require, to prevent hazard. The location of such poles shall be shown on the construction plans under Section 4. The cost of all lighting fixtures, poles, and installation shall be the responsibility of the developer. The developer shall bond such lighting facilities with all other public improvements. 
    5.05.06 Street name signs. The developer shall be responsible for the cost and installation of street name signs. Such signs shall be placed at each intersection with existing streets as well as at each intersection within the development. The location, type and size of such signs shall be subject to the approval of the Avon Traffic Authority and shall conform to the standards set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. The developer shall bond such street name signs with all other public improvements. 
    5.05.07 Traffic control devices. The developer shall be responsible for the cost and installation of any traffic control devices deemed necessary by the Traffic Authority. Such devices shall meet the appropriate standards set forth in the manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. The developer shall bond such traffic control devices with other public improvements. Necessary state permits for work related to state highways shall be the responsibility of the developer and shall be coordinated through the office of the Local Traffic Authority. 
    5.05.08 Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street. 
5.06. - Cul-de-sac or dead-end. 
    A temporary turnabout shall be provided on all temporary cul-de-sac streets, with the notation on the subdivision map that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued. The Commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
    5.06.01 Permanent cul-de-sacs. Permanent cul-de-sacs shall not exceed the following design standards: 
i.  1,500 feet in length or 20 lots, whichever is the more restrictive requirement; 
ii.  1,500-2,000 feet in length or 15 lots, whichever is the more restrictive requirement; or 
iii.  2,000-2,500 feet in length or ten lots, whichever is the more restrictive requirement; 
However, where an applicant can demonstrate that he can adhere to these design standards but an alternate plan better protects the health, safety or welfare of the community, the Commission may waive these standards using the provisions of Section 1.05.4 of these regulations. The Commission may base its decision in part on the recommendations of the Traffic Authority and Fire Marshal. 
5.07. - Design standards. 
    In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, fire-fighting, snow removal, sanitation, and road-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for roads shall be adhered to: 
    5.07.01 Table I. Road Design Standards. 
Table I - Road Design Standards 
Road 
Class ROW 
Width Pavement 
Width Maximum 
Grade Minimum 
Grade Design 
Speed Cross 
Slope Collector 60 feet 32 feet 12% 1% 30 mph 3/8 inches 
per foot Local 50 feet 26 feet 12% 1% 25 mph 3/8 inches 
per foot Limited 
Local 50 feet 22 feet 12% 1% 20 mph 3/8 inches 
per foot  
Table II - Cul-de-sac Design Standards 
Cul-de-sac Type Right-of-Way Pavement Temporary 50-foot radius 45-foot radius Permanent 55-foot radius 45-foot radius  
    5.07.01.1 Road classification may be indicated on the plan of development; otherwise it shall be determined by the Commission. Streets of a higher classification, i.e., primary and secondary arterial, shall, at the minimum, meet collector street standards. 
    5.07.01.2 (Deleted effective February 17, 2000) 
    5.07.01.3 Where a subdivision of four or less lots is proposed on a private road, the design standards contained herein may be modified by the Commission when, in the judgment of the Commission, the best use and subdivision of land is assured. 
    5.07.02 Curbs. Curbs shall be required on all new streets and shall conform to construction and design standards as required in Appendix B of these regulations. 
    5.07.03 Guide rails . Guide rails shall be provided where the side slope on fill is steeper than one vertical to four horizontal. Such rails shall conform to the standards and specifications adopted by the Town of Avon. 
    5.07.04 Road pavement. All road pavement, shoulders, drainage, improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the Town of Avon. 
    5.07.05 Right-of-way. The full width of the road right-of-way shall be graded in accordance with the cross section shown in Appendix A. This requirement may be modified where, in the opinion of the Commission and upon recommendation of the Town Engineer, the existing character of the land creates unusual difficulty or hardship or will require removal of desirable natural growth, or where the location and kind of street appears not to require sidewalks in the future. 
5.08. - Intersections. 
    Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the Commission. 
    5.08.01 Proposed new intersections. Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersections with major streets should be at least 800 feet apart. 
    5.08.02 Curb radius. Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall be at least 25 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least 30 feet. 
    5.08.03 Cross section. At street intersections, the normal cross section of the main street shall be maintained. The centerline grade of the secondary street shall begin at the curb line of the main street and have a maximum grade of 2% for at least 50 feet from said curb line. Maximum may be increased to 4% at the discretion of the Commission when the proposed road is a permanent cul-de-sac less than 400 feet in length. 
    5.08.04 Street intersections . Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent required by the Commission to provide an adequate sight distance. A sight-line easement shall be shown on the subdivision map limiting future plantings within this area to ensure the continuance of adequate sight lines. 
5.09. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
    5.09.01 General requirements. The developer shall be fully responsible for constructing adequate facilities for the control, collection, conveyance and acceptable disposal of storm water, other surface water and subsurface water, whether originating within the subdivision area or in a tributary drainage area. All drainage facilities shall be designed by a registered professional engineer and be subject to the approval and final acceptance of the Town Engineer. 
    5.09.01.1 Storm water drainage system. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by methods as approved by the Town Engineer. 
    5.09.02 Location of storm water facilities. Drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements, where necessary. Such easements shall be at least 20 feet in width. 
    5.09.02.1 When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the map. 
    5.09.02.2 The applicant may be required to dedicate either in fee or by drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses to a distance to be determined by the Commission. 
    5.09.02.3 Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. 
    5.09.03 Drainage discharge. The discharge of all storm water from a subdivision shall be into suitable streams or other acceptable and suitable storm water drainage facilities having adequate capacity to carry the additional water. Where the discharge will be into private property, proper easements and discharge rights shall be secured for the Town by the applicant from all affected property owners. Such easements must be acceptably executed before acceptance of drainage plan and approval of the subdivision map. 
    5.09.03.1 Sufficient and adequate facilities shall be constructed on private lots wherever necessary to prevent the flow of surface drainage from the property on which it originates onto adjacent property in sufficient quantity, concentration or velocity to cause damage or create a nuisance on adjoining property. 
    5.09.03.2 Where a new street intercepts an existing street which has no underground drainage system or has a drainage system of insufficient capacity to carry the additional flow, appropriate facilities shall be installed by the developer to intercept and dispose of any drainage from the new street which would otherwise be discharged onto the surface of the existing street or into its drainage system. 
5.10. - Drainage design. 
    All designs shall be based on the maximum ultimate development of the entire watershed as permitted by the Zoning Regulations. All bridges and culverts shall be designed such that the required head and water backwater produced by the structure shall not cause flooding of abutting property. 
    5.10.01 On watersheds one square mile or over, the design of culverts, bridges and through watercourses shall be based upon not less than a 100-year storm. On watersheds of less than one square mile, the design for the through drainage system shall be for not less than a 50-year storm. 
    5.10.02 The drainage system for roads, including catch basins, inlets, pipe, underdrains and gutters, within or abutting the subdivision shall be designed for not less than a ten-year storm. 
    5.10.03 Adequate underdrains shall be constructed whenever, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, drainage conditions require it. They may be required even though not shown on the approved construction plans. Design shall be as approved by the Town Engineer. 
    5.10.04 Drainage ditches will, in general, not be permitted where it is feasible to install underground pipe. Lead-off culverts shall be extended to grade. 
    5.10.05 Culverts under streets shall be extended at least to the edge of the right-of-way of the street. Headwalls, paving, flared-ends, and/or riprap, adequate to prevent erosion, shall be provided at the ends of all culverts. 
5.11. - Water. 
    A potable, adequate, and dependable water supply shall be provided for every lot or dwelling unit. 
    5.11.01 Public water supply. [A public water supply] shall be required to serve all of the following: 
i.  Any subdivision in an R-15 zone. 
ii.  Any subdivision, any part of which is within the required distance of an existing water service as determined by the following formula: ultimate number of lots times 150 feet for all residential zones equals distance of extension. 
The ultimate number of lots shall be determined by multiplying the total acreage of the tract by the appropriate density factor. Distance shall be measured from the end of the existing service line along existing or proposed streets or rights-of-way to the nearest point in the subdivision. 
If the Commission determines that it would not be reasonably feasible to serve one or more of the lots in a proposed subdivision with existing public water supply facilities for reasons of elevation, the Commission may permit service of one or more lots with water from private wells in lieu of water from a public water supply. In making this determination, the Commission shall consider whether: 
i.  The extension from existing public water supplies is required in order to provide water service to future developments; 
ii.  Such extension is required in order to improve water supply or service in existing developments by providing interconnections between existing public water supply systems; 
iii.  Such lot or lots can adequately be served by on site wells under Section 5.11.03 of these regulations; and 
iv.  The use of private wells in lieu of a public water supply will have an adverse effect on the public health, safety and welfare. 
    5.11.02 Fire hydrants. Where a public water main is extended, fire hydrants shall be installed at the expense of the developer. Fire hydrants shall be spaced no more than 750 feet apart unless waived or reduced by the Commission upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. The location of hydrants shall be subject to the review and approval of the Commission following input from the Fire Chief. Each hydrant shall have a minimum yield of 1,000 gallons per minute for a sustained period of one hour unless waived by the Commission upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. In association with a request for a waiver in hydrant spacing or yield, the Commission shall be guided by housing density, proximity to firehouses, access to major roadways, long-range planning by water companies to upgrade service within the area of the subject application, and alternative water sources which are available for fire protection. 
    5.11.03 Private wells. In a subdivision which is located where a public water service is not required, a private well shall be permitted for each lot provided that[:] 
(1)  Topographic and geological conditions are satisfactory; 
(2)  Each well can be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Conn. Department of Health; 
(3)  Each well shall have the approval of the Avon Director of Health. 
5.12. - Sewage disposal facilities. 
    Every application for approval of a subdivision must include satisfactory evidence that the site has suitable physical characteristics to adequately satisfy the requirements of the State Health Code for subsurface sewage disposal or that the proposed lots can be connected to an operational public sanitary sewer. 
    5.12.01 Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows: 
    5.12.01.1 Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible, the applicant shall connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision. 
    5.12.01.2 Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible, but may become available within a reasonable time (not to exceed five years), individual disposal systems may be used provided the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer system where such exist and shall be ready for connection to such public sewer main. 
    5.12.01.3 Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will not become available for a period in excess of five years, the applicant may install individual disposal systems. 
5.13. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks, when required, shall conform to the design requirements in Appendix C of these regulations. 
    5.13.01 Provision. The Commission may require the provision of sidewalks in any area within legal walking distance of any school, or where traffic conditions are such that public safety would be best served by such safety features. 
    5.13.02 Pedestrian accesses. The Commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the map. 
5.14. - Utilities. 
    All utility lines shall be located underground except that the Commission may approve overhead electrical and telephone lines in subdivisions not involving new streets, or where physical conditions make underground installations impractical. 
    5.14.01 Underground locations shall generally comply with the following: 
i.  Sanitary sewers. Center line of street. 
ii.  Storm sewers. Edge of street opposite water line. 
iii.  Water line . Within right-of-way above and at least 10' from sanitary sewer line. 
iv.  Electric and telephone. Within right-of-way opposite the water line. 
5.15. - Passive solar design. 
    Any person submitting a subdivision shall demonstrate to the Commission that they have designed the street and lot layouts, house orientations, and used vegetation and natural and manmade topographical features so as to maximize and protect solar access within the development while still observing other provisions of these regulations and respecting the natural limitations of the site. 
5.16. - Fire protection. 
    In order to provide for adequate fire protection, subdivisions which are not served by public water and fire hydrants in accordance with Section[s] 5.11.01 and 5.11.02 shall install fire ponds and/or underground cisterns in locations directed by the Town Engineer. The Commission may waive the requirement of providing fire ponds and/or underground cisterns where the ultimate number of lots within the parcel of land being subdivided is five or less. In making this determination, the Commission shall be guided by the cost of the improvements as measured against the project's ability to absorb these costs and the need for enhanced firefighting capabilities for the development. Cisterns and fire ponds shall be sized and constructed in accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 1141, 1985 Edition - Fire Protection in Planned Building Groups and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 1231, 1989 Edition - Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Firefighting, as those standards may from time to time be amended or replaced. The Town Engineer shall review and approve proposed fire pond and cistern sizes, design, and construction specifications. 
    5.16.01 Dry hydrants for cisterns and fire ponds. All cisterns and fire ponds shall include the installation of a dry hydrant. The hydrant design shall be approved in accordance with NFPA Standards and by the Town Engineer. 
    5.16.02 Fire pond and cistern location. Fire ponds and cisterns shall be located in areas which can be easily accessed by emergency personnel. Where possible, they shall be located adjacent to the road right-of-way. The land area containing ponds, cisterns, and access areas shall be conveyed to the Town along with all other public improvements. Fire ponds and cistern locations shall be approved by the Fire Chief. Design standards for access areas shall be approved by the Town Engineer. In instances where a fire pond is to be located on private property as part of a building lot, necessary easements shall be conveyed to the Town to ensure the Town's perpetual right to access the pond; to maintain the integrity of the pond for firefighting purposes, including but not limited to cleaning the pond of accumulated sediments, removing snow, and removing trees and brush; and to use the pond for firefighting and training purposes. Deed restrictions shall be prepared which define the property owners' obligation to not alter the pond or locate any structures in a manner which inhibits the ability of firefighting equipment and personnel to utilize the pond in the event of an emergency. All easements and deed restrictions shall be subject to review and approval by the Town Attorney. 
    5.16.03 Landscaping of fire ponds and cisterns. The Commission may require the installation of landscape plants or other objects or materials to screen pipes, access drives, or other structures associated with the installation of fire ponds or cisterns. 





APPENDIX D - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the zoning regulations. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section I. - Introduction. 
A.  Authority. These regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended [G.S. § 8-1 et seq.]. 
B.  Purposes. These regulations are adopted for the purposes of: 
Promoting public health, safety, and general welfare; 
Providing adequate light, air, and privacy; 
Preventing overcrowding of the land and avoiding undue concentration of population; 
Lessening congestion in the streets; 
Facilitating adequate transportation, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
Securing safety from fire, panic, flood, and other dangers; 
Conserving the value of buildings and property; 
Encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town of Avon with reasonable consideration for the existing or planned character of the area; 
Protecting historic factors within the Town of Avon; 
Protecting existing and potential public surface and ground drinking water supplies; 
Controlling erosion caused by wind or water and providing for sedimentation control; 
Encouraging energy conservation, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy-efficient patterns of development; and 
Guiding the growth of the Town of Avon in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Development. 
C.  Zone types. For achieving these purposes, the Town of Avon is divided into the following zones: 
Residential R-15 Residential R-30 Residential R-40 Residential RU-2A Agricultural A Educational Land EL Recreation/Open Space ROS Office Park OP Neighborhood Business NB Commercial Specialized CS Commercial Retail CR Commercial Park A CPA Commercial Park B CPB Industrial I Industrial Park IP  
D.  Zone boundaries. Zone boundaries are established by the Planning and Zoning Commission and are shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map; Town of Avon, Connecticut." 
E.  Zone boundary interpretation. Unless otherwise clearly designated on the Zoning Map, zone boundaries shall be interpreted as: 
Following the center line of a street, highway, road, river, brook, or stream; 
Following property lines; 
Following the lines of a particular geophysical feature including flood plains and steep slopes; or 
Running parallel to any of the before-mentioned lines, at distances measured, where zone boundaries appear to be set back from such lines. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the location of zone boundaries in case of an uncertainty. 
Section II. - Interpretation of regulations. 
A.  General interpretation. The uses of land, buildings or structures not clearly permitted in the various zones are prohibited. 
B.  Interpretation of terms. Certain terms used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
The singular includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
The word "person" includes a partnership, corporation, or other entity. 
The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
The word "zone" includes the word "district." 
The word "Commission" means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Avon. 
C.  Definitions. The definitions contained in this section shall be used for the purpose of interpreting the various provisions of these regulations. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall establish the appropriate definition for words not defined in this section or in case of an uncertainty. 
    Accessory. (e.g., accessory building, structure, or use) Customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal building, structure, or use located on the same lot. 
    Accessory apartment. A second dwelling unit in an existing single-family detached dwelling for use as a complete, independent living facility with provisions within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling is an accessory use to the main dwelling. 
    Assisted living facility. A residence facility for the elderly or disabled that contains independent living units with provisions for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping; that provides for meals, personal care, and supervision of self-administered medication; and that provides a transition between independent living and skilled nursing care. 
    Attic. A space immediately below the roof of a building that is used solely for utilities, storage, or other accessory uses and that is not generally intended, designed or used for regular human occupancy. If the space immediately below a roof is greater than six feet in height over an area equal to or greater than 200 square feet, the space shall be deemed to be a separate story or half-story and shall not be deemed to be an attic. 
    Basement. That portion of a building where the ceiling is less than three feet above the average ground level. 
    Berm. A mound of earth typically used as a landform design element or buffer. 
    Buffer. Land area used to visibly separate one use from another or to block noise, lights, or other nuisances, generally through the use of landscaping, structures, and/or vegetation. 
    Building. A structure having a roof supported by walls on all sides and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal, or material of any kind. Buildings that are physically connected only by structures other than buildings, such as covered walkways, shall be deemed to be separate buildings. 
    Building floor area, maximum. The maximum cumulative area, as specified in and permitted by these regulations, of all floors in any one building, except that the area of basement floors and attic floors shall not be included in the calculation of maximum building floor area. 
    Building height. The vertical distance from the average finished ground level at the building walls to the highest point of the roof or to the average height between the eaves and the ridge for a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. For buildings which have more than one roof line, height requirements shall be measured to the highest roof. 

    Building height, maximum. The maximum building height, as specified in and permitted by these regulations. The maximum building height in any zoning district shall also be the maximum height of any structure in the same zoning district, except as provided in Section III.B.2. of these regulations, and except that stand pipes, soil stacks, chimneys, and similar accessory utility structures, as well as television and radio antennas that are affixed to a building, may extend not more than an additional five feet above the highest point of the roof of the building to which they are accessory, provided the roof complies with the maximum building height limitation. 
    Building line. A line parallel to the property lines set back a distance equal to the yard requirements established for the zone in which the lot is located. (See Yards.) 
    Caliper. The diameter of a tree trunk, measured 6" above the ground. 
    Certificate of Occupancy. A document issued by the Building Inspector allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed in compliance with applicable regulations and approvals. 
    Congregate living facility . A residence facility for elderly or disabled residents that contains independent living units with provisions for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping and that provides communal dining facilities and other appropriate support services such as housekeeping, organized social and recreational activities, and/or transportation. 
    Convenience goods. Goods such as food, dairy, bakery, or drug products, which may regularly be required in the day-to-day functions of a residential home. 
    Day care. The provision of a supplementary care program to people outside their homes on a regular basis. 
    Decibel . A unit of sound pressure level which is commonly used to express noise level. 
    Density. The maximum number of families permitted per acre of developable land. 
    Dwelling. A building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy. 
    Earth. Earth, sand, gravel, clay, quarry stone, and other earthen materials. 
    Elderly. Age 62 or older or, in the case of elderly occupancy, where at least one member of the immediate family is age 62 or older. 
    Emergency medical care facility. A medical office staffed by a licensed medical professional, such as a physician or veterinarian, providing emergency treatment for humans or animals on a walk-in basis. The facility will provide equipment and pharmaceuticals necessary to diagnose and treat medical and surgical emergencies. 
    Family. Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption and not more than two additional unrelated individuals living and working together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Farming. Cultivation of soil for growing of crops; dairy farming; orchards; and/or the raising, breeding, and keeping of livestock and animals (excluding pigs) on a parcel of land containing at least ten acres. 
    Farming, limited. Farming on a tract of less than ten acres provided the use is accessory to the principal use of the premises. Animal size is defined as follows: Large animals - domestic animals whose mature weight is generally 500 pounds or more, such as horses and ponies. Medium animals - domestic animals whose mature weight falls within the range of 30-500 pounds, such as sheep and goats. Small animals - domestic animals with a mature weight of less than 30 pounds, such as poultry, fowl, and rabbits. 
    Floor. The bottom surface of a room or of any other interior space within a building. 
    Front lot. A lot which abuts and fronts on a street and which meets the lot width requirement of the zone. 
    Home occupation. An occupation or business activity which results in a product or service for financial gain; is conducted in whole or in part in the dwelling unit; is clearly subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling unit; occupies less than 25% of the dwelling unit; doesn't affect the residential character of the property; and does not create a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
    Home occupation, minor . A home occupation in which no persons other than residents residing on the premises are engaged in the occupation; has no visible exterior evidence of the conduct of the occupation; does not create need for off-street parking beyond normal dwelling needs; does not generate additional traffic from nonresidents; and for which no equipment is stored or used on-site other than that normally used in household, domestic, or general office work. 
    Home occupation, major . A home occupation in which not more than one person other than residents residing on the premises is employed on the premises; may have more customer activity than a minor home occupation; and that accommodates both dwelling and home occupation parking needs. Major home occupations are subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission by special exception. 
    Impervious coverage. The percentage of a lot covered by impervious surfaces. 
    Impervious surface. A hard, typically man-made surface that prevents the percolation of stormwater into the soil including building roofs, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, other paved surfaces, and other essentially impenetrable surfaces. 
    Kennel. An establishment in which more than three dogs over the age of six months are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold. 
    Landscaped area. An open area, landscaped area, or naturally vegetated area maintained in natural or artificial ground cover, lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plantings and including walks or drives to and from a street. 
    Licensed medical marijuana production facility: Means a secure, indoor facility where production of marijuana occurs and that is operated by a person to whom the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection has issued a producer license under section 10 of "An Act Concerning the Palliative Use of Marijuana and whose purpose is to cultivate marijuana for palliative use, selling, delivering, transporting or distributing such marijuana only to licensed dispensaries under sections 1 to 15, inclusive of the Act. 
    Licensed medical marijuana dispensary facility: Means a place of business where marijuana may be dispensed or sold at retail by a pharmacist licensed pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 400j, Sections 1 to 15, inclusive, to qualifying patients or primary caregivers and for which the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection has issued a dispensary facility permit to an applicant under the Act Concerning the Palliative Use of Marijuana, Sections 21a-408-1 to 21a-408-70, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
    Living area. That portion of the total floor area of a residential dwelling which has ceilings, walls and floors finished in a manner which is clearly intended for human occupancy, and which conforms to the Building Code. 
    Logo. For the purposes of these regulations, logo shall mean a simple graphic presentation which may include numbers or letters used to identify the business. 
    Lot. A parcel of land occupied or approved to be occupied by a building or buildings. 
    Lot area. The total area within the lot lines of a lot. 
    Lot coverage. That percentage of the lot area that is covered by the roof area of all buildings and structures on the lot. Roof overhangs shall not be calculated as lot coverage unless they project more than 18 inches from the exterior of the foundation wall. 
    Lot line. A line of record bounding a lot. 
    Lot width. The distance between the side lot lines measured along the front yard setback requirement. 
    Major grocery store. A self-service retail market larger than 20,000 square feet of gross building area, that sells food and household goods, provided that 50% or more of the area used for displaying goods is used for the display of food. 
    Manufacturer certified pre-owned motor vehicle. A motor vehicle which has been certified in accordance with an automobile manufacturer sponsored program which provides quality pre-owned vehicles covered by a comprehensive, factory-backed protection plan and which vehicles are in compliance with manufacturer certified standards. 
    Motor vehicle. Any motor passenger vehicle (including taxis and livery vehicles, but excluding busses), any truck not exceeding a 3/4-ton capacity, and any other motor vehicle which is primarily used for agriculture or for maintenance on the premises. 
    Multiple dwelling unit. A dwelling unit located in a building which contains at least two or more dwelling units. 
    Nonconforming. (e.g., nonconforming use, building or structure) Not conforming to the applicable requirements or provisions of these regulations. 
    Nursery. An agricultural operation where the primary use is the growing of flowers, plants, shrubs, or trees outdoors for commercial gain and which may include sale of such products and related garden merchandise as an accessory use. Garden supply stores and sales of equipment and implements are not included in this definition. 
    Permeable paving or surfaces. Is a range of materials using sustainable techniques for permeable pavements with a base and subbase that allow the movement of stormwater through the surface and back to the groundwater. In addition to reducing site runoff, this effectively traps suspended solids and filters pollutants from the entering the groundwater. 
Examples depending on construction and use may include roads, paths, lawns and lots that are subject to light vehicular traffic, such as car/parking lots, cycle-paths, service or emergency access lanes, road shoulders, and residential sidewalks and driveways. 
Although some porous paving materials appear nearly indistinguishable from nonporous materials, their environmental effects are qualitatively different. Whether it is pervious concrete, porous asphalt, paving stones or concrete or plastic-based pavers, all these pervious materials allow stormwater to percolate and infiltrate the surface areas, traditionally impervious to the soil below. The goal is to control stormwater at the source, reduce runoff and improve water quality by filtering pollutants in the substrata layers. 
    Personal service. Shops such as barbershops, beauty salons, tailoring establishments, shoe repair shops and other similar operations which provide services of a personal, domestic nature. Day care is not included in this definition. 
    Pervious coverage. The percentage of a lot not covered by completely impervious surfaces. The intent of optimizing pervious coverage is to increase infiltration back to groundwater and to avoid excess stormwater from leaving the site. 
    Pervious surface. Any material that permits absorption of stormwater into the ground. 
    PODS. The term "portable on-demand storage structures" (hereinafter referred to as "PODS") shall be defined to be temporary, transportable storage units designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials, household goods, personal items and other materials for use on a limited basis on residential property. Any "PODS" greater than 10 CY are subject to these regulations. POD units greater than eight feet in height, eight feet in width or 16 feet in length (38 CY) are strictly prohibited. 
    Premises. All land comprising a lot and including all buildings, structures and uses located on the lot. 
    Rear lot. A residentially zoned lot which does not meet the lot width requirement of the zone and which is approved for building purposes under Section IV.A.4.p. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which can be towed, hauled or driven and is designed primarily for recreational use or as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping or travel use. 
    Restaurant. An establishment used principally for the preparation and service of food and beverages for consumption either on or off the premises. 
    Restaurant, Class I. A restaurant that meets all of the following criteria: 
(i)  Gross floor area is 1,500 square feet or less; 
(ii)  Seating capacity is 20 or less; 
(iii)  Food and beverages served on the premises are actually or expected to be consumed primarily off the premises; 
(iv)  No drive-through windows are provided. 
    Restaurant, Class II. A restaurant that meets all of the following criteria: 
(i)  Gross floor area is 2,000 square feet or less; 
(ii)  Seating capacity is 50 or less; and 
(iii)  Food and beverages served on the premises are actually or expected to be consumed primarily on the premises. 
    Restaurant, Class III. A restaurant that does not meet all of the criteria of either a Class I Restaurant or a Class II Restaurant. 
    Shopping centers. Commercial building(s) totaling more than 20,000 square feet of gross building area, managed as a single operating unit, which includes retail stores and which may include financial institutions, personal services, business and professional offices, and restaurants, but excluding major grocery stores. Adjacent properties subject to a Consolidated Parcel Agreement, as defined in Section V.C. of these regulations, meeting the above definition shall be considered a shopping center. 
    Sign. Any natural or artificial structure, object, device, light, or display which is used to advertise, identify, or attract attention to any object, product, institution, organization, business, service, or location by any means, including but not limited to letter, number, banner, flag, insignia, device, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or logo, and which is situated so that it can be seen from a street. One flag or any one insignia of any governmental agency shall not be considered a sign within the purpose of this regulation. 
    Sign, detached. A sign supported by one or more supports placed in or upon the ground. 
    Sign, roof. Any sign erected and maintained upon or above the main roof of a building. 
    Sign, wall. A sign which is attached to any surface or plane of a building and which does not extend beyond the perimeter of the building or above the roof line. 
    Small wind energy system (windmill). A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion of electronics, which has a rated nameplate capacity of not more than 20 kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power. 
    Small wind energy system height (windmill). The vertical distance from the average finished ground level at the main tower edges to the highest point of the structure, including any blade, lighting rod, or antenna. If a blade extends above the tower at any point in its arc, then the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height shall be used. 
    Story. That part of a building between any floor and the ceiling or roof above it. Basements shall be included in determining the number of stories in a building if the ceiling of the basement is three feet or more above the average ground level. Attics shall not be deemed to be separate stories. 
    Story, half. That portion of a building between a gable, hip, or gambrel roof and the floor below provided that the floor below is not more than two feet below the intersection of the roof and the wall. (See Graphic) 

    Street. Any right-of-way used for public travel or any proposed way shown on a recorded subdivision approved by the Commission. 
    Street line. A boundary line of any public or private street. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, but excluding pavement. 
    Temporary special events. A temporary accessory use of not more than three consecutive days' duration for any one occurrence held outdoors in an open area. Such event may include a fair, carnival, festival, flea market, automobile show, arts and crafts show, or sidewalk sale which is used as a promotional device to advertise an established commercial use and/or as a fund-raising event for a nonprofit organization and may be expected to attract more than 300 persons during the course of the event. Such event may include temporary retail food vendors; retail vendors from both within and outside the project; and exhibitors of arts, crafts, jewelry, farm produce, and other retail products. Special events shall not include those activities which are merely an extension of the principal use itself, such as a school graduation or athletic competition. 
    Variance. A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Regulations where such variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the regulations and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare, and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such a parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such bylaws, ordinances or regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice will de done and the public safety and welfare secured. 
    Watercourse. Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water (natural or artificial), which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the Town of Avon or any portion thereof. 
    Wetland. Land, including submerged land, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, or flood plain by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. 
    Wind facility. A facility located at a residential property that will consume more than 50 percent of the electricity generated by the facility. 
    Wind facility equipment. All equipment, machinery, and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of wind to electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, transmission lines and support structures, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers, service and access roads, and one or more wind turbines. 
    Wind turbine. A device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine typically consists of a tower, accelerator platform or nacelle body, and one or more rotors, with two or more blades for each rotor. 
    Work/live space or work/live unit, means a space or unit within a building which is used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space or unit is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work. 

    Yard, front. A space extending across the full width of the lot between the street line and a parallel line set back a distance equal to the front yard requirement. Lots with frontage on more than one street shall have a front yard provided on each street. Rear lots shall have the front yard requirement measured from that lot line which most closely parallels the street from which the rear lot gains access. 
    Yard, rear. A space extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and a parallel line set back a distance equal to the rear yard requirement. On a lot with no rear yard, the side yard shall extend to the opposite lot line. 
    Yard, side. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and a parallel line set back a distance equal to the side yard requirement. On a lot with no rear yard, the side yard shall extend to the opposite lot line. 
    Zone. An area of land set aside on the Zoning Map having separate requirements as established by these regulations. 
(Amend. of 9-9-08(2); eff. 9-17-08; Amend. of 3-31-09, eff. 4-3-09; Amend. of 3-9-10, eff. 3-17-10; Amend. of 7-15-14(2), eff. 7-23-14; Amend. of 9-27-16(3), eff. 10-5-16; Amend. of 3-27-18, eff. 4-4-18; Amend. of 10-17-17(1), eff. 10-25-17) 
Section III. - General regulations. 
A.  Applicability. 
No building, structure or land shall be used, designed for any use or changed to any use, other than is permitted in the zone in which such building, structure, or land is located except in conformance with these regulations. 
No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged, moved, or maintained except in conformance with these regulations. 
No conveyance of land shall be made that reduces the remaining land of the grantor below the area, width or yard requirements of the zone. 
B.  Exceptions to regulations. 
1.  Yard projections. 
a.  Open or closed porches or vestibules may extend into any required front yard provided that such extension shall not project more than five feet into the front yard, nor contain more than 50 square feet of floor area computed on exterior dimensions. 
b.  Other usual projections such as chimneys, window sills, cornices, and bay windows may extend into any required yard not more than two feet. 
2.  Height. 
a.  The Commission may, by special exception, waive the height provisions of these regulations for church steeples, belfries, towers, cupolas and similar architectural features; flagstaffs, chimneys, elevator mechanisms and housings, water tanks, stand pipes, and similar utility structures; and radio and television towers and antennas, and similar telecommunication structures. 
b.  The height provisions of these regulations shall not prevent the erection of a school, public library, or public museum to a height not exceeding 40 feet in a residential zone. 
3.  Pre-existing lots. 
    Where safe and adequate disposal of sewage and a safe water supply, as required by the Public Health Code, can be provided without endangering the health and safety of adjoining residents, nothing in these regulations shall prevent the construction of a permitted building or the establishment of a permitted use on a lot containing less than the prescribed area or width which at the time of adoption hereof or any pertinent amendment hereto was: 
a.  Owned separately from any adjoining lot and filed in the Office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Avon. 
b.  Shown on a plan of subdivision approved by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission and filed in the Office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Avon. 
    Where two or more nonconforming adjoining lots are or come to be under the same ownership on or after the effective date of these regulations, then such lots shall be considered merged under operation of law. 
C.  Nonconforming uses and structures. Nothing in this section shall require any changes in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building for which a building permit has been issued, of which construction was commenced prior to the adoption of these regulations or of any amendments hereto, and which shall be completed within one year of the adoption of same. 
1.  Nonconforming uses may be continued. Any nonconforming use of buildings or land lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these regulations or any amendments hereto, may be continued. 
2.  Changes to nonconforming uses. No nonconforming use may be changed except to a conforming use or, with the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, to another nonconforming use of a less objectionable character. No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be changed back into a nonconforming use. 
3.  Resumption of nonconforming uses. No nonconforming use which has been discontinued for a period of six months shall thereafter be resumed. 
4.  Expansion of nonconforming uses. No nonconforming use, and no building containing a nonconforming use, shall be extended or expanded. 
5.  Alterations to building containing nonconforming uses. Structural alterations which do not materially alter the characteristics or exterior appearance of a building containing a nonconforming use may be made, providing the total costs of such alterations do not exceed 50% of the assessed valuation of such building at the time it becomes nonconforming unless the use thereof is changed to a conforming use. 
6.  Alterations to nonconforming buildings. Nonconforming buildings may be altered, or enlarged, provided that such additions or enlargements conform to the applicable provisions of these regulations, and the total added floor area does not exceed 50% of the floor area of the original building. 
Where a part of a nonconforming building extends into a required yard, any additions shall have the required yards, except that the Zoning Board of Appeals may approve a variance in yard requirements to a yard size not less than presently exists, where such smaller yards will not have a detrimental effect on adjoining property. 
7.  Replacement of nonconforming buildings. Any nonconforming building which has been damaged by fire, explosion or accident, may be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced within one year of such damage, provided that such repairs, rebuilding, or replacement does not extend nor expand the previously existing nonconforming building. 
D.  Developable land calculation. 
Land designated as Flood plain, Inland/Wetlands, Watercourse, or with slopes in excess of 25% shall not be used to calculate density, as prescribed in Section IV.A.5., for any use. 
The Commission may modify or waive this requirement when, in the opinion of the Commission, the location and configuration of such lands in relation to the buildable area on the site may warrant such use and the applicable special exception criteria established in Section VIII are satisfied. 

E.  Corner visibility. On a corner lot in any district no planting, structure, fence, wall, or obstruction to vision more than three feet in height from the pavement shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting points on said street lines, each point being 25 feet distant from the point of intersection. 

F.  Municipal and public utility uses. Municipal and public utility uses, buildings, and structures, including governmental and emergency services communication towers and/or antennas, may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in any zone under the applicable criteria of Section VIII, provided that: 
1.  All of the requirements of the zone are met except floor area, lot area, and lot width. 
2.  The land is of sufficient area and width to protect public health, safety, and welfare. 
3.  The proposed use is compatible with existing development and the site development blends with the character of the area. 
4.  Plants generating power and plants disposing of sewage and/or garbage are not permitted in residential zones. 
5.  For all applications involving towers and/or antennas, information as required in Section IV.A.4.a.(1) and (2) shall be provided; and the minimum standards and conditions in Section IV.A.4.a.(4), (5), and (7), through (10) shall apply. 
These requirements shall not apply to standard utility distribution systems. 
G.  Floodplain. 
1.  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this regulation to regulate floodplain development, promote public health, safety, and general welfare, and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions. As a result of past flooding including the effects of the 1938 and 1955 hurricanes in Avon, these regulations exceed the minimum requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. More specifically, it is the purpose of these regulations: 
a.  To protect human life and health, and prevent damage to property; 
b.  To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects; 
c.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
d.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions and other economic disruptions; 
e.  To minimize damage to public facilities, infrastructure and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges, located in the floodplain. 
f.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas in such a manner as to minimize flood damage and flood blight areas; 
g.  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood hazard area; 
h.  To prevent increase in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in higher costs and conflicts between property owners; 
i.  To ensure that those who occupy the flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions; and 
j.  To discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain. 
2.  Definitions. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section, the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
    Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the 100-year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a flood insurance study (FIS) and depicted on a flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Basement. A building or the portion of a building where the ceiling is less than three feet above the average ground level. For floodplain management purposes, a basement is any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Cost. As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing components, structural components, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials; building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in applicants; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications; survey costs; permit fees; outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply walls, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
    Design flood elevation. See 500-year floodplain. The 500-year floodplain is hereby defined as the design flood elevation (DFE) for the Town of Avon. 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    100-year-flood plain (1%). Areas of special flood hazard which include all land adjacent to the Farmington River and Roaring Brook and all land adjacent to Hawley Brook, Big Brook, Lake Erie Brook, Nod Brook, Chidsey Brook, and Thompson Brook which falls below the 100-year-flood-frequency profile as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in their flood insurance study of September 26, 2008, and any subsequent revisions thereto which establishes detailed flood profile and elevations. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation, it must take precedence when it is more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. 
    500-year flood plain (.2%). Areas of special flood hazard which include all land adjacent to the Farmington River and Roaring Brook and all land adjacent to Hawley Brook, Big Brook, Lake Erie Brook, Nod Brook, Chidsey Brook, and Thompson Brook which falls below the 500-year-flood-frequency profile as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in their flood insurance study of September 26, 2008, and any subsequent revisions thereto which establishes detailed flood profile and elevations. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation, it must take precedence when it is more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's flood insurance rate maps for the Town of Avon, CT, dated September 26, 2008, and any subsequent revisions thereto. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning with the phase "floodway". 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 

500-Year Floodplain 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to a community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). A flood insurance study is a compilation and presentation of flood risk data for specific watercourses, lakes, and coastal flood hazard areas within a community. When a flood study is completed for the NFIP, the information and maps are assembled into an FIS. The FIS report contains detailed flood elevation data in flood profiles and data tables. 
    Floodway functionally dependent use or facility. A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship-building and ship-repair facilities. The term does not include seafood-processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic place[s] in states with historic-preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic-preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
    Market value. The market value of the structure shall be determined by the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvements. 
    Mean sea level (MSL). For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    New construction. For structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain-management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which can be towed, hauled or driven and is designed primarily for recreational use or as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping or travel use. For floodplain management purposes, a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within Avon subject to a .2 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs in Avon are determined utilizing the 500-year floodplain elevations provided on the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) for a community. A 500-year floodplain elevation provided on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) is only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A, AE and Zone X shaded, and include both the 100-year and 500-year floodplains. All land below the 500-year flood elevation is included within the SFHA in Avon. The SFHA is also called the area of special flood hazard. 
    Structure. A walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations, additions or other improvements to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure as determined at the beginning of such ten-year period. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic" structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with Avon's floodplain-management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as proper documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
3.  Permitted uses provided that no regrading or filling is necessary: 
a.  Agriculture/farming; 
b.  Forestry; 
c.  Nurseries; 
4.  Special exception uses. 
    The following uses and activities may be permitted within the 100-year floodplain when authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII of the Avon Zoning Regulations and the applicable criteria contained in this section: 
a.  Golf courses, playgrounds, recreation areas, parks, and open spaces; 
b.  Municipal or public utility uses not subject to major flood damage; 
c.  Parking areas as an accessory use; 
d.  Buildings, structures, and signs accessory to a permitted principal use located outside the floodplain provided that such accessory structures are located so as to minimize potential flood damage; 
e.  Filling of land within the floodplain, above the 100-year floodplain elevation, where the Commission evaluates the following: 
(1)  The impact of flooding on the proposed use, 
(2)  The availability of public services and facilities during and after flooding, 
(3)  Whether any loss of flood-storage volume can be compensated for the provision of equivalent flood-storage volume elsewhere on the site, 
(4)  Any adverse effects that the proposed use or activity will have on flooding, flow velocity or flow direction on the site and surrounding properties, 
(5)  The cumulative effect of filling in the flood plain. 
f.  Regrading of land below the 100-year flood plain elevation but outside the floodway where the Commission determines that: 
(1)  Compliance. All the requirements as specified in subsections III.G..4.e.(1) through (5) above are met. 
(2)  Compensatory storage provided. The water-holding capacity of the 100-year floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of floodwater at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off site if proven equal and approved by the Flood Plain Administrator (Town Engineer). 
(3)  Equal conveyance. Within the 100-year floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced as designated on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels in the design flood elevation. Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. 
5.  Minimum site development requirements. 
a.  Filling of land as authorized above shall only be allowed as logical extensions of land lying at higher elevations. 
b.  Filling of land in the 100-year or 500-year floodplain shall only be allowed where the resulting landscape is enhanced and where the neighborhood's essential characteristics have not been negatively altered. 
c.  No encroachments, including structural use, fill, new construction, substantial improvement, repairs to substantially damaged structures, and other developments shall be permitted within the floodway unless permitted by the Commission as a special exception for such public purposes as road crossings, minor recreational improvements, or safety improvements, provided that no (0.00) increase occurs in flood levels during the 100-year flood discharge as certified by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer with supporting technical data. Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design. When the 100-year flood elevation has been determined on the community's FIRM but a floodway has not been designated, the Commission must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development, including fill, shall be permitted which will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community when all existing and anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. The Commission may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from any other source (in response to the municipality's request or not), the community shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. 
d.  Building floor elevations. 
(1)  All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage, both residential and nonresidential structures that are used for human occupation, shall have the floor elevation of all stories elevated above the 500-year floodplain elevation. 
(2)  Stories used exclusively for access, mechanical equipment or storage may be built below the design floodplain elevation provided that: the building is designed to remove the hazards of flooding; and provided that all floor elevations including basements, of all buildings shall be raised above the 100-year floodplain elevation; and provided that approval is granted by the Commission based upon hydrologic study and recommendation by the Town Engineer. Methods to reduce flood damage may be required. 

(3)  Substantial improvements and repairs to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall have the floor elevation of all stories to be used for human occupancy raised above the 500-year floodplain elevation. Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure, as well as basements, may be located below the 500-year floodplain elevation but above the 100-year floodplain elevation. Approval must be obtained from the Commission, based upon hydrologic study and recommendation by the Town Engineer. 
(4)  All manufactured homes are prohibited in the 100 and 500-year floodplain. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles shall not be placed below the 100-year floodplain, but may be stored temporarily in the 500-year floodplain if they are registered, road ready and parked in accordance with any other applicable Avon Zoning Regulation. 
e.  Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must be elevated completely above the 100-year flood elevation on a concrete pad and be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movements, have the entire tank located above the 100-year flood elevation and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of floodwater. 
f.  If any portion of a structure lies within the 500-year floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in these zones. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the most restrictive flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. 
g.  If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most-restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., An A Zone is more restrictive than a X Zone; structure must be built in compliance with the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Attached decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.) 
h.  New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless they are a functionally dependent use or facility. 
i.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. On-site waste-disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
j.  New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. New construction, substantial improvements, and repairs to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
k.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, HVAC ductwork, and other service facilities, or any machinery or utility equipment or connections servicing a structure shall be elevated to or above the 100-year flood elevation to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. This includes, but is not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation ductwork, washer and dryer hookups, electrical junction boxes, and circuit breaker boxes. Any such work proposed to be installed below the 100-year flood level must be properly certified as completely flood-proofed and must be agreed to as such by the Avon Building Official. 
l.  In any portion of a watercourse that is proposed to be altered or relocated, the flood-carrying capacity must be maintained. Notification to adjacent communities and the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), Inland Water Resources Division, prior to any such alteration or relocation of a watercourse is required. 
H.  Earth removal. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to preserve the natural features of the landscape, keep the land suitable for appropriate future uses, prevent the occurrence of nuisances from earth removal operations which affect the value and enjoyment of neighboring properties, and control earth removal operations in order to protect the public health and safety. 
2.  Procedure. 
a.  The removal of 100 cubic yards or less of earth materials off site from any lot or parcel is permitted. 
The removal of more than 100 but less than 1,000 cubic yards of earth materials off site from any lot or parcel is permitted provided such removal occurs in conjunction with a construction operation which has a valid approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission or which has a valid building permit. Removal shall be conducted such that the requirements of Paragraph 3 are observed. 
Except as provided above, the removal of more than 100 cubic yards of earth materials off site is only permitted by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. 
b.  Application for special exception shall be accompanied by a written report indicating the purpose of the earth removal operation, the period of operation, the proposed dates of completion (removal, rough grading, finish grading, stabilization, restoration), and a statement from a registered professional engineer of the amount of material to be removed. 
c.  A permit granted for the removal of earth shall be valid for a period established by the Planning and Zoning Commission but which shall not exceed two years in any event from the date of approval. 
d.  Before any excavation occurs, a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Town Engineer shall be posted by the applicant to guarantee the restoration of the site and to cover erosion and sedimentation control during the operation. 
Such bond shall guarantee the completion of earth removal, stabilization, and restoration of the site and adjacent areas within the period covered by the earth-removal permit. Such bond shall be released once the earth removal has been completed, and the site has been stabilized. 
3.  Land use and site development requirements. 
a.  Period of excavation and removal. Excavation and removal may be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays only. No excavation or removal shall be conducted on weekends or holidays. 
b.  Conduct of excavation and removal. The Planning and Zoning Commission may specify that area which may be under excavation at any one time, and the timetable for completion of excavation and removal operations. 
c.  Erosion and sediment control. Compliance with the provisions of Section III.I. of these regulations is required at all times during the earth removal operation. 
d.  Buffer requirements. Excavation shall not take place within 35 feet of any property line unless varied by the Commission. Natural vegetation in this setback shall be preserved. 
In addition, the Commission may require a landscape buffer be provided around the excavation prior to the initiation of the removal operation, conforming to the requirements of a "B" Bufferyard, as specified in Section VII.A. of these regulations. 
I.  Erosion and sediment control. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect wetlands, watercourses, and other natural resources; prevent the occurrence of nuisances from erosion and sedimentation during construction operations which affect the value and enjoyment of neighboring and other affected properties; preserve a cover crop on the land; and provide adequate erosion and sediment control procedures during construction in order to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.  Procedure. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is more than one-half acre. For purposes of this section, disturbed area shall mean an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed. 
a.  A single-family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations. 
b.  A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A narrative describing the development; the schedule of major activities on the land (including start and completion dates, sequence of grading and construction activities, sequence for installation of erosion and sediment control measures, and sequence for final stabilization measures); the design criteria, construction details, and ongoing maintenance program for erosion and sediment control measures and the stormwater management system. 
(2)  A site plan map showing topographic data (including soil types, wetlands and watercourses); existing structures and the proposed development; proposed area alterations; location of and detailed information concerning erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater control facilities; the sequencing of all construction phases; and the sequence of installing and details of erosion and sediment control features. 
c.  The Commission, through the Town Planner, shall certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the requirements and purpose of these regulations or shall deny certification where the proposal does not comply. Certification is necessary prior to any approval of a relevant development application by the Commission. 
d.  The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, that are a condition of certification of any modified site plan may be required to be covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission. If a bond is required, said bond shall be posted with the Town prior to the commencement of any site construction activities. 
e.  Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan. The Commission may require submission of progress reports by the applicant/developer to ensure compliance with this section. 
3.  Minimum site development standards. 
a.  Installation. Required erosion and sediment control procedures shall be installed at the earliest possible date relative to the normal sequencing of construction operations. 
b.  Maintenance. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed at all times during construction, that reasonable procedures are followed to minimize erosion and sedimentation, and that any proposed measures or problems are inspected, reviewed, and maintained on a regular basis. 
c.  Restoration. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed at all times during construction, that reasonable procedures are followed to minimize erosion and sedimentation, and that any proposed measures or problems are inspected, reviewed, and maintained on a regular basis. 
d.  Minimum standards. The Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended, shall be the minimum standards by which plans shall be reviewed for certification. The Town Planner may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant based upon technically sound alternatives. 
(Amend. of 9-13-16, eff.9-21-16; Amend. of 9-27-16(2), eff. 10-5-16) 
Section IV. - Residential and rural zones. 
A.  Residential. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Single-family dwelling. 
b.  Farming on a tract containing more than ten acres. 
2.  Accessory buildings and accessory structures. The following accessory buildings and structures are permitted, provided; that they are used for garage and storage only; and that the total of all such buildings shall not exceed 1,000 square feet; however, the average height of any accessory structure shall be less than the average height of the principal structure: 
a.  A private garage, conforming to all required yards in applicable zone. The total number of garage spaces on the lot shall not exceed a capacity of one more motor vehicle than the number of bedrooms in the principal building. 
b.  Storage sheds, and similar out buildings, including gazebos, conforming to all required yards in the applicable zone. 
c.  Buildings for the purpose of housing horses, livestock, and fowl, provided that they are located at least 100 feet from any lot lines. (See Section IV.A.3.) 
d.  Swimming pool, tennis court, or other similar recreational structure, provided such structure shall not be located in the required front yard setback, is at least 30 feet from any rear lot lines and at least 25 feet from any side lot lines, (in any zone which has a more restrictive side yard requirement, it shall be applied to the structures); these structures shall be buffered or fenced, where necessary, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, to protect adjacent property values, and lights (if any) are shielded to protect adjacent property values. Accessory structures such as pumps, filters, heaters, or a bathhouse shall also be located at least 30 feet from any rear lot lines and at least 25 feet from any side lot lines (in any zone which has a more restrictive side yard requirement, it shall be applied to structures). 
e.  Above-ground oil tanks, propane tanks, and/or generators shall conform to all required yards in the applicable zone, and shall be buffered or fenced where necessary, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
f.  Other structures customarily incidental to a single-family dwelling shall be located at least ten feet from side or rear lot lines in the rear yard, or if not in the rear yard, conforming to front and side yards in the applicable zone. 
g.  Tower and pole type antennas not exceeding 70 feet in height for radio broadcast and reception for the personal, not-for-profit, noncommercial use by residents of the dwelling are permitted as accessory if they comply with applicable regulations of the district, are not located in any required yard area, and are not located closer to any property line than a distance equal to the height of the antenna. 
h.  Satellite dish antennas subject to the following requirements: 
Size of Satellite Dish Requirements Less than or equal to 24 inches in diameter 1. May be ground mounted or mounted to a structure situated on the lot in a manner which conforms to all required yard setbacks and height restrictions. 2. May be attached directly to the structure or attached to a mast or pole providing the mast or pole is less than 12 feet in height. 3. Shall utilize colors that blend with the surroundings. Greater than 24 inches in diameter 1. Shall be ground mounted and shall not exceed a height of ten feet to be measured from ground level to the highest point of the antenna. The Commission may permit an installation not to exceed 13 feet in height for those uses receiving special exception approval under this section. 2. Shall observe all yard setbacks. 3. Shall not be permitted within the front yard. 4. Shall be screened from adjoining lots, drives, and streets by the installation and maintenance of a visual barrier. Shall utilize colors that blend with the surroundings.  
i.  PODS (portable on-demand storage structures) may be placed on a residentially-zoned lot which contains a single-family home for a maximum period of 90 days. All POD units are prohibited from being placed within the street or in any right-of-way owned by the Town of Avon. PODS shall be positioned on the lot such that they meet the required side and rear yard setback requirements and in a location that does not adversely affect the available line of site at the intersection of the driveway and street. Only one POD unit may be placed at any residential property at any given time, unless it is determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer that special circumstances exist such as storage need following a disaster such as a fire, flood, or storm. The above regulations do not apply to open containers commonly known as "dumpsters" used for the removal of construction debris or other refuse. 
3.  Accessory uses. 
a.  Home occupation, minor. 
b.  A day care home conducted in the resident's dwelling unit for less than five people conducted by the resident with a valid State license. 
c.  Recreational vehicle storage, provided that the vehicle is owned by the owner or occupant of the premises, is stored at least ten feet from the side and rear lot lines, observes the front yard setback, is not used as living quarters, and is buffered, or fenced where necessary, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, to protect property values in the neighborhood. Temporary storage (less than 48 hours in one month) is exempt from these regulations. 
d.  Limited farming on a tract of land containing 80,000 square feet or more which is clearly accessory to a residential use subject to the following standards: 
(1)  On a lot containing 80,000 square feet, a maximum of one large animal, two medium animals, or 15 small animals may be kept. 
(2)  For each additional 43,560 square feet, one additional large animal may be kept; or for each additional 21,780 square feet, one additional medium animal or 15 small animals may be kept. 
(3)  No more than 100 small animals may be kept on any lot. 
(4)  The keeping of pigs is not permitted. 
(5)  Buildings for the purpose of housing horses, livestock, and fowl shall be located at least 100 feet from any lot line. Manure must be stored at least 100 feet from any lot line and visually screened from adjoining properties. 
(6)  Dogs, cats, and other pets which are kept as companions and housed together with human occupants are permitted in any residential zone on any size lot in conjunction with a residence. 
(7)  The keeping of up to ten rabbits shall be permitted on a lot of any size. 
(8)  The boarding of horses or other farm animals or any other commercial activities undertaken for compensation is not permitted. 
e.  Any other use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use. 
4.  Special exceptions. The following uses, and accessory uses thereto, may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception under the applicable criteria of Section VIII: 
a.  Modification to, or replacement at the same site, of any existing communications transmission stations and towers, both conforming and nonconforming, including changes to any accessory building, facilities or equipment, subject to the following: 
The application presented to the Commission shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A site plan conforming to Section X.A.1.a. including detailed elevations of all existing towers, antennas, dishes and other transmitting and receiving devices. 
(2)  A report showing field measurements of ambient nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) levels in the frequency range of those sources existing and proposed on the site. Such readings shall be: submitted by a qualified engineer and shall be taken at the nearest point of the main NIER source to the property boundary and at any other point deemed necessary by the Commission. The report shall include calculations of estimated total NIER levels following the proposed modifications and shall compare these to the standards noted in Section IV.A.4.a.(7). 
The following are minimum conditions of any permit granted under this section: 
(3)  Except as provided for in Section IV.A.4.a., no additional communications transmission stations and towers shall be permitted after the effective date of this amendment. 
(4)  No strobe or white aviation lights shall be permitted. Only standard red aviation lights shall be allowed. If after the approval any applicable authority requires the refitting of a tower to white or strobe lights, the tower must be lowered in height to a point where red lights are acceptable or the tower shall be removed. 
(5)  Any tower shall be set back from all street lines and property lines a distance at least equal to the tower height, however, the Commission may modify this setback along certain property lines where, in the opinion of the Commission, the abutting property is not likely to be used for residential purposes. In no instance shall the tower or guy wire anchors be placed within the required yard areas. 
(6)  No employees shall be employed on a regular basis at the site and no office or broadcast studios shall be permitted. 
(7)  NIER emissions from this site as measured at the property lines and combined with ambient levels in similar frequency ranges shall not exceed levels adopted or established by either the American National Standards Committee C95.1 (ANSI), the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States, the State of Massachusetts Department of Public Health, or the State of Connecticut Department of Health Services, whichever is more stringent. 
(8)  Any approval shall include the requirement that the applicant submit annual records of NIER measurements and annual reports to the Commission by a qualified engineer verifying compliance to NIER levels. 
The Commission shall review the following items as part of each application process: 
(9)  The visual intrusion of these structures shall be minimized to the maximum extent possible. Berming and/or year-round screen planting may be required by the Commission to screen view from any public road or any residences. 
(10)  Any increase in tower height shall be discouraged as not in keeping with the policy of the Town to preserve the beauty of the Talcott Mountain ridge line. Any increase in height shall only be permitted when in the judgment of the Commission the following is provided: 
(a)  The radiation level at the nearest property line is reduced; and 
(b)  The resulting impact on the ridge line is materially improved by other site, equipment, or tower modifications. 
b.  Public and private schools and colleges with a valid State license. 
c.  Educational and training facilities of public and private schools, colleges, and all other types of organizations. 
d.  Community center buildings and clubs provided no liquor is sold. 
e.  Nursing homes with a valid State license. 
f.  Churches, religious buildings, and cemeteries. 
g.  Nurseries. 
h.  Golf courses, playgrounds, recreational areas, and parks. 
i.  Day care centers for five or more people in public and institutional buildings with a valid State license. 
j.  Multiple Dwelling Developments subject to the provisions of Section IX.A. 
k.  Cluster Developments subject to the provisions of Section IX.B. 
l.  Planned Residential Developments subject to the provisions of Section IX.C. 
m.  Planned Elderly Residential Developments subject to the provisions of Section IX.D. 
n.  Conversion of existing buildings to residential use for not more than two dwelling units, provided that: 
(1)  The lot contains the minimum frontage and lot area required in the applicable zone. 
(2)  The gross ground floor area after conversion does not exceed the maximum lot coverage regulation of the zone. 
(3)  The dwelling units comply with the multifamily floor area requirements. 
(4)  All applicable sanitary requirements for the additional families are met. 
(5)  The external appearance and general character of the building as a single-family dwelling shall be preserved. 
(6)  In the instance when an application is submitted in an area of predominantly single-family homes, the applicant must demonstrate that the area's present character and housing values will not be adversely impacted. The Commission will be guided by the following: 
(a)  External design and appearance, including entrances, 
(b)  Exterior materials, 
(c)  Size of the home before and after conversion, 
(d)  Parking, 
(e)  Landscaping and buffering, 
(f)  Building and lot coverage before and after conversion, 
(g)  Undeveloped property in the area and relevant recommendations contained in the plan of development. 
(7)  Conversions or construction may be appropriate in areas which adjoin higher density residential housing, commercial or industrial development where the Commission determines they may provide an effective transitional land use. 
o.  Conversion and expansion of existing buildings to office use, provided that: 
(1)  The lot contains at least 60,000 square feet or the minimum lot area required in the applicable zone (whichever is greater), the minimum frontage required, and fronts on a State highway. Front yard shall be a minimum of 60' in depth. Side and rear yards shall be a minimum of 50' in depth where abutting a residential zone. 
(2)  The maximum lot coverage after conversion and additions does not exceed 5%. The Commission may grant an increase in lot coverage up to 10% owing to the quality of architectural and landscape design and a determination of no adverse impact on surrounding properties. 
(3)  All parking requirements for office use in accordance with Section VII.B. No parking shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(4)  At least 65 percent of the lot shall be a landscaped area including a 25-foot front yard landscaped area and side/rear yard buffers in accordance with Section VII.A. 
(5)  The external appearance, details, scale, materials and general character of the building shall be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. 
p.  Rear lots, for residential purposes only, provided that: 
(1)  The Commission determines that the development of rear lots will provide the most suitable use of the land considering such factors as drainage, configuration, accessibility, and topography. 
(2)  The rear lots conform to all requirements prescribed for the zone in which they are located except that the front yard setback and the lot area, shall be at least twice the minimum such requirements for the zone. In computing lot area, the access strip, whether owned in fee or over an easement area, extending from the front lot line to the public roadway shall not be counted towards satisfying this requirement. 
(3)  Rear lots shall be provided with an access strip at least 30 feet wide to a public street. This 30-foot strip of land shall be owned in fee by the owner of the rear lot, except where: 
i.  The Commission approves more than one (1) rear lot and where such lots will utilize a common driveway. In this instance, one of the approved rear lots shall own the access strip in fee while the others shall be granted easement rights for access and the installation and maintenance of utilities; or 
ii.  The Commission determines that ownership of the access strip by the rear lot is not necessary and that the rear lot is best served by an easement over the front lot. 
Driveways serving rear lots shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length and shall have an adequate all-weather surface for their entire length and for a 10-foot width. The Commission may require the entire driveways to be paved. Common driveways may serve up to a maximum of two (2) rear lots and, where appropriate, the two (2) adjacent front lots, and shall adhere to the following: 
(a)  the common portion must be paved; 
(b)  pavement width shall be a minimum of 12 feet; 
(c)  pavement specifications shall comply to Town standards; 
(d)  if part of a subdivision, the common portion of the driveway shall be installed as part of the street system; 
(e)  a maintenance agreement shall be approved by the Commission and shall be filed in the land records of both lots prior to the issuance of any building permits authorized under the Special Exception approval. 
(4)  A landscape buffer is provided where necessary within the lot and along the access way to ensure that the development of rear lots will be in harmony with surrounding areas and protect existing homes. 
(5)  Where a proposed rear lot abuts a front lot which is under the control of the applicant then such front lot shall observe a rear yard setback of 50 feet. (See also Section IV.A. 6., Height and Area Regulations.) 
(6)  The Commission may modify the above requirements when it determines that the rear lots and the access thereto will be in harmony with the surrounding area and preserve the public health, safety, welfare and property values. 
q.  Incorporation of one accessory apartment, which is subordinate and incidental to a principal single-family dwelling. 
In addition to standards set forth in Section VIII of these regulations, the following standards/criteria must be met: 
(1)  The lot conforms to the various requirements for the zone in which it is located. 
(2)  The accessory apartment must be contained within the principal single-family dwelling after modification(s) as may be permitted under (3)(c) (below). 
(3)  The following area requirements must be met: 
(a)  The accessory apartment may not exceed 25% of the dwelling after modification(s) as may be permitted under (c) (below). 
(b)  The accessory apartment must contain at least 400 square feet, but not exceed 600 square feet in area. 
(c)  Any additions may not increase the square footage of the original house by more than 10%. For the purpose of this regulation the "original house" shall be measured at a point in time five years prior to the submission of an application under this section. If the house is less than five years old, it shall be measured from the date a certificate of occupancy was issued. 
The Commission may modify the above area requirements when, in the opinion of the Commission, such modification will preserve the public health, safety and welfare, and provide a more practical layout of the principal or accessory living unit. 
(4)  The gross ground floor area after modification(s) shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage regulation of the zone. 
(5)  The living area in the principal dwelling unit after modification(s) conforms to the living area requirements of these regulations. 
(6)  At least one of the dwelling units is occupied by an owner of the property. 
(7)  All applicable sanitary requirements for the additional dwelling unit, as enumerated in the Connecticut Public Health Code are met. 
(8)  Adequate parking facilities are provided on site for both dwellings. 
(9)  The accessory apartment shall be designed so that, to the degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the building remains that of a one-family residence. In general, any new entrances shall be located on the side or in the rear of the building. 
(10)  The Commission may require that the design of the home, both interior and exterior, be such that conversion back to a single-family dwelling may be readily accomplished. 
(11)  Approvals shall be valid for a period of two years from the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Prior to the expiration of this two-year period, or any subsequent approval, an application for renewal may be submitted for an additional period not to exceed two years. 
r.  Sale of farm products and construction of farm buildings. Farms on parcels of land in excess of ten acres (unless the acreage requirement is modified by the Commission upon a finding that all criteria in Section VIII of these regulations have been met) may be allowed retail sales of farm-grown or farm-related products and the construction of farm buildings for the purpose of farming operations or retail sales in excess of the size specified in Section IV.A.2.b., provided that the following criteria can be met: 
(1)  The farm store must be located on an active farm site. 
(2)  The retail sales of farm products must be of a scale such that it is compatible with nearby residential uses. 
(3)  The following items may be sold: Produce grown on the farm and farm-related products produced on the farm excluding meat products. Farm products grown elsewhere and other products related to agriculture may also be sold such that the total sales of these other products do not exceed 20% of the total amount of gross revenue generated from all retail sales at the farm stand. Items such as agricultural fertilizers, bark mulch, top soil, peat moss, plants pots, statuary items, prepackaged convenience food items, and soft drinks shall not be permitted for sale. 
(4)  The farm store may be located in a free-standing building or may be situated in a portion of a larger structure which may be used in part to support other farming operations such as a dairy barn, hay loft, or farm equipment storage area. In all cases, the farm store shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in area. 
(5)  The farm store must have a primary means of access and egress from a through street capable of safely accommodating anticipated volumes of traffic. Preference shall be given to arterial roadways. 
(6)  All structures shall meet the minimum requirements established for the residential zoning district in which the farm is located. All parking shall meet the setback requirements for structures for the residential zoning district in which the farm stand is located. Parking shall be provided at a rate to be approved by the Commission. In addition, a B Bufferyard shall be observed between any farm buildings and farm store parking areas and adjoining residentially zoned properties. 
s.  Home occupation, major. 
t.  Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas may be permitted for those uses receiving special exception approval under this section. Applicant shall demonstrate that due to the unusual shape of a parcel of land, building design, or site layout, a ground-mounted installation is not feasible. The Commission may require screening utilizing building materials and a design which will complement and enhance the architecture of the building and not detract from it. No installation shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
u.  Small wind energy system (windmill). A small wind energy system (windmill) may be permitted on a property located in any residential zone subject to the following area and height requirements and land use and site development requirements. 
(1)  Area and height requirements. 
Minimum lot size: two acres 
Maximum height (including blades): 120 feet 
Maximum density: one windmill per parcel 
(2)  Land use and site development requirements. 
a.  Maximum rated nameplate capacity, as specified by the manufacturer, shall be not more than 20 kW. 
b.  Small wind energy systems (windmills) shall only be allowed in association with a residential structure. 
c.  The small wind turbine and tower shall have a flat finish as applied by the manufacturer. The objective is to have the equipment as inconspicuous as practicable. 
d.  Any tower shall be set back from all street lines and property lines a distance at least equal to the tower height; however, the Commission may modify this setback along certain property lines where, in the opinion of the Commission, the abutting property is not likely to be used for residential purposes. In no instance shall the tower or guy wire anchors be placed within the required yard areas. 
e.  Decibel levels shall not exceed 60 dBA, as certified by the manufacturer. 
f.  All ground structures shall comply with minimum side yard and rear yard requirements of the subject zone and shall be properly buffered, as required by the Commission. 
g.  Windmills shall be sited in a manner that minimizes shadow and flicker impacts to adjacent properties and properties below the ridgeline. 
h.  Documentation of wind readings shall be presented to the Commission to demonstrate that the proposed location provides class 2-3 winds. 
i.  Any windmill proposed within the Ridgeline Protection Overlay Zone shall also require approval under Section IX.E. 
j.  No tower is permitted that requires any lighting under federal, state, or local law. 
k.  Reasonable efforts shall be made to locate utility connections from the wind facility underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground, if required by the utility provider. 
l.  No wind facility shall cause interference with radio or television reception. 
m.  Applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission that property security measures have been installed to protect the wind facility from unlawful entry or trespass. 
n.  If a small wind turbine is not operated and is not put back into service within 12 months, the applicant shall remove the small wind turbine, tower, and other related equipment. 
(3)  Special exception criteria. 
a.  All special exception criteria contained in Section VIII of the Zoning Regulations shall be met. 
b.  Any windmill proposed within the Ridgeline Protection Overlay Zone shall also require approval under Section IX.E. 
5.  Density regulations. Any parcel developed for residential use shall observe the following density regulations: First, apply the developable land calculation to the parcel being developed. Density of the parcel shall be calculated by multiplying the density fact of the applicable zone by the developable land of the parcel (not the parent parcel). See example in Section III.D. 
Zone Maximum Density 
(Families/Acre) RU-2A 0.3 R-40 0.8 R-30 1.2 R-15 2.2  
In residential subdivisions of four lots or less, or for a first division of land not meeting the definition of a subdivision, the Planning and Zoning Commission, by special exception, may modify the density requirements. An applicant must demonstrate compliance with Section VIII of these Regulations. This provision shall not apply to resubdivisions. 
In residential resubdivisions of four lots or less, the Planning and Zoning Commission, by special exception, may also modify the calculated number of allowable lots, after application of the density regulations, to be rounded up to the next integer value when said calculation is within 0.10 of this next integer value. An applicant must demonstrate compliance with Section VIII of these regulations. 
6.  Height and area regulations. 
RU-2A R-40 R-30 R-15 Min. Lot Area 2 ac. 40,000 s. f. 30,000 s. f. 15,000 s. f. Min. Lot Width 200 ft. 170 ft. 170 ft. 100 ft. Max. Lot Coverage 10%* 15%* 15%* 15% Minimum Front Yard -Local Streets 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. -Collector and Arterial Streets 60 ft. 60 ft. 60 ft. 60 ft. Min. Side Yard 35 ft.** 35 ft.** 30 ft.*** 15 ft. Min. Rear Yard 30 ft.**** 30 ft.**** 30 ft.**** 30 ft.**** Maximum Building Height 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. Minimum Landscaped Area for all special exception uses enumerated in Section IV.A.4. No more than 50 percent of the required landscaped area shall be comprised of steep slopes, floodplain, or wetland soils. 65%***** 65%***** 65%***** 65%*****  
*Maximum Lot Coverage for all special exception uses shall be ten percent except that by a two-thirds vote of all its members, the Commission may allow an increase in lot coverage up to 15% upon a determination of no adverse impact on any other property and a finding that all special exception criteria in Section VIII are met and by further consideration of the following criteria: 
1.  The hours of operation of the proposed facility. 
2.  The amount of daily and peak hourly traffic to be generated by the proposed facility. 
3.  The location of the minimum landscaped area (65% of the site) such that a buffer to adjoining properties is provided which surpasses the minimum required. 
4.  The natural topography to be preserved and that to be created which offers a visual and noise barrier to adjoining properties. 
5.  The size and quality of existing vegetation to be preserved and that to be added. 
6.  The intensity of necessary lighting. 
7.  The frequency of deliveries. 
8.  The amount of outdoor activity associated with the use. 
9.  The height, scale, and architectural style as it relates to surrounding properties. 
10.  The history of substantiated complaints. 
** Any lot which was in existence as of June 27, 2006, shall observe a 25-foot side yard. 
*** Any lot which was in existence as of June 27, 2006, shall observe a 20-foot side yard. 
**** Where a proposed rear lot abuts a front lot, then such front lot shall observe a rear yard setback of 50 feet. 
***** Where less than 25 percent of the minimum landscaped area requirement is met utilizing steep slopes, floodplain, or wetland soils the Commission may by a 2/3 vote of all of its members permit a reduction in the minimum landscaped area to 55 percent. The Commission shall make a determination of no adverse impact on any other property and a finding that all special exception criteria in Section VIII are met. 
7.  Living area requirements. 
a.  Each single-family dwelling hereafter erected shall contain at least 1,000 square feet of living area for a one- or two-bedroom house, plus at least an additional 200 square feet of living area in the unit as a whole for each additional bedroom. 
b.  Dwellings more than one story in height, shall contain at least 800 square feet of living area on the ground floor. 
c.  Split-level and bi-level dwellings shall be computed with the entire living area requirement contained on the upper-most levels. 
COLLECTOR/ ARTERIAL STREETS (requiring 60' front yard setback) Arch Road Burnham Road Carriage Drive Chevas Road Climax Road Country Club Road Deercliff Road Harris Road Hollister Drive Huckleberry Hill Road Juniper Drive Lofgren Road Lovely Street New Road Nod Road Northington Drive Old Farms Road Rt. 10 (Simsbury Road, Waterville Road) Rt. 44 (E. Main Street, W. Main Street, Avon Mountain Road) Scoville Road Stagecoach Road Talcott Notch Road Thompson Road Tillotson Road West Avon Road Woodmont Road Reference: Section IV.A.6. This is an interpretive aid only and is not part of the regulations.  
B.  Agricultural. 
1.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Planting and cultivation of any crop including tobacco, flowers, fruit, vegetables, forestry, nurseries, and field crops whether for personal or commercial purposes. 
b.  Dairy farming, and livestock and poultry raising (excluding the commercial raising of pigs and at no time shall more than three pigs over six months old be kept). 
2.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
a.  Buildings and structures customarily housing the principal use. 
b.  Dwellings; in accordance with the height and area requirements for an R-40 Zone (as specified in Section IV.A.6) occupied by the owner, members of the owner's family employed on the farm, or by permanent salaried employees. 
c.  Buildings, structures, and uses for processing the products of farming, including cider mills. 
d.  Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use except that the commercial slaughtering of animals (as distinguished from fowl), fertilizer manufacture, and commercial reduction of inedible animal matter are prohibited. 
3.  Special exceptions. 
a.  Golf courses may be permitted as a special exception in the Agricultural Zone when authorized by the Commission under the applicable criteria of Section VIII. 
b.  Kennels, animal hospitals, or veterinary offices provided that: 
(1)  No outside kennels or runs for animals shall be allowed. 
(2)  Buildings used for overnight boarding of animals shall be fully enclosed and shall be designed as to keep noises from emanating from the buildings, except that in times of emergency, such as electrical failure, natural ventilation may be used. 
(3)  No structure housing animals shall be located closer than 150 feet to any residential zone boundary. 
(4)  Minimum lot area coverage, height and yard requirements shall be those of the R-40 Zone. 
C.  Educational land. 
1.  Permitted uses. Public and private schools, colleges and universities. 
2.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
a.  Residential structures accessory to the principal use. 
b.  Any other use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use. 
3.  Area and height requirements. 
Minimum lot size 25 acres Minimum front yard 60 feet Minimum side yard 25 feet Minimum rear yard 30 feet Maximum building height 55 feet  
4.  Land use and site development requirements. Site plan approval under Section X.A.1. is required. The Commission may require compliance with Section VII of these regulations in regard to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements; and with Section V of these regulations in regard to other requirements. 
D.  Recreation/open space. 
1.  Permitted uses. Golf courses, playgrounds, recreation areas, parks and open space. 
2.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses. Any building or structure not exceeding 600 square feet in area, or use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use. 
3.  Special exceptions. Accessory buildings or structures in excess of 600 square feet in area. The building or structure, due to its location in a residential or recreation area, shall have residential design, scale, architecture and exterior materials compatible with the residential, recreational or rural character of the area. Accessory buildings or structures approved under this section shall be set back, as a minimum, from side and rear property lines in accordance with the requirements for a "B" Bufferyard, as outlined in Section VII.A. Landscape Regulations. 
4.  Area and height requirements. 
Minimum lot size 40,000 square feet Minimum lot width 150 feet Minimum front yard 60 feet Minimum side yard 25 feet Minimum rear yard 30 feet Maximum building height 35 feet  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. Site plan approval under Section X.A.1. is required. The Commission may require compliance with Section VII of these regulations in regard to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements; and with Section V of these regulations in regard to other requirements. 
(Amend. of 12-11-07, eff. 1-10-08; Amend. of 6-3-08(1), eff. 7-3-08; Amend of 6-3-08(2), eff. 7-3-08; Amend. of 3-31-09, eff. 4-3-09; Amend. of 3-9-10, eff. 3-17-10; Amend. of 6-22-10; eff. 6-30-10; Amend. of 6-7-11; eff. 7-7-11) 
Section V. - General and special regulations for commercial and industrial land uses. 
A.  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all Commercial and Industrial Zones in addition to all other requirements for the specific zone. The use of any land or building shall not be changed and no building shall be erected or added to except in conformance with these regulations. 
B.  Accessory buildings and uses. Buildings or uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted principal use are also permitted. Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  All yard setbacks shall be observed. In addition, no antenna shall be located closer than 100 feet to the front property line. 
2.  No antenna shall be located within any required landscaped perimeter or landscape buffer as defined in Section VII of these regulations. 
3.  No antenna shall exceed a height of 13 feet measured from ground level to the highest point of the antenna. 
4.  The antenna shall be screened from adjoining lots, drives, and streets by the installation and maintenance of a visual barrier. All installations, including the antenna, dish, and mounting pad, shall employ materials and colors that blend with the surroundings. 
5.  Proposed antennas shall be shown as part of any application requesting site plan approval to construct a principal use. Any request to modify a previously approved site plan by the addition of a satellite dish antenna shall require separate site plan approval. A site development plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section X of these regulations. 
6.  NIER emissions from this site, as measured at the property lines and combined with ambient levels in similar frequency ranges, shall not exceed levels adopted or established by either the American National Standards Committee C95.1 (ANSI), the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States, the State of Massachusetts Department of Public Health, or the State Department of Health Services, whichever is more stringent. 
A single ground-mounted satellite dish antenna which is under 31/2 feet in diameter shall be permitted by right. All yard setbacks shall be observed. 
Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas may be permitted by special exception provided the following standards and conditions can be met: 
1.  Applicant shall demonstrate that due to the unusual shape of a parcel of land, building design, or site layout, a ground-mounted installation is not feasible. 
2.  The antenna shall be completely screened utilizing building materials and a design which will complement and enhance the architecture of the building and not detract from it. 
3.  The height of the installation shall not exceed the maximum height restriction of the zone in which it will be located. 
4.  Proposed antennas shall be shown as part of any application requesting site plan approval to construct a principal use. Any request to modify a previously approved site plan by the addition of a satellite dish antenna shall require separate site plan approval. A site development plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section X of these regulations. 
5.  The antenna shall meet all special exception criteria listed in Section VIII of these regulations. 
6.  NIER emissions from this site as measured at the property lines and combined with ambient levels in similar frequency ranges shall not exceed levels adopted or established by either the American National Standards Committee C95.1 (ANSI), the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States, the State of Massachusetts Department of Public Health, or the State of Connecticut Department of Health Services, whichever is more stringent. 
C.  Consolidated parcels. For the purpose of integrated development, any number of contiguous parcels may be consolidated for the purpose of development, and the consolidated parcel shall be construed to be one lot when computing building coverage and yard requirements, and permitted uses, provided: 
1.  The owner of each lot shall give to the owner of each lot in the consolidated parcel by deed, easement, or agreement filed in the Office of the Town Clerk, the right of entrance, exit, passage, parking and loading. 
2.  The consolidated parcel is developed with an integrated plan of buildings, parking, loading and unloading, and open space. 
3.  The Commission may require or limit use of access driveways to one or more parcels, whether or not under separate ownership, in order to assure safe traffic movement onto the street and to avoid congestion. 
D.  Outdoor display of merchandise and materials. The Commission may, by special exception, approve the display of merchandise in any commercial zone except for the NB Zone. Site plan approval shall also be required in accordance with Section X of these regulations. The following criteria shall be met: 
1.  Merchandise shall not be displayed within the required front yard setback. 
2.  Parking spaces, landscaped areas, and walkways shall not be used for sales, storage, display of goods, or advertising purposes of any kind except for detached signs installed in conformance with these regulations and except for the display of automobiles accessory to new car sales in parking spaces. 
3.  The area to be used for outdoor display shall be adequately screened from public view from any nearby public roadway or residence. The area shall be screened using a combination of landscape materials and decorative masonry walls which complement the main structure. The materials which will be used to construct the enclosure shall be of a design and overall quality as the Commission may require in determining that the display area will enhance the overall aesthetics of a project. No advertising signage shall be permitted on the enclosure or within the enclosure such that it can be seen by the public from outside the building. Measures shall be taken to prevent any adverse impact on nearby residences from sound which may be generated from the display area. 
4.  The pad for the display area shall be constructed of concrete, brick, or a similar material approved by the Commission. 
5.  The area shall not conflict with pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
6.  The entire enclosure area shall be considered additional retail space and lot coverage. Accordingly, additional parking shall be required and certification shall be provided which documents compliance with maximum building and minimum landscaping requirements. 
7.  The outdoor display area may include a permanent structure(s) such as a trellis to be used in conjunction with the display of live plants. Any structure must receive site plan approval from the Commission. No temporary structures, such as tents, shall be permitted. 
8.  Approvals shall be valid for an initial period of three years from the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Prior to the expiration of the initial three-year period, or any subsequent approval, an application for renewal must be submitted. Consecutive extensions in increments of up to five years may be granted if there are no documented violations of this regulation, any other sections of these regulations, or conditions of approval imposed by the Commission. 
E.  Areas for loading and unloading. Any lot developed for business or industrial use shall provide adequate space for the loading and unloading of goods and materials so located as to avoid conflict with vehicular movement. No loading space, any part thereof, or access thereto shall be located within the front yard, except for access from the street. 
F.  Hours of operation. Retail establishments and restaurants shall be closed to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. In a Neighborhood Business Zone, all premises shall be closed to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for emergency medical care facilities, which may be open for business 24 hours per day. 
G.  Enclosed operations. All commercial and industrial uses and accessory uses shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings except for off-street loading and those operations normally conducted outdoors. 
H.  Noise levels. Commercial and industrial uses and processes shall not be conducted in such a way as to create noise which is considered objectionable due to volume, intermittence, beat, frequency, shrillness, or intensity. 
    Sustained noise levels shall not exceed the following decibel readings at the indicated locations: 
Maximum Sound Level (Decibels) Frequency (Hertz) At Residential Zone Boundaries At Property Lines in Business Zones 0-74 72 75 75-149 67 70 150-299 59 63 300-599 52 57 600-1199 46 52 1200-2399 40 45 2400-4799 34 40 4800+ 32 38  
I.  Illumination. Commercial and industrial interior or exterior lighting, including signs, shall not be of such intensity, or located or directed in such a way, as to produce glare or discomfort on public streets or neighboring property. 
J.  Alcoholic liquors. Buildings intended to be used for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall observe the following requirements: 
1.  Buildings shall be located at least 500 feet in a straight line from any property used for church, public school, private school, or library purposes. 
2.  Any portion of the floor of a building to be used with a restaurant liquor permit or hotel liquor permit or any other use involving alcohol and regulated by the State of Connecticut shall be located at least 200 feet in a straight line from a property used for residential purposes and shall not advertise any alcoholic liquors or beverages in such a way that it is visible from the street. 
3.  A restaurant beer and wine only permit may be permitted in any commercial zone regardless of distance to residential use only if granted a special exception which is found to meet the standards of Section VIII. All abutting property owners within 500 feet shall be notified of the public hearing for such a special exception by the applicant. Proof of notification is required. 
4.  Drug store, grocery beer, restaurant, and hotel permits are permitted as incidental uses only. Cafe permits are not permitted in any zone. 
K.  Gas stations. Gasoline filling stations may be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in either the Commercial-Retail or Commercial-Specialized Zone. The Commission shall carefully review the suitability of any site proposed for such use in relation to the purposes of the specific zone and the special exception criteria. Premises intended to be used for a gasoline station shall observe the following requirements: 
1.  Premises shall be located at least 1,500 feet in a straight line from any other property used as a gasoline filling station. 
2.  Premises shall be located at least 1,000 feet in a straight line from any property used for a church, school, playground, or public park. 
3.  Gasoline pumps or other filling appliances shall be located at least 40 feet from any street or property line. 
L.  Maximum slope. In order to alleviate the danger of erosion hazards, to minimize the excesses of large earth moving operations, and to encourage that newly developed sites are compatible to the existing natural features, the following shall be the maximum slopes allowable on disturbed land: 
For any filled slope 3 horizontal, 1 vertical For any cut slope 2 horizontal, 1 vertical  
The Planning and Zoning Commission may modify this requirement upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer in unusual conditions where the use of retaining walls is necessary to most appropriately develop the site, and where such walls will not pose a safety hazard, and where the aesthetic impact will not negatively alter the characteristics of the site and neighborhood. 
M.  Guard rails. In areas where parking spaces abut slopes which fall away in excess of 4 horizontal, 1 vertical, guard rails shall be installed in locations designated by the Town Engineer. Guard rails shall be constructed of pressure-treated wooden materials and be located on a minimum three-foot-wide level shoulder adjacent to the curb. 
N.  Temporary special event. Temporary special events, as defined in Section II of these regulations, are permitted up to a maximum of four times per parcel of land during each calendar year. Individual parcels which are joined as a result of a common merchants' association shall be limited to a maximum of four events per calendar year. Events held on Town-owned properties shall not be limited as to frequency. Special events are permitted only: 
1.  In a Commercial zoning district on the grounds of an established commercial property; 
2.  In an Industrial or Office Park zoning district on the grounds of an established industrial or office property; 
3.  In a zoning district other than those listed above on the property of a use which has been approved by special exception, such as a school, church, library, or golf course; or 
4.  On property owned by the Town of Avon. 
Thirty days in advance of the event, a permit shall be applied for and approvals obtained from the Building Official, Fire Marshal, Farmington Valley Health District, and Public Safety Department. Applications must be signed by the property owner or, in the case of consolidated properties, by the owners of all properties subject to the consolidated agreement. 
O.  Restaurants. 
1.  Traffic generated by restaurant operations shall not adversely affect traffic flow, circulation, or patterns or the level of service on adjacent or nearby streets. The Commission may require an applicant for approval of a special exception for any restaurant to provide data or analyses from a qualified traffic engineer or other appropriate expert and may condition the approval of a special exception on roadway, signalization, intersection, drainage, or other improvements if the Commission deems such requirements to be necessary to assure compliance with these regulations. 
2.  Restaurants that are expected to or actually produce more than 350 vehicle trip ends per peak hour of generation are prohibited. 
3.  The size, nature, character, and site layout of any restaurant requiring a special permit shall be designed in such a way as to minimize hazards to pedestrians and vehicles; to harmonize with the character of the neighborhood and zoning district in which the restaurant is or is to be located; and to prevent any nuisance or unnecessary annoyance to nearby properties. In determining whether a restaurant meets these requirements, the Commission may consider, and may limit by conditions, all operational aspects of the restaurant relevant to the generation of traffic, noise, litter, and pollution, including but not limited to the relative proportions of on-premises and off-premises consumption of food and beverages, the percentage of building space used for patron seating, the expected average duration of visits by customers, hours of operation, the nature of the food and beverages served at the premises, and the manner in which service is provided. If the operational aspects of any restaurant for which a special exception has been issued are changed in any manner that the Commission or its lawful agent determines to create a nuisance or to have a significant impact on the generation of traffic, noise, litter, or pollution, the Commission or its lawful agent may issue an order to cease such changed operations or may require an application for a new special exception. 
4.  Outdoor walk-up windows and drive-through windows shall be permitted only in the Commercial-Retail Zone and only upon the submission of evidence satisfactory to the Commission that the proposed walk-up or drive-through window will not cause or contribute to hazards to vehicles or pedestrians. 
5.  Outdoor dining may be permitted by special exception as an accessory use to all classes of restaurants. In addition to meeting all criteria enumerated in this section and special exception criteria in Section VIII of these regulations, the following criteria shall be met: 
a.  It will not create visibility problems or hazards for motorists or pedestrians. Where appropriate, walls, fencing, or plantings are encouraged to separate seating from traveled areas and parking areas. 
b.  No required parking spaces or drives shall be utilized. 
c.  Additional parking shall be provided at the rate required by these regulations for the additional number of seats to be added. 
d.  Tables shall not be located in such a manner as to restrict access by emergency services to any portion of the building. Access to neighboring properties shall not be obstructed, and at least 44 inches of unobstructed public walkway space shall be maintained around the perimeter of all buildings, including the portion of the building where outdoor dining is provided. 
e.  Hours of operation shall be limited to no later than 10:00 p.m. unless waived by the Commission. 
f.  All portions of the dining area shall be separated by a distance equal to the required yard separating distances for structures for the zone in which the restaurant is located unless waived by the Commission. 
g.  If any structural or lighting changes are proposed, site plan approval shall be required. 
h.  If the service of alcoholic beverages is proposed, the applicant must demonstrate that the location is compatible with surrounding uses; offers maximum protection to the public health, safety, and welfare; and does not detract from neighboring property values. 
6.  Any change in the nature of a restaurant from one class to any other class shall be considered a change to a new use and shall be allowed only upon proper application for and issuance of such approvals, permits, or special exceptions as may be required by these regulations for such new use. In determining whether to issue such new approvals, permits, or special exceptions, the Commission or its lawful agent shall employ the standards and procedures set forth in these regulations as they may be amended and existing on the date of such application. 
(Amend. of 4-5-11, eff. 4-13-11; Amend. of 5-23-17(2), eff. 6-1-17) 
Section VI. - Commercial and industrial zones. 
A.  Office Park. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Office Park Zone is to establish a district for business and professional offices as a gradual transition between Commercial and Residential areas; to retain open space and natural features of the area; and to promote the construction of buildings that are architecturally compatible in type, scale, and exterior materials with the character of the area. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Business and professional offices; 
b.  Financial institutions; 
c.  Medical, dental and optical laboratories; 
d.  Class I restaurants. 
3.  Special exceptions. 
a.  Planned Residential Development (PRD) in accordance with Section IX.C. 
b.  Assisted living facilities; congregate living facilities; rehabilitation facilities; medical, diagnostic, and ambulatory services; nursing and convalescent homes including, without limitation, skilled nursing facilities, intermediate care facilities, and subacute facilities operated and maintained in accordance with the standards of the appropriate State agencies. 
c.  Conversion of an existing building to residential use for not more than five dwelling units provided that: 
1.  The building to be used for residential purposes is located on a lot containing at least 15,000 sf of office development. 
2.  The building to be used for residential purposes is of residential scale and character. 
3.  The dwelling units comply with the multifamily floor area requirements. 
4.  The general appearance and character of the building shall be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.  The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission that: 
a.  There [Here] is an adequate amount of land area, not otherwise needed by office uses located on the same property to maintain compliance with the minimum standards of the OP Zone, to support the residential use, and; 
b.  The setting for the residential use is appropriate in terms of location and character. 
d.  Other uses similar to the permitted uses may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. The Commission shall consider the relationship of the proposed use to the orderly development of the district and the aesthetic contribution of the proposed development to the character of the area. 
e.  Medical marijuana dispensary facilities: Subject to special exception and site plan approval. 
1.  No medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be permitted to be located closer than 300 feet measured closest point of the building housing the use to closest point, in a straight line, from a public or private school or an established place of worship. 
2.  Any proposed dispensary facility shall meet all criteria as established by any applicable Connecticut General Statute or any applicable regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection pertaining to such facilities. 
3.  Any dispensary facility which is permitted under this section or any Section of the Connecticut General Statutes existing at the time of approval may not be permitted to dispense marijuana for recreational purposes, regardless of any revision to the Connecticut General Statutes permitting such use without first seeking and obtaining a special permit from the Commission for such change of use. 
4.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 40,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 150 ft. Maximum lot coverage 10% Minimum front yard 50 ft. Minimum side/rear yard 25 ft., except that yards abutting a Residential Zone shall be 50 ft. Minimum building footprint 1,500 sq. ft. Maximum building height 35 ft. Maximum number of stories 2 stories Minimum landscaped area 50%  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements. 
B.  Neighborhood Business. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Neighborhood Business Zone is to establish a district for small specialty stores, offices, and other compatible land uses which furnish convenience goods and services for the daily needs of the residents of the neighborhood; do not generate large volumes of traffic; are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; and which are located in buildings of residential design, scale, architecture, and exterior materials in order to preserve the residential character of the area. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Small, convenience goods stores (including drug, food, dairy, and bakery products); provided, that the major portion of any food products or goods manufactured is sold only at retail on the premises, and provided that the sale of alcoholic beverages is excluded completely; 
b.  Business and professional offices[;] 
c.  Personal services. 
3.  Special exceptions. 
a.  Class I restaurants; 
b.  One, single-family dwelling unit in association with a use permitted by right or by special exception. The Commission shall give special consideration to those proposals which include a connection between the resident of the dwelling unit and the permitted or special permitted use contained within the building. This may include an instance where the resident is the owner of the building or is an owner or employee of the business which occupies space within the building; 
c.  Emergency medical care facilities; 
d.  Sale of alcoholic liquors or beverages. The Commission shall carefully review the suitability of a site proposed for such use in relation to the purpose of the Neighborhood Business Zone and the special exception criteria; 
e.  Other uses similar to the permitted uses may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. The Commission shall consider the size of the operation, the amount of traffic generated, and the aesthetic contribution of the proposed development to the existing character of the area, and shall find that the proposed use is in harmony with the purpose of the Neighborhood Business Zone. 
4.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 60,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 200 ft. Maximum lot coverage 10% Minimum front yard 50 ft. Minimum side/rear yards 25 ft., except that yards abutting a Residential Zone shall be a minimum of 50 ft. Minimum building footprint 1,500 sq. ft. Maximum building floor area 2,500 sq. ft. per building, except that the Commission may, by special exception, approve a greater floor area up to a maximum of 6,500 sq. ft. per building provided that the scale of the building is consistent with the purpose of this zoning district. An applicant must demonstrate compliance with the criteria set in Section VIII of these regulations.  
In addition, the Commission will be guided by the following factors. These factors may assist in mitigating the increased size of the proposed structure(s): 
Architecture. Building size, materials, colors, mass, scale, and details shall be chosen so as to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The design shall reduce larger building volumes in smaller forms to lessen total building mass. 
Neighborhood continuity. The proposed use for the structure shall be one which is compatible with the residential neighborhood and provide an appropriate transition between commercial and residential uses. The Commission will also give consideration to hours of operation for the proposed use, noise, traffic generation, lighting levels, lot coverage, and other issues which relate to the overall intensity of the use. 
Landscaping. The Commission shall review the quality of the overall landscape design including plant quantities, sizes, and the reduction of on-site views from adjacent properties and public streets. Other amenities shall be considered which improve the appearance of the proposed building(s), its setting and features, which provide benefits to the public's welfare. 
History. When appropriate, the building design should reflect local historic detailing related to the history of the Town and, in particular, Avon's colonial past. 
Maximum building height 35 ft. Maximum number of stories 2 stories Minimum landscaped area 50%  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements. 
C.  Commercial-Retail. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial-Retail Zone is to establish a central shopping district consisting of larger stores and satellite shops for the convenience of shoppers, to facilitate the construction of new access roads for the control of traffic, and to encourage the development of business by consolidating individual parcels of land into a total integrated plan. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Retail stores; 
b.  Business and professional offices; 
c.  Personal services; 
d.  Class I restaurants; 
e.  Class II restaurants; 
f.  Financial institutions. 
3.  Special exceptions. The following uses may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. The Commission shall consider the relationship of the proposed use to the orderly development of the district, and aesthetic contribution of the proposed development to the attractiveness of the area, and shall find that the proposed use is in harmony with the purpose of the Commercial-Retail Zone: 
a.  New car sales, including the sale of used cars as an accessory use provided no motor vehicles, "for sale" are displayed or stored within the required front yard setback; 
b.  Class III restaurants; 
c.  Planned Residential Development (PRD) in accordance with Section IX.C.; 
d.  Other uses similar to the permitted uses. 
e.  The sale and service of Manufacturer Certified Pre-Owned Motor Vehicles, including the sale and service of other motor vehicles as an accessory use. Any such facility must comply with each of the following conditions: 
(i)  The location must be an approved location by the automobile manufacturer; 
(ii)  No motor vehicles "for sale" are displayed or stored within the required front yard setback; 
(iii)  All vehicles displayed or stored on the site shall be parked only in parking spaces depicted on the site plan approved by the Commission; and 
(iv)  There will be no flashing lights, video displays, banners, inflatables, balloons or other aerial displays, searchlights, noise makers, amplified sounds or signage except such signage as may be properly approved under Avon Zoning Regulations. 
For the purpose of this section, the sale of pre-owned motor vehicles not made by the automobile manufacturer identified in subsection (i) above shall be considered an accessory use provided that it does not exceed 30 percent of total annual motor vehicle sales from the facility. 
f.  Purpose of work/live spaces or units: 
a)  Provide for the appropriate development of buildings that incorporate both living and working areas; 
b)  Provide flexibility for the development of work/live spaces and units, particularly within existing buildings; 
c)  Provide locations where appropriate new businesses can start up; 
d)  Provide opportunities for people to live in mixed use commercial and residential areas where compatible with existing uses; 
e)  Protect existing and potential uses from conflicts with each other by application of applicable standards; 
f)  Ensure that the exterior design of work/live buildings is compatible with the exterior design of other building in the area if appropriate while remaining consistent with the necessary function of the buildings. 
Work/live units or work/live space as defined herein may be permitted provided they meet the requirements found in Section VIII of these regulations and the following: 
i.  The use combines a commercial use or activity which is allowed in the zone with a residential living space or unit for the owner of the commercial business, or the owner's employee, and that person's household; and 
ii.  The resident owner or employee of the business is responsible for the commercial activity performed; and 
iii.  The commercial activity conducted takes place subject to a valid business license associated with the premise and the service provided. 
iv.  The residential component of a work/live space or unit may not be located on the street level of a multi-floor building, such that if a work/live space or unit has two floors within it, the ground floor shall act as the commercial component, while the upper floor shall be the residential aspect. The residential use may not exceed 50 percent of the total floor area of such building. The number of residential units may not exceed the number of separate bona fide commercial uses. (i.e. 1:1) Work/live uses for multi-story buildings shall be reviewed and may be approved on a case by case basis by the Commission. 
v.  Where such use is proposed for a single story building the street frontage of the commercial use shall make up at least 80 percent of the building's street frontage and street presentation. 
vi.  Parking: Each work/live unit of less than 2,500 square feet must provide at least one parking space for the residential use. For work/live units greater than 2,500 square feet in size, required parking will be based on applicable parking standard for the nonresidential use or the closest similar use as determined by Planning Director. 
vii.  At least one resident in each work/live unit shall maintain a formal connection such as owner or employee of the business and must be able to prove it upon request. Any inhabited residential unit without this required connection shall be deemed a zoning violation and will be subject to formal zoning enforcement procedures. 
viii.  Any approval for a work/live unit shall automatically and immediately become void and cease upon the cessation of the commercial portion of the use. Continuation of the residential use when the commercial use has ceased or when the unit is no longer in compliance with the original approval shall be subject to all available zoning enforcement and legal procedures. 
g.  Medical marijuana dispensary facilities: Subject to special exception and site plan approval. 
1.  No medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be permitted to be located closer than 300 feet measured closest point of the building housing the use to closest point, in a straight line, from a public or private school or an established place of worship. 
2.  Any proposed dispensary facility shall meet all criteria as established by any applicable Connecticut General Statute or any applicable regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection pertaining to such facilities. 
3.  Any dispensary facility which is permitted under this Section or any Section of the Connecticut General Statutes existing at the time of approval may not be permitted to dispense marijuana for recreational purposes, regardless of any revision to the Connecticut General Statutes permitting such use without first seeking and obtaining a special permit from the Commission for such change of use. 
4.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 60,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 200 ft. Maximum lot coverage 25% Minimum front yard 75 ft. Minimum side/rear yards 20 ft. Minimum building footprint 4,000 sq. ft. Maximum building height 35 ft. Maximum number of stories 2 stories Minimum landscaped area 50%  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements. 
D.  Commercial-Specialized. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial-Specialized Zone is to establish a district for specialty stores and other compatible land uses which do not generate large volumes of traffic, encourage the most appropriate use of land, and retain the present architectural and aesthetic character of the area for the purpose of conserving property values. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Retail specialty shops; 
b.  Business and professional offices; 
c.  Personal services; 
d.  Financial institutions; 
e.  Class I restaurants; 
f.  Class II restaurants. 
3.  Special exceptions. 
a.  Class III restaurants; 
b.  Other uses similar to the permitted uses may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. The Commission shall consider the size and architectural design of the proposed building in relation to other buildings in the area, the amount of traffic generated, and the aesthetic contribution of the proposed development to the existing character of the area. 
c.  Purpose of work/live spaces or units: 
a)  Provide for the appropriate development of buildings that incorporate both living and working areas; 
b)  Provide flexibility for the development of work/live spaces and units, particularly within existing buildings; 
c)  Provide locations where appropriate new businesses can start up; 
d)  Provide opportunities for people to live in mixed use commercial and residential areas where compatible with existing uses; 
e)  Protect existing and potential uses from conflicts with each other by application of applicable standards; 
f)  Ensure that the exterior design of work/live buildings is compatible with the exterior design of other building in the area if appropriate while remaining consistent with the necessary function of the buildings. 
Work/Live units or Work/live space as defined herein may be permitted provided they meet the requirements found in Section VIII of these regulations and the following: 
i.  The use combines a commercial use or activity which is allowed in the zone with a residential living space or unit for the owner of the commercial business, or the owner's employee, and that person's household; and 
ii.  The resident owner or employee of the business is responsible for the commercial activity performed; and 
iii.  The commercial activity conducted takes place subject to a valid business license associated with the premise and the service provided. 
iv.  The residential component of a work/live space or unit may not be located on the street level of a multi-floor building, such that if a work/live space or unit has two floors within it, the ground floor shall act as the commercial component, while the upper floor shall be the residential aspect. The residential use may not exceed 50 percent of the total floor area of such building. The number of residential units may not exceed the number of separate bona fide commercial uses. (i.e. 1:1) work/live uses for multi-story buildings shall be reviewed and may be approved on a case by case basis by the Commission. 
v.  Where such use is proposed for a single story building the street frontage of the commercial use shall make up at least 80 percent of the building's street frontage and street presentation. 
vi.  Parking: Each work/live unit of less than 2,500 square feet must provide at least one parking space for the residential use. For work/live units greater than 2,500 square feet in size, required parking will be based on applicable parking standard for the nonresidential use or the closest similar use as determined by Planning Director. 
vii.  At least one resident in each work/live unit shall maintain a formal connection such as owner or employee of the business and must be able to prove it upon request. Any inhabited residential unit without this required connection shall be deemed a zoning violation and will be subject to formal zoning enforcement procedures. 
viii.  Any approval for a work/live unit shall automatically and immediately become void and cease upon the cessation of the commercial portion of the use. Continuation of the residential use when the commercial use has ceased or when the unit is no longer in compliance with the original approval shall be subject to all available zoning enforcement and legal procedures. 
d.  Medical marijuana dispensary facilities: Subject to special exception and site plan approval. 
1.  No medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be permitted to be located closer than 300 feet measured closest point of the building housing the use to closest point, in a straight line, from a public or private school or an established place of worship. 
2.  Any proposed dispensary facility shall meet all criteria as established by any applicable Connecticut General Statute or any applicable regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection pertaining to such facilities. 
3.  Any dispensary facility which is permitted under this Section or any Section of the Connecticut General Statutes existing at the time of approval may not be permitted to dispense marijuana for recreational purposes, regardless of any revision to the Connecticut General Statutes permitting such use without first seeking and obtaining a special permit from the Commission for such change of use. 
4.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 30,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 150 ft. Maximum lot coverage 25% Minimum front yard 40 ft. Minimum side/rear yards 20 ft. Minimum building footprint 1,500 sq. ft. Maximum building floor area 6,500 sq. ft. per building, except that the Commission may by special exception approve a greater building floor area provided that the scale of the building is consistent with the purpose of this zoning district. An applicant must demonstrate compliance with the criteria set in Section VIII of these regulations.  
In addition, the Commission will be guided by the following factors. These factors may assist in mitigating the increased size of the proposed structure(s): 
Architecture. Building size, materials, colors, mass, scale, and details shall be chosen to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The design shall reduce larger building volumes in smaller forms to lessen total building mass. 
Neighborhood continuity. The proposed use for the structure shall be one which is compatible with the surrounding area and provide an appropriate transition between commercial and residential uses where appropriate. The Commission will also give consideration to hours of operation for the proposed use, noise, traffic generation, lighting levels, lot coverage, and other issues which relate to the overall intensity of the use. 
Landscaping. The Commission shall review the quality of the overall landscape design including plant quantities, sizes, and the reduction of on-site views from adjacent properties and public streets. Other amenities shall be considered which improve the appearance of the proposed building(s), its setting and features which provide benefits to the public's welfare. 
History. When appropriate, the building design should reflect local historic detailing related to the history of the Town and, in particular, Avon's colonial past. 
Maximum building height 35 ft. Maximum number of stories 2 stories Minimum landscaped area 50%  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements. 
E.  Commercial Park A. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial Park A Zone is to establish a district for office, commercial, light industrial, and other related uses; permit flexible site development; retain the natural features and open character of the area; and create a park type environment. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Business and professional offices; 
b.  Financial institutions; 
c.  Personal services; 
d.  Class I restaurants; 
e.  Class II restaurants; 
f.  Movie theaters; 
g.  Research and experimental laboratories; 
h.  Printing, publishing, and graphic arts establishments; 
I.  Hotels and motels; 
j.  Retail stores provided that the minimum landscaped area is at least 50% of the total lot area. 
3.  Special exceptions. 
a.  Class III restaurants; 
b.  Other uses similar to the permitted uses may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. The Commission shall consider the size of the enterprise, the number of employees, the process employed, services rendered, and the relationship of the proposed use to the orderly development of the district. 
c.  Medical marijuana dispensary facilities: Subject to special exception and site plan approval. 
1.  No medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be permitted to be located closer than 300 feet measured closest point of the building housing the use to closest point, in a straight line, from a public or private school or an established place of worship. 
2.  Any proposed dispensary facility shall meet all criteria as established by any applicable Connecticut General Statute or any applicable regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection pertaining to such facilities. 
3.  Any dispensary facility which is permitted under this Section or any Section of the Connecticut General Statutes existing at the time of approval may not be permitted to dispense marijuana for recreational purposes, regardless of any revision to the Connecticut General Statutes permitting such use without first seeking and obtaining a special permit from the Commission for such change of use. 
4.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 60,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 150 ft. Maximum lot coverage 20% Minimum front yard 40 ft., except that yards abutting a state highway shall be 75 ft. Minimum side/rear yards 20 ft. except that no building shall be closer than 100 ft. or parking closer than 50 ft. to any Residential Zone boundary. Maximum building height 40 ft. Maximum number of stories 3 stories Minimum landscaped area 50%  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements. 
F.  Commercial Park B. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial Park B Zone is to establish a district for compatible commercial and residential uses, and to permit flexible site development in order to retain natural site features and promote harmonious development. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Retail specialty shops; 
b.  Business and professional offices; 
c.  Printing and publishing establishments; 
d.  Sales and service of home equipment and furnishings; 
e.  Personal services; 
f.  Class I restaurants. 
3.  Special exceptions. The following uses may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. The Commission shall consider the size of the enterprise, the number of employees, the process employed, services rendered and the relationship of the proposed use to the orderly development of the district. 
a.  Multiple dwelling development in accordance with Section IX.A. Density shall be calculated on the basis of that contiguous land designated exclusively for multifamily housing. 
b.  Wholesale and indoor storage use. 
c.  Other uses similar to the permitted uses. 
d.  Medical marijuana dispensary facilities: Subject to special exception and site plan approval. 
1.  No medical marijuana dispensary facility shall be permitted to be located closer than 300 feet measured closest point of the building housing the use to closest point, in a straight line, from a public or private school or an established place of worship. 
2.  Any proposed dispensary facility shall meet all criteria as established by any applicable Connecticut General Statute or any applicable regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection pertaining to such facilities. 
3.  Any dispensary facility which is permitted under this Section or any Section of the Connecticut General Statutes existing at the time of approval may not be permitted to dispense marijuana for recreational purposes, regardless of any revision to the Connecticut General Statutes permitting such use without first seeking and obtaining a special permit from the Commission for such change of use. 
4.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 5 acres Minimum lot width 200 ft. Maximum lot coverage 20% Minimum front yard 60 ft. Maximum building height 40 ft. Maximum number of stories 21/2 stories Minimum landscaped area 50%  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements. 
G.  Industrial Park. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Industrial Park Zone is to establish a district for industry and other suitable uses, to permit flexible site development in order to retain the natural features and open character of the area, and to produce a park-type environment for industry and other compatible uses. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Business and professional offices; 
b.  Financial institutions; 
c.  Warehouses, distribution plants, and storage uses; 
d.  Manufacturing, machining, and assembling; 
e.  Research and experimental laboratories; 
f.  Class I restaurants. 
3.  Special exceptions. The following uses may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. The Commission shall consider the size of the enterprise, the number of employees, the process employed, and the relationship of the proposed use to the orderly development of the district: 
a.  Planned Residential Development (PRD) in accordance with Section IX.C. 
b.  Planned Elderly Residential Developments (PERD) in accordance with Section IX.D. 
c.  Other uses similar to the permitted uses. 
d.  Nursing and convalescent homes including, without limitation, skilled nursing facilities and intermediate care facilities operated and maintained in accordance with the standards of the State Health Department and the State Commission on Hospitals and Health Care. 
e.  Schools, not to exceed 480 students. In addition to the criteria established in Section VIII of these regulations, the applicant shall demonstrate that the site can safely accommodate playgrounds, parking, and stacking requirements; and that the location of the proposed site is a transition area between the more intense industrial uses of the IP Zone and adjacent, less intensely zoned, properties. 
f.  Medical marijuana dispensary or production facilities: Subject to special exception and site plan approval. 
1.  No medical marijuana dispensary or production facility shall be permitted to be located closer than 300 feet measured closest point of the building housing the use to closest point, in a straight line, from a public or private school or an established place of worship. 
2.  Any proposed dispensary or production facility shall meet all criteria as established by any applicable Connecticut General Statute or any applicable regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection pertaining to such facilities. 
3.  Any dispensary facility which is permitted under this Section or any Section of the Connecticut General Statutes existing at the time of approval may not be permitted to dispense marijuana for recreational purposes, regardless of any revision to the Connecticut General Statutes permitting such use without first seeking and obtaining a special permit from the Commission for such change of use. 
4.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 40,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 150 ft. Maximum lot coverage 20% Minimum front yard 60 ft. Minimum side/rear yard 25 ft., except that no building or parking shall be closer than 100 ft. to a Residential Zone boundary. Maximum building height 60 ft. Minimum landscaped area 50%  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements. 
H.  Industrial. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Industrial Zone is to establish a district for light manufacturing and other suitable uses to encourage the most appropriate development of industrial land, in harmony with the neighborhood. 
2.  Permitted use. 
a.  Professional offices. 
3.  Special exceptions. The following uses may be authorized by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VIII. The Commission shall consider the size of the enterprise, the number of employees, the process employed, and the services rendered: 
a.  Mill working shop; 
b.  Contractors materials and equipment storage yards and buildings; 
c.  Wholesale business and warehouse storage, excluding bulk fuel storage; 
d.  Foundries limited to the use of electric, electronic, and induction heating of metals and manufacture and storage of chemicals or plastics; 
e.  Manufacturing, machining, and assembling; 
f.  Plants for the processing and distribution of milk, dairy, and food products for human consumption and for bottling or packing beverages, pharmaceuticals, toilet preparations, perfumes, and similar products; 
g.  Research and development laboratories; 
h.  Class I restaurants; 
i.  Automotive-related uses which operate under a General Repairer's License issued by the State; 
j.  Building material sales, storage yards, and buildings; 
k.  Other industrial and commercial uses similar to the permitted uses. 
l.  Medical marijuana dispensary or production facilities: Subject to special exception and site plan approval. 
1.  No medical marijuana dispensary or production facility shall be permitted to be located closer than 300 feet measured closest point of the building housing the use to closest point, in a straight line, from a public or private school or an established place of worship. 
2.  Any proposed dispensary or production facility shall meet all criteria as established by any applicable Connecticut General Statute or any applicable regulation of the Department of Consumer Protection pertaining to such facilities. 
3.  Any dispensary facility which is permitted under this Section or any Section of the Connecticut General Statutes existing at the time of approval may not be permitted to dispense marijuana for recreational purposes, regardless of any revision to the Connecticut General Statutes permitting such use without first seeking and obtaining a special permit from the Commission for such change of use. 
4.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 40,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 150 ft. Maximum lot coverage 25% Minimum front yard 60 ft. Minimum side yard 25 ft. Minimum rear yard 20 ft. Maximum building height 60 ft. Minimum landscaped area 50%  
5.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage, and other requirements. 
I.  Avon Village Center. 
1.  Preamble. The Avon Village Center Zone was developed as part of a comprehensive Village Center planning process, reflecting existing conditions in the center of Avon within the context of the Town's historical past. Through this planning process, it was recognized that Avon Center differs from the traditional concept of the New England town center in that it represents a historical composite of development rather than a formally designed area centered around a formal public open space. The planning process has resulted in the development of the new Avon Village Center Zone with the intention to create a zone and associated regulations that permits flexibility in future development that will still adhere to design principles and standards that are supportive of Avon Center's unique history and development pattern. 
2.  Purpose. The purpose of the Avon Village Center Zone is to provide for village center-scale development that reflects the historic character of Avon Center while enabling flexibility in development styles and uses. When applying for any Special Permit use in the Avon Village Center Zone, the applicant must provide a comprehensive master plan that encompasses and plans for the entirety of all property owned by the applicant within the Avon Village Center Zone. Development within the Avon Village Center Zone is intended to meet the following criteria: 
a.  Promote the goals and objectives of the Town of Avon's Plan of Conservation and Development (POCD), including the Design Guidelines and Recommendations for the Avon Village Center Zone; 
b.  Maintain and enhance village center-style character through architectural design, building orientation, street design and layout, pedestrian and nonmotorized vehicular accommodations, landscaping and the provision of public open space; 
c.  Establishing controls that will facilitate development while protecting the public interest and will promote a range and balance of land uses; 
d.  Protect, preserve and promote the unique historic and environmental character of the Avon Village Center area; 
e.  Provide for uses and activities that complement and reinforce those uses and activities existing in areas adjacent to the Avon Village Center, thereby facilitating integrated physical design and encouraging interaction among activities; 
f.  Promote the development of housing types and forms that meet the needs of smaller households and families; 
g.  Promote low-impact development (LID) principles, techniques and best management practices; 
h.  Provide a system of roads and streets that connects with the surrounding transportation network in a cohesive manner, accommodates pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles; and 
i.  Be consistent with the principles, objectives and guidelines of G.S. § 8-2j of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended and generally known as the "Village Districts Act." 
3.  Establishment as floating zone and identification of landing area. 
a.  The Avon Village Center Zone is established as a floating zone within the Town of Avon. 
b.  When an applicant requests a Zoning Map Amendment to "land" the AVC Zone, the zone map amendment application must be accompanied by a mixed use development plan (MUDP), as described in greater detail in Section VI.I.6. below. 
4.  Architectural review. 
a.  The Avon Village Center Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by G.S. § 8-2j, as amended. 
b.  All new construction and substantial reconstruction activities for buildings existing as of the effective date of the landing of an Avon Village Center Zone that are visible from public roadways and that have not previously received special permit and/or site plan approval from the Commission shall be reviewed by an architectural or design professional designated by the Commission. Those reconstruction activities that constitute substantial reconstruction shall be determined by the Town's director of planning. All such activities shall comply with the general design guidelines and principles contained in G.S. § 8-2j, as amended, as well as the specific design guidelines provided in Appendix A herein. 
c.  In all cases, the determination of compliance with said design guidelines and approval of construction and modification activities shall be governed by the regulations and conditions contained in G.S. § 8-2j, as amended. 
5.  Special permit uses. The following special permit uses may be permitted subject to the standards and requirements contained in Section VI.I.6. below and Section VIII of these regulations: 
a.  Mixed use development, within which the following uses may be permitted: 
1)  Retail stores; 
2)  Business and professional offices; 
3)  Medical offices; 
4)  Personal services; 
5)  Trade, business or commercial instruction services, such as martial arts studios and dance studios; 
6)  Hotels and other hospitality uses; 
7)  Financial institutions; 
8)  Municipal buildings and uses; 
9)  Recreation facilities and youth centers; 
10)  Educational and civic buildings and uses; 
11)  Arts centers and performance venues; 
12)  Multifamily residential units; 
13)  Elderly housing units; 
14)  Class I, II and III restaurants; 
15)  Other uses that the Commission, in its sole discretion, may deem to be similar in nature and scale to those identified in this section. 
6.  Mixed use development plan (MUDP). 
a.  Intent. A mixed use development plan is intended to provide for a multistep process that permits development flexibility within the context of a unified general master plan. It is also intended to define mixed use development projects in terms of physical design, architectural character, public amenities, site improvements, traffic improvements, mitigation actions, categories of uses and the general location of buildings. MUDP applications that provide a balanced variety of different uses compatible with the intent of the AVC Zone are strongly encouraged. 
b.  Definitions. 
    Mixed Use Development Plan (MUDP) -A generalized plan of proposed development within the Avon Village Center Zone. The MUDP is a required submittal as part of a zone map amendment application to "land" the AVC Zone. The requirements for the submittal of a MUDP are set forth in Section I.6.c. below. The MUDP will become the formally adopted master plan for the Avon Village Center Zone upon approval of the zone map amendment by the Commission. 
    Avon Center Design District -An individual development block identified within an MUDP. After the approval of a MUDP, individual Avon Center Design Districts (ACDDs) plans may be submitted to the Commission as special permit and site plan applications. The requirements for the submittal of an individual ACDD plan are set forth in Section I.6.g. below. 
    Each ACDD plan shall define in detail the site, the site plan, the proposed uses, site improvements, traffic impacts and their mitigation, environmental impacts and their mitigation, future division of the property, and other information required for the public, the Commission and other municipal boards, agencies and departments. In order for an applicant to receive approval for any ACDD, the applicant must demonstrate, and the Commission must make a determination, that the application is in compliance with the MUDP. 
    Main Street -The primary roadway bisecting an MUDP, whether public or private, along and around which the proposed land uses and buildings are designed in a manner that provides a traditional "village center" or "downtown" atmosphere. A "main street" is often a relatively short segment of minor arterial or collector roadway forming the spine of a network of local roads and accessways that support the compact, mixed use center of the MUDP. "Main streets" also generally include on-street parking, ample pedestrian infrastructure, buildings and uses directly oriented toward the street itself, and properties with either very limited front yard setbacks or no front yard setbacks at all. 
    Mixed Use Development Plan-MUDP 
c.  MUDP requirements. An MUDP must meet the following requirements: 
1)  Encompass and plan for the entirety of all property owned by the applicant or its successors in interest, as of the effective date of these regulations, within the proposed Avon Village Center Zone; 
2)  Provide for a direct traffic connection that links all ACDDs within the MUDP and is designed, in both physical form and function, in the manner of a traditional "main street," as further defined under Section VI.I.6.b. above; 
3)  Provide a general conceptual site development plan (prepared by a licensed landscape architect in collaboration with an architect and/or other pertinent design/engineering professionals) showing the location and size of footprints for all proposed buildings; architectural style; a site grading plan indicating spot grade elevations; a parking plan; a landscaping plan; a roadway and traffic circulation plan; a preliminary earth removal and filling plan; a sidewalk plan illustrating walkways and accessways; an open space plan; and a description and map identifying any environmental constraints within the MUDP; 
4)  Provide maps, plans and other graphic illustrations that identify the general layout and organization of individual development blocks, referred to as "Avon Center Design Districts," including building footprints, heights, scale and massing. The applicant shall include a building setback schedule for each ACDD, identifying the proposed front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks. Where necessary, the building setback schedule shall differentiate between setbacks for the perimeter of each ACDD and setbacks along new public or private streets within the ACDD. In addition, the applicant shall provide a building height schedule for each ACDD, identifying both maximum and minimum building heights. 
5)  Provide a preliminary utilities plan showing the general location of wastewater collection facilities; the location and type of stormwater management facilities; and the water distribution system to be used on the site; 
6)  Provide a preliminary parking and traffic circulation plan that demonstrates both how the parking and traffic circulation system for the entire mixed use development will function cohesively and that each ACDD will have sufficient parking and traffic circulation to function independently during the course of a phased development. Such plan shall include a description of the proposed roads and streets within the mixed use development, including roadway classification, roadway ownership (private or public), typical sections and details for proposed roads and streets, and specific information regarding the integration of pedestrian connections and nonmotorized vehicular accommodations within the overall MUDP development plan; 
7)  Provide an ownership, maintenance and management plan for all internal streets and roads, both private and public; sidewalks and other pedestrian circulation elements; and other areas of public use and congregation. All streets and roads that remain in private ownership shall have dedicated public easements of travel; 
8)  Provide text-based narrative that lists and discusses: 
a.  The potential mix of uses in the proposed development; 
b.  Descriptions and estimates of the total square footage of each use; 
c.  Total number of dwelling units (where applicable); 
d.  Public and private amenities included as part of the proposed development; 
e.  Amount of open space acreage; 
f.  Discussion of traffic and environmental impacts resulting from the development; 
g.  Any mitigation actions that may be required; and 
h.  General information regarding site lighting, signage and other site furnishing and amenities. 
All of these items must be addressed both in aggregate for the entire proposed development and for each individual development block (ACDD). 
9)  Provide reports or studies conducted by a qualified third-party professional firm or individual to address the following potential impacts from the proposed development in the areas of traffic, the environment, the provision for and utilization of public services, and surrounding property values. 
d.  MUDP review criteria. All MUDP applications shall be subject to the requirements and criteria set forth in these regulations and the following additional requirements: 
1)  The Commission shall determine that the MUDP either is in conformity with the purpose of the Avon Village Center Zone, the intent of the MUDP process, and the MUDP requirements under Section VI.I.6.c. above. 
e.  Peer review and professional studies . As part of the MUDP application review process, and in addition to the design professionals retained under the authority of G.S. § 8-2j as amended, the Commission may engage qualified peer reviewers to review all MUDP applications and subsequent ACDD applications. The applicant shall be required to pay for all peer review costs associated with the assessment of submitted data and analyses, in accordance with Ordinance #55 of the Town of Avon, effective March 31, 2010. 
f.  Individual ACDD Application submission procedure and approval process. 
1)  The application procedure for an individual ACDD application shall be the same as for other special permit and site plan applications as described in Section X of these regulations and Section VI.I, herein. In addition, the ACDD applications shall include sufficient information for the Commission to assess the proposed development's ability to meet the performance standards contained in Section VI.I.6.l. herein. 
2)  The application review and approval process for an individual ACDD application shall be the same as for other special permit and site plan as described in Section X of these regulations, and in conformance with the requirements of G.S. § 8-3, as amended. 
3)  All individual ACDD applications must comply with the table of uses, the dimensional requirements and the aggregate limits established in Section VI.I.6.j.5. herein, with the design guidelines established in Section VI.I.6.j., and with the performance standards established in Section VI.I.6.l. herein. 
g.  ACDD application submission requirements . All individual ACDD applications shall be subject to the requirements and criteria set forth in Section X.A.1.a. of these regulations and the following additional requirements: 
1)  Include a copy of the MUDP and accompanying text describing how the subject ACDD special permit and site plan applications provide the level of integration with other portions of the Avon Village Center Zone as envisioned in the MUDP; 
2)  Include a phasing schedule for construction of each component part of the project which ensures integration of residential, nonresidential and recreational uses; 
3)  Include a demolition and construction schedule, including a construction traffic management plan; 
4)  Provide a detailed site development plan (prepared by a licensed landscape architect in collaboration with other pertinent design/engineering professionals) showing the location and size of footprints for all proposed buildings; architectural style; a site grading plan with finished floor elevations; a parking plan; a landscaping plan; a roadway and traffic circulation plan; an earth removal and filling plan; a sidewalk plan illustrating walkways and accessways; an open space plan; and a description and map identifying any environmental constraints within the ACDD; 
5)  Provide a detailed narrative description outlining the proposed ACDD development plan and the manner in which it functions effectively within the previously approved MUDP. 
h.  Modifications to the MUDP. Amendments to, and modifications of, the MUDP may be permitted with the separate submission of a ACDD site plan-plan modification subject to the following restrictions: 
1)  Modifications to the mix of uses in an ACDD shall not consist of more than 20 percent of floor area changing from either a commercial use to a residential use or from a residential use to a commercial use. 
2)  Modifications to the gross floor area of all uses in an ACDD shall not consist of a change of more than 20 percent in the amount of gross floor area in the ACDD. 
3)  Modifications to the height (in feet) of any structure in an ACDD shall not change by more than 25 percent of the original base height of the subject structure. 
4)  Modifications in the amount of usable open space shall not reduce the allocation of open space with the site plan without compensation elsewhere within the development areas approved under the MUDP. 
5)  Modifications to roads and accessways shall not eliminate the direct traffic connection that links all ACDDs within the MUDP designed as a "main street." 
In addition, any changes proposed to the individual ACDD plans that would clearly result in a significant alteration to the character, function and/or the composition of the MUDP, as determined by the Commission, shall require the submission of a new special permit application. The new special permit application must follow the same process as described in Section X of these regulations, and in conformance with the requirements of G.S. § 8-3c, as amended. 
i.  Additional development requirements. 
1)  Subdivision of ACDDs. If the subdivision of a ACDD into individual parcels is required for development purposes, the design guideline standards contained in this Section VI.I. will govern in place of the design guideline standards contained in the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Avon. 
2)  Public gathering space . Any MUDP must include a centrally-located open space available for public use and congregation. Such open space must be a minimum of 4,000 square feet in size, and shall be composed of a mix of appropriate landscape and hardscape elements. The design and selected location for this open space must be appropriately and effectively integrated into the overall site design for the MUDP, with particular attention paid to its connection to pedestrian circulation systems and elements. 
3)  Development phasing-Land uses. The intent of the AVC Zone regulations is to encourage cohesive mixed use developments with a balance of uses designed in a walkable, village center style. As such, any AVC Zone should be developed in a balanced manner throughout its development phasing cycle. 
The phasing plan for any MUDP must take into account the need for a balanced approach for the development of individual uses. It is the Town's intention and desire that any MUDP must be composed of a mix of land uses during all phases of its development, not just as an end product. Therefore, the following sequence of requirements for pro rating the development of specific uses shall apply to all MUDPs: 
 Zoning certification for up to but not exceeding 25 percent of the residential units proposed in a MUDP may be issued only if 20 percent of the total non-residential gross floor area proposed in the MUDP has also received zoning certification. 
 Zoning certification for up to but not exceeding 50 percent of the residential units proposed in a MUDP may be issued only if 40 percent of the total non-residential gross floor area proposed in the MUDP has also received zoning certification. 
 Zoning certification for up to but not exceeding 50 percent of the residential units proposed in a MUDP may be issued only if all of the parks, recreation and open space elements proposed in the MUDP also have been constructed and, when required, conveyed to the Town of Avon. 
 Zoning certification for the full number of residential units proposed in an MUDP may be issued only if 60 percent of the total nonresidential gross floor area proposed in the MUDP has also received zoning certification. 
The Commission, in its discretion, may modify these percentage requirements by up to ten percentage points if the applicant can demonstrated, and the Commission determines, that doing so would still enable the proposed development to meet the purpose and intent of the AVC Zone and would result in a development that is generally consistent with the Town of Avon's Plan of Conservation and Development. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify any future purchasers of property within the MUDP of these conditions. 
4)  Development phasing-Infrastructure. Given the intended unified nature of development within an MUDP, the construction phasing for infrastructure components that effectively link individual ACDDs together to form a complete MUDP is a critical element in the MUDP development process. Therefore, all MUDP applications must include a descriptive narrative and associated graphic illustration of the proposed phasing of infrastructure components. The Commission shall have the ability to modify the proposed infrastructure phasing plan, in its sole discretion, as a condition of approval of the MUDP. 
5)  Parking-Modified standards. In general, the standards for the required number of parking spaces for each land use as established under Section VII.B. of these Zoning Regulations shall apply in the Avon Village Center Zone. However, it is recognized that the Avon Village Center Zone encompasses a unique area of the Town that is envisioned as mixed use development, many of which uses may have shared and complementary off-street parking needs. Therefore, in cases where the required number of parking spaces for a particular land use under Section VII.B. is greater than an applicable standard for the number of parking spaces required for such use according to data from the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or the Urban Land Institute (ULI), the Commission in its sole discretion may allow the use of the lesser parking space requirement standard. The applicant must provide sufficient evidence indicating that such parking reduction will neither create a shortage of parking spaces nor create ancillary negative traffic circulation impacts. 
6)  Aggregate development. Total aggregate development within the AVC Zone shall adhere generally to the following guidelines: 
a.  The total residential development component within the AVC shall be composed of approximately 400 to 500 dwelling units for the entire mixed use development, of which no less than ten percent shall be situated in mixed use structures. All dwelling units generally shall have two bedrooms or fewer. 
b.  The total nonresidential development component within the AVC shall be composed of approximately 500,000 to 600,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7)  Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets. Streets shall be laid out in a manner that promotes safe and logical traffic circulation. Unless specifically approved by the Commission, the use of cul-de-sacs and other types of dead end streets should be avoided in all ACDDs that have any nonresidential land uses. Within ACDDs consisting entirely of residential uses, cul-de-sacs and other types of dead end streets may be permitted at the Commission's discretion. 
8)  Earth removal and filling. In general, all earth removal, grading and filling activities shall be conducted in a manner such that these activities will result in no net change in the amount of earth material brought into or removed from within the MUDP. Within each individual ACDD, the applicant shall demonstrate a balance of cuts and fills, unless waived by the Commission. At the Commission's discretion, removal of earth material from the MUDP may be permitted if it can be demonstrated by the applicant that doing so would produce a better overall development design. 
9)  Utilities. All utility lines serving new construction shall be buried underground in any MUDP. 
j.  Design guidelines. 
1)  Introduction. The AVC Zone is intended to implement the policies, goals and urban design principles articulated in official Town documents, calling for preservation and development of a mixed use and pedestrian-friendly "Main Street" character for the Avon Village Center, including the development of new structures and uses with appropriate architectural designs and the conservation and enhancement of the character of existing buildings, sites, streetscapes and pedestrian environments. This is accomplished through compliance with the following design and use standards that apply to new and existing architectural facades, sites and buildings, applied under the review procedures of this district. These design guidelines are intended to preserve, restore and enhance resources, improve property values, promote and support a vibrant business and residential environment, and enhance the architectural character and attractiveness of the village center. 
These design guidelines are intended to be implemented through the Avon Village Center Zone regulations. They are intended to be used during review of projects proposed within the approved redevelopment areas. These guidelines were created to assist both the Commission and the project proponents with direction to maintain the quality of character in Avon's village center. 
2)  Context. The Avon Village Center Zone is a subset of the larger Town Center of Avon, which includes architecture representative of a mix of periods and design styles. This variation contributes to the unique character of Avon's Village Center. These design guidelines seek to emulate the many positive elements of Avon's existing town center architectural landscape. 
Notable village center buildings from historic periods are the complex of buildings associated with Ensign Bickford and the stores and offices situated on the north side of West Main Street between Ensign Drive and Woodford Avenue. While these buildings may not be assumed as models for improvements in village center buildings and properties, the unique design and construction of these buildings could be used as a comparison for new construction. 
Notable contemporary buildings are also present in the Village Center area. While these buildings do not conform to older historic character, they define some of the more recent periods of architecture, and must be considered as to what contributions they may provide to the overall uniqueness and character of the Avon Village Center. However, changes in the buildings have not all contributed to the aesthetics of the architecture or the character of Avon's Village Center. Many of the single-story commercial buildings in the surrounding area are examples of contemporary commercial buildings which are effectively only distinguishable by their tenant signage. 
3)  Principles of Village Center design. These design guidelines are meant to apply to the "public realm;" those building facades and spaces that are subject to public view from public areas and in public use. Interior spaces and building code compliance are not the subject of these guidelines but may be considerations under these design standards. 
Overall principles include: 
 Support the village center redevelopment with projects that support multiple modes of accessibility and transit. 
 Support village center vitality with uses and spaces that contribute to the commercial and entertainment aspects of the village center and promote attractiveness for visitors and patrons of the area. 
 Reinforce the village center as a civic place with spaces for small public gatherings and discourse. 
 Use examples of existing architecture and design in the AVC as models for renovation and new design. 
k.  MUDP dimensional requirements. 
1)  Minimum lot size for each ACDD: Five acres, unless waived by the Commission. In order for an applicant to receive a waiver of this requirement, the applicant must demonstrate, and the Commission must make a determination, that there are unique characteristics of the subject area (such as physical characteristics of the land, unique relationship to the balance of the MUDP, or other special circumstances) that warrant a waiver of the minimum lot size requirements and that providing a waiver would produce a better overall development design. 
2)  Maximum building height: To be determine by the Commission, but in no case higher than 40 feet as measured according to the definition of "building height" in Section II of these regulations. 
3)  Maximum overall MUDP impervious surface coverage: 50 percent 
4)  Maximum overall MUDP building coverage: 30 percent 
5)  Minimum overall MUDP usable open space: 15 percent 
6)  Setbacks for MUDP perimeter> 
  General setback requirement: Minimum of 20 feet, maximum of 40 feet, unless waived by the Commission. 
  Setback for MUDP boundaries adjacent to or across a public right-of-way from a residential use or residential zone: Minimum of 35 feet, maximum of 60 feet and landscaped and design in accordance with the "B Bufferyard" standards under Section VII.A. of these regulations. 
l.  Performance standards. 
1)  Usable open space. A minimum of 15 percent of developable land area within the AVC shall be usable open space. The determination of whether designated areas constitute usable open space shall be made at the sole discretion of the Planning Commission. 
2)  Pedestrian walkways, nonmotorized vehicular accommodations, accessibility and connectivity. 
a.  All MUDP developments must provide a cohesive and coherent system of pedestrian connections and nonmotorized vehicular accommodations linking together the various ACDDs. 
b.  All MUDP developments must integrate pedestrian connections and nonmotorized vehicular accommodations to the Farmington Valley Greenway trail as part of their overall design. 
c.  All MUDP developments must provide pedestrian connections between development within the Avon Village Center Zone and Route 44 and Route 10. 
3)  Truck traffic circulation and deliveries. 
a.  Truck traffic associated with pickups and deliveries for uses in the Avon Village Center Zone is allowed only during approved hours of operation, generally 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise designated by the Commission. 
b.  Truck traffic shall not impede general traffic circulation within the Avon Village Center Zone. As part of any proposed development, an applicant shall provide reasonable off-street accommodations for all expected truck traffic associated with such development. 
c.  As part of any ACDD application, an applicant shall submit information describing the expected number, size and frequency of delivery and pickup vehicles to service the proposed development in each ACDD. 
4)  Low impact development. 
a.  All MUDP developments shall implement low impact development (LID) and best management practices wherever and whenever feasible. When considering issues of overall site design, stormwater drainage and infrastructure design, developers within a MUDP shall first consider LID best management practices (BMPs). If such BMPs are shown to be inappropriate or infeasible for use in a particular area or areas of the MUDP, conventional development methods may be considered and utilized. LID BMP categories shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
 Hydrologic design elements (infiltration, retention and detention, biofilters) 
 Permeable pavement elements and disconnected impervious surfaces 
 Roadway, parking lot, driveway and pedestrian circulation design elements 
 Structural design elements (green roofs, rain water harvesting, foundation planting) 
 Landscaping design elements (soil amendments, street trees, selection of appropriate plant species) 
b.  All stormwater runoff generated from land development and land use conversion activities shall not discharge untreated stormwater runoff directly to a wetland, local water body, municipal drainage system, or abutting property, without adequate treatment. 
c.  The implementation and use of any alternative energy infrastructure, including, but not limited to, solar panels, micro wind turbines and micro water turbines, shall be appropriately integrated within buildings and structures so as to minimize any visual impacts associated with such infrastructure. 
5)  Environmental impact. Any environmental impacts or potential environmental impacts identified as part of a report submitted by the applicant per Section VI.I.6.c.9. herein, or any environmental impacts or potential environmental impacts identified through the peer review process under Section VI.I.6.e. herein, must be addressed to the satisfaction of the Commission prior to the start of construction. 
7.  Signage in Avon Village Center Zone (AVC). 
a.  In addition to any other signage permitted by the Avon Zoning Regulations the following signage shall be allowed in the AVC zone and may be permitted by staff as follows: 
1)  After approval of a Master Plan, one detached sign, not exceeding 32 square feet in area, may be erected at or near each of the following locations: 
A.  The intersection of Route 10 and Fisher Drive. 
B.  The intersection of Fisher Drive and Ensign Drive. 
C.  The intersection of Ensign and Bickford Drive. 
D.  The intersection of Ensign Drive and Arts Center Lane. 
E.  The intersection of West Main Street and Climax Road. 
F.  The intersection of Climax Road and Bickford Drive. 
2)  Each sign may be one-sided or two-sided. Note: A two-sided sign must have the respective faces of the sign no further than one foot apart at any point. 
3)  Any sign permitted to be erected under this regulation shall be considered temporary and eligible for renewal after one year. Renewal shall be based upon: 
A.  The continued need for the sign. 
B.  The condition of the sign. Signs not properly maintained or in poor condition, or with out of date information will not be renewed and will be required to be removed. 
C.  Multiple signs on the same parcel which are visible at the same time will not be permitted. 
J.  Restricted Industrial Zone. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of the Restricted Industrial Zone is to establish a district for light manufacturing and other specific and suitable uses to encourage the most appropriate development of land which can be used for the permitted uses and for Special Exception uses which the Commission finds meet the applicable requirements and which will still remain in harmony with the neighborhood. 
2.  Process. Upon application for either the establishment of a Restricted Industrial Zone which requires a zone change application or for a change of use in and established Restricted Industrial Zone or for approval to establish a new or any substantial change in use in an Restricted Industrial Zone a complete site plan with a detailed narrative is required to be presented and approved by the Commission. 
3.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Professional offices; 
b.  Retail and wholesale businesses and related warehouse storage; 
c.  Plants for processing, marketing and distribution of milk, dairy and food products; 
d.  Bottling and/or packing of beverages, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, and similar products; 
e.  Research and development laboratories; 
f.  Class 1 restaurants; 
g.  Other uses similar to permitted uses as may be permitted by the Commission. 
4.  Special exception uses. 
a.  Other industrial, commercial and residential uses similar to permitted uses and/or which are found to be in keeping with the stated purpose of this regulation and which meet the standards of Section VIII criteria; 
b.  Class II and Class III restaurants which may be permitted by the Commission if found that they will meet the standards of Section VIII; 
c.  Planned Residential Development (PRD) in accordance with Section IX.C; 
d.  Planned Elderly Residential Development (PERD) in accordance with Section IX.D; 
e.  Nursing and convalescent homes including without limitation, skilled nursing facilities and intermediate care facilities operated and maintained in accordance with the standards of the State Health Department and the State Commission on Hospitals and Health Care; 
f.  Schools, not to exceed 480 students. In addition to the criteria established in Section VIII of these regulations, the applicant shall demonstrate that the site can safely accommodate playgrounds, parking and stacking requirements; and that the location of the proposed site is a transition area between the more intense industrial uses of the Restricted Industrial Zone and adjacent less intensely zoned properties. 
5.  Height and area requirements. 
Minimum lot area 40,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 150 ft. Maximum lot coverage 20% Minimum front yard* 60 ft. Minimum side/rear yard* 25 ft. except that no building or parking shall be closer than 100 ft. to a Residential Zone boundary. Maximum building height 60 ft. Minimum landscaped area 50%  
  
*Unless existing buildings and parking are proposed to be used and are found acceptable. 
6.  Land use and site development requirements. See Section VII for additional regulations relating to landscaping, parking, signage and other requirements. 
(Amend. of 12-14-10; eff. 12-22-10; Amend. of 6-28-11; eff. 7-6-11; Amend. of 7-15-14; eff. 7-23-14; Amend of 1-12-16; eff. 2-11-16; Amend of 11-15-16, eff. 11-23-16; Amend. of 5-23-17(1), eff. 6-1-17; Amend. of 3-27-18, eff. 4-4-18) 


Section VII. - Land use and site development regulations. 
A.  Landscape regulations. 
1.  Purpose. These landscaping regulations are adopted for the purpose of protecting property values by preserving existing vegetation and planting of new materials; providing privacy from visual intrusion, light, dirt, and noise; preventing the erosion of soil; providing water recharge areas; and improving the quality of the environment and attractiveness of the Town of Avon. 
2.  Overall landscaped area requirements. 
a.  Any lot developed for business or industrial use shall provide landscaped areas on the site which are, in the aggregate, at least 50 percent of the total lot area. 
b.  In the CS, CR, CP-A, CP-B, and I Zones, the Commission may allow by special exception a reduction in the overall landscaped area to 40 percent in the case of redeveloped sites, when in the opinion of the Commission, improvements to building and landscaping will be an overall benefit to the community and where the special exception criteria as outlined in Section VIII have been met. 
3.  Perimeter landscaped area requirements. 
a.  Front yard. Any lot developed for commercial or industrial use shall provide a landscaped area adjacent to the street which is not less than the width specified in the table below: 
Commercial Retail Commercial Specialized Commercial Park A 25 feet Office Park Neighborhood Business 50 feet Commercial Park B Industrial Park Industrial 60 feet  
The front yard landscaped area shall contain at least one shade tree at least three inches in caliper for each 50 feet or part thereof of street frontage. 
b.  Side/rear yards. Any lot developed for commercial or industrial use shall provide a landscaped area along side and rear lot lines at least ten feet wide with one shade tree at least three inches in caliper for each 50 feet or part thereof of such lines. 
In addition, 50% of the landscaped side yards shall be in landscaped areas at least 25 feet wide. The Commission may modify this requirement for excellence in landscaping on other parts of the site. 

4.  Parking lot, landscaped area requirements. 
a.  Any lot which contains parking facilities for more than ten cars shall also provide landscaped areas within the parking lot equal to at least 20% of the gross parking lot area. This landscaped area requirement shall be provided by landscaped end islands and landscaped center islands within the parking area which are designed and located to minimize the unattractiveness of parking lots. Landscaped end islands shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width and landscaped center islands shall be a minimum of 18 feet in width. One deciduous shade tree at least three inches in caliper shall be planted within the landscaped area for each ten parking spaces. 
b.  No parking area or driveways shall be closer than ten feet from any portion of a building other than its garage entrance or loading area apron. This ten-foot area shall be used for walkways and/or landscaping and this ten-foot area shall not be counted as part of the 20% requirement in Section VII.A.4.a. 
5.  Landscaped buffer requirements. 
Landscaped buffers shall be provided where required by this section and shall conform to the standards illustrated in the bufferyard graphic. 
Canopy trees shall be deciduous shade trees planted at three inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 35 feet. Understory trees shall be deciduous shade or fruit trees planted at two inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 12 feet. 
Evergreens shall be coniferous species planted at six feet in height. Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at 21/2 feet in height with a mature height of at least six feet or coniferous species planted at 21/2 feet in spread. 
a.  Front yards . A front yard landscaped buffer, meeting or exceeding the requirements of the A-1 Bufferyard, may be required by the Commission in the Industrial Zone and Industrial Park Zone where necessary to preserve and protect residential property values and privacy of residential lots. 
b.  Front yards. A front yard landscaped buffer, meeting or exceeding the requirements of the A-2 Bufferyard, may be required by the Commission in Commercial or Industrial Zones where deemed necessary to screen parking lot areas from the public street. 
c.  Side/rear yards. A landscaped buffer shall be provided along side and rear yards where Commercial Zones, Industrial Zones, or approved special exception uses within Residential Zones abut Residential Zones or uses. 
A bufferyard along the property boundary shall be provided as follows: 
Type of Required Bufferyard Conditions B Bufferyard Between any Commercial Zone and a Residential Zone or use. Between any approved special exception use within a Residential Zone and a Residential use. C Bufferyard Between any Industrial Zone and a Residential Zone or use.  
These side/rear yard buffer requirements may be reduced or waived at the discretion of the Commission when warranted by special conditions. 
The Commission shall determine which type of bufferyard within each category shall be used upon a review of the site design, topography, existing vegetation and abutting land uses. The Commission may authorize the use of existing vegetation in lieu of part or all of the bufferyard requirements. Also, the Commission may require the substitution of the evergreen plant materials shown in the bufferyard graphic. The use of B1, B2, or B3 berms may also be required by the Commission where deemed appropriate in any bufferyard as an additional buffering mechanism. 
6.  Existing vegetation. Existing plant materials may be used to meet all or part of the landscape regulations. Existing trees in good condition over 12 inches in caliper shall be preserved unless approved for removal by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
7.  Variations to landscape requirements. 
a.  Additional landscaping. The Commission may require additional landscaping or more mature plantings when unusual conditions require more extensive screening, or for noise abatement to prevent the depreciation of adjoining residential properties. 
b.  Reduced landscaping. The Commission may reduce the landscape requirements by not more than 25% for excellence in building or space design. The Commission shall consider, among other features, the site characteristics, compatibility of proposed structures with surrounding architectural types, quality of building materials and the size and quality of landscape materials. 
8.  Completion of landscaping. In new construction, all landscaping shown on the approved plan shall be completed before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, or a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission assuring completion within a specific time (not to exceed one year) shall be filed with the Commission. Such bond shall be forfeited if the work shall not have been completed within such time limit. 
In additions or changes of use to existing buildings, a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission assuring completion of all landscaping shown on the approved plan within a specific time limit (not to exceed one year) shall be filed with the Commission. Such bond shall be forfeited if the work shall not have been completed within such time limit. 
9.  Landscape plan requirements. Landscape plans shall include a plant list, with plant names, quantities, size at planting, and size when mature. Typical sections may be shown. Existing planting shall be identified on the plan. 
B.  Parking regulations. 
1.  Purpose. These parking regulations are adopted for the purpose of providing sufficient parking facilities off the street to serve all existing and proposed uses. 
2.  Number of parking spaces. Parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot in sufficient number to accommodate the motor vehicles of all occupants, employees, customers, and any others normally visiting the premises at any one time. Spaces shall be provided in not less than the number indicated on the following table: 
Use Parking spaces Retail stores 0-10,000 sq. ft. 10/1,000 gross sq. ft. 10-20,000 sq. ft. 8/1,000 gross sq. ft. 20-40,000 sq. ft. 7/1,000 gross sq. ft, not less than 160 40,000 sq. ft. plus 6/1,000 gross sq. ft., not less than 280 Financial institutions 8/1,000 gross sq. ft. Personal services 6/1,000 gross sq. ft. Gasoline stations 3/service bay and 1/2 employees Major grocery store 6/1,000 gross sq. ft. Offices 5/1,000 gross sq. ft. Class I restaurant 10/1,000 gross sq. ft. Class II & Class III restaurants 1/2 seats plus 1/2 employees plus an additional 10/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. The additional 10-spaces/1,000-square-feet requirement may be temporarily or permanently deferred in whole or in part by the Commission upon a finding that additional parking is not needed. Hotels, motels 1/guest room plus 1/2 employees plus additional spaces for accessory uses Industrial uses 3.3/1,000 gross sq. ft.* Residential uses 2.5/dwelling unit Other Theaters, churches, public assembly, recreation, etc. 1/4 seats Shopping centers 20,000-40,000 sq. ft. 7/1,000 gross sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. plus 6/1,000 gross sq. ft.  
Notes 
(1)  The Commission shall determine the required number of parking spaces for all uses not included in the above table, based on those criteria. 
(2)  The Commission may determine that part or all of an office building's atrium area, exclusive of stairwells, elevators, etc., does not require any parking spaces if the area primarily serves as an interior landscaped amenity. 
(3)  The following rules shall apply when computing required parking for a shopping center: 
-If more than 25% of the gross building area of a shopping center is to be used for Class I, Class II, or Class III restaurant(s), that portion over 25% shall provide additional parking at the regular shopping center rate (either six or seven spaces/1,000 square feet of gross floor area) plus an additional ten spaces/1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
-Any temporary or permanent reduction of parking requirements which may have been granted by past action of the Commission under Section VII.B.4. shall not be automatically applied to the shopping center rate. Proposed alterations, expansions, or other changes to a shopping center will only be permitted if compliance with these parking standards can be achieved, or if the Commission grants a temporary or permanent reduction in parking. 
-Any property meeting the definition of a shopping center or located within a shopping center must utilize the shopping center parking requirements. Parking may not be based on the composite of individual uses. For example, the office use rate of five spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. may not be applied to buildings or portions of buildings within a shopping center used as offices. 
-Any retail plaza which contains a major grocery store shall compute parking requirements based on the composite of individual uses. 
-Where property within a CP-A Zone would constitute a shopping center under Section II of these regulations, the parking rate shall be based on the composite of individual uses. 
(4)  Basement areas occupied by a principal use shall be used to calculate parking requirements; otherwise they shall be used only for utility and storage purposes accessory to the principal use of the building. 
(5)  Consolidated parcels which involve the combination of a hotel project larger than 50 rooms in size with a retail development shall provide parking at the following rates: 
Category 1: Retail development is 20,000-40,000 square feet in size. Use Parking spaces Retail component 6/1,000 gross sq. ft. Hotel component Regular rate (one/guest room plus 1/2 employees plus additional spaces for accessory uses) Category 2: Retail development in excess of 40,000 square feet Retail component 5.5/1,000 sq. ft. Hotel component Regular rate (1/guest room plus 1/2 employees plus additional spaces for accessory uses)  
(6)  *The Commission may, by special exception, reduce the required rate of parking for any industrial use based on the individual needs of the industrial occupant of the building. In making such a determination, the Commission shall be guided by the actual number of employees; the amount of space within the facility which is used to house equipment; and the ability of the applicant to demonstrate that future parking may be created should it become necessary for either the current occupant or a future occupant of the building. 
3.  Size of parking facilities. 
a.  The dimensions for parking spaces and drive aisles shall conform to the following table: 
Degrees 90 60 45 A) Double parking bay 60 ft. 58 ft. 53 ft. B) Depth of bay 18 ft. 20 ft. 19 ft. C) Aisle width 24 ft.* 18 ft. 15 ft. D) Width of space 9 ft. 9 ft. 9 ft. E) Depth of space 18 ft. 18 ft. 18 ft.  
*Aisles for single-loaded parking bays may be 22 ft. wide. 
Aisles for 90-degree parking are for two-way circulation, and aisles for 60-degree and 45-degree parking are for one-way circulation. 
b.  Other standards. 
1.  The outside radius of parking lot end islands shall be ten feet minimum. 
2.  All other radii shall be five feet minimum. 
3.  All interior landscaped islands shall be a minimum width of 18 feet. 
c.  Where parking spaces overhang a concrete or bituminous walk (minimum six feet in width), the depth of the parking space may be reduced by two feet. 

4.  Reduction of parking facilities. 
a.  Permanent shared use reduction. The Commission may permit a reduction of up to 25% of the required parking spaces due to shared use of parking facilities when the parking needs of the joint users occur at different hours of the day. 
b.  Permanent compact space reduction. In parking lots in excess of 50 spaces in the I or IP-Zone, the Commission may allow the installation of compact spaces, not to exceed 25% of the total number of spaces installed, at eight feet by 16 feet. These spaces shall be clearly designated as compact car parking. This reduction may only be considered for single-tenant buildings where there is reasonable assurance of private control of these areas. 
c.  Temporary installation reduction. The Commission may waive the immediate installation of up to 25% of the required parking spaces where sufficient evidence has been presented, in the judgment of the Commission, to show that the reduced parking facilities will adequately serve the proposed use. Before approval of a waiver by the Commission, the applicant shall show upon the site development plan the complete layout for the full parking requirements. The owner shall file that plan in the Office of the Town Clerk, stipulating that the owner, or the successor and assigns of the owner, will install as many of the waived parking spaces as the Commission deems necessary within six months of the Commission's request, when, in the opinion of the Commission, such installation is needed. 
d.  Commercial Specialized Zone. Within the CS Zone, the Commission may permit up to a 30 percent reduction in the required rate of parking for large developments which meet the definition of a shopping center. The Commission shall consider the location of parking spaces in order to provide convenient access to storefronts, the unique characteristics of specialty retailers who as a result may have less than average demand for parking, and the ability of retailers to share parking in a complementary manner due to peak parking needs for retailers occurring at different hours of the day. 
5.  Parking lot and site design. 
a.  Except for residential uses, no lot shall have more than one driveway for each 150 feet of frontage. In order to protect the public safety where traffic volumes, patterns, or street geometry warrants, the Commission may require that only one driveway serve any lot regardless of the length of street frontage and may designate the location of any driveway. In the case of corner lots, driveways shall be located not less than 150 feet from the intersection of the street lines of the lot. In the case of a corner lot having frontage of less than 150 feet, the driveway shall be as far from the intersection as is practical. Driveways entering streets at a curve or at the crest of a hill shall be located to provide the maximum sight distances possible. 
b.  Driveways shall be designed to be as perpendicular to the street line as possible, and in no case may the angle between the street line and the driveway centerline be less than 60 degrees. 
c.  Parking lots designed for 90-degree parking are encouraged and may be required by the Commission; however, where a one-way circulation pattern is desired due to traffic safety considerations, the Commission may require angle parking. 
d.  Parking lot aisles longer than 45 feet may not be dead-ended and must provide continuous circulation; however, the Commission may modify this standard if turnaround areas and adequate overall site circulation is still provided. 
6.  Surface treatment. All parking spaces, loading facilities, and access roadways shall have at least six inches of process stone and 21/2 inches of bituminous concrete as surface treatment unless waived by the Commission for other surface treatment which, in the opinion of the Commission, will provide an adequate all-weather surface. 
7.  Handicapped spaces. Parking spaces designed for handicapped persons shall be provided in all parking lots in excess of ten cars. Spaces shall be clearly delineated at 15 feet by 18 feet and shall be posted for use by handicapped persons only. Spaces shall be provided in not less than the number required by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
C.  Sign Regulations. 
1.  Purpose. 
The general purposes of the Sign Regulations are to set forth standards to control the location, size, number, lighting, and character of signs located in all zones in order to further the purposes set forth in Section I of the Zoning Regulations, and to avoid conditions of clutter and unsightliness. 
The specific purposes of the Sign Regulations are to: 
-Preserve the public health and public safety by controlling a sign's size, location and character so it will not confuse, distract, mislead or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety; and 
-Preserve the general welfare by controlling the aesthetics and attractiveness of signs in order to: protect the residential, business, industrial and historic character of each zone; mitigate any negative impacts on adjoining properties; assist in achieving a more desirable environment in order to maintain property values and to encourage economic growth; and to avoid negatively altering the essential characteristics of the area. 
2.  General regulations. 
a.  Sign. Any natural or artificial structure, object, device, light or display which is used to advertise, identify, or attract attention to any object, product, institution, organization, business, service, or location by any means, including but not limited to letter, number, banner, flag, insignia, device, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or logo, and which is situated so that it can be seen from a street. One flag or any one insignia of any governmental agency shall not be considered a sign within the purpose of this regulation. 
b.  Sign area measurement . The sign area shall be the smallest area which encompasses all letters, designs, symbols, logos including the advertising surface. The sign area shall include any background material if such material is designed to be an integral part of the sign because of its texture, color or building material. 

c.  Minimum letter size on permanent detached signs. To ensure that the message on all signs can be safely read from adjoining public streets, all letters, numbers, and logos contained within the sign shall be a minimum of nine inches in height unless waived by the Commission upon a finding that the sign can be safely read by passing motorists driving on adjacent public roadways. In reviewing a request for such a waiver, the Commission shall base its decision on whether the letters are of adequate size to make it possible for the sign to be read and understood within a time frame consistent with safety and safe driving practices. 
d.  Sign illumination. No flashing, intermittent, intensity variations of light, or exposed neon lights are permitted. Signs may be externally illuminated provided that the source of light is shielded from the road and adjacent properties. Internally illuminated signs shall consist of a dark background with light lettering, unless waived by the Commission. No internally illuminated signs are permitted in the NB or CS Zone. 
e.  Sign motion. No sign or any part thereof shall be moving whether by mechanical or other means. 
f.  Sign review procedure. 
(1)  Sign permits. All permanent signs shall have a building permit obtained from the Building Department before the sign is erected. Application shall include a plan of the sign and its location on the site. 
(2)  Sign concept. As part of the review for site plan applications or modifications to site plan applications, the Commission shall review and approve a sign concept. A sign concept review shall include information on the size, shape, materials, lighting and location of signs. The purpose of this review is to ensure compliance to these regulations and compatibility to the building and surrounding properties. No permits shall be issued for signs which conflict with the approved sign concept. 
(3)  Prior to obtaining a building permit for a sign, all new or replacement signs larger than 75 square feet shall be approved by the Commission. This may be submitted as part of the site plan application or application for sign review may be made at a later date on forms supplied by the Commission. 
g.  Temporary detached signs. Temporary detached signs may be displayed in accordance with the criteria specified below: 
(1)  Real estate signs. One four-square-foot sign per road frontage may be displayed on the parcel in any zone advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the premises. 
(2)  Construction sign. One sign not exceeding 32 square feet may be displayed in any zone designating the owner, contractor, or other pertinent data relating to a construction project. Such sign shall be removed within five days after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(3)  Business promotions. One sign not illuminated and not exceeding 12 square feet may be displayed by every business in the CR, CS, CPA, CPB, OP, and NB zones not more than twice in the same calendar year, for up to two weeks each time, for sales, special promotions, or new business announcements. All businesses shall obtain permits from the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to the sign being displayed. 
(4)  Renovation signs. One four-square-foot sign may be displayed on a residential lot designating the contractor and the service being provided. Such sign shall be removed within five days after the completion of the renovation work. 
(5)  Subdivision signs. One sign not exceeding 12 square feet may be displayed on an approved lot within a newly approved subdivision designating the subdivision name, owner and other pertinent data. Such signs shall obtain permits from the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to being erected and shall be removed upon the issuance of certificates of occupancy for 75% of the homes constructed within the subdivision or upon approval of a permanent sign identifying the subdivision under Section VII.C.3.b.(3) of these regulations. 
(6)  New business signs. One sign not illuminated and not exceeding 12 square feet may be displayed for any new business in a commercial zone for up to 30 consecutive days. A new business is defined as any business which moves into a new location subsequent to the adoption of this regulation. Any business which has met this definition and has received a certificate of occupancy within six months of adoption of this regulation shall also be permitted a new business sign for 30 consecutive days. A permit for such sign shall be obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to display of the sign. 
h.  Nonconforming signs. Repairs or alterations to nonconforming signs are permitted provided that the cost of such repairs or alterations does not exceed 25% of the replacement cost, and provided that the nonconformity is not increased or enlarged. 
3.  Signs in Residential and Rural Zones. 
a.  Permitted signs. 
(1)  Identification sign. One wall or detached sign not exceeding two square feet may be displayed designating the name and address of the occupants of the premises. Home occupations, major and minor, may also designate the occupation or business located on the premises. 
b.  Signs allowed by special exception. 
(1)  One detached sign not exceeding 12 square feet for identification of an authorized special exception may be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VII.C.5. 
(2)  Governmental signs. One detached sign not exceeding 12 square feet for identification of public and government facilities may be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VII.C.5. 
(3)  One permanent detached residential development sign designating the name of a residential subdivision which meets the following criteria: 
(a)  The sign shall be single sided and not exceed 12 square feet in area. 
(b)  The sign and structure supporting the sign shall not exceed five feet in height. 
(c)  Only materials requiring low maintenance such as stone and brick shall be utilized for the sign and structure. 
(d)  The sign shall be located outside of the road right of way [right-of-way]. The applicant shall provide written documentation which demonstrates that appropriate instruments will be executed that guarantee the perpetual maintenance of the sign. This responsibility may be assigned to an individual lot owner or several lot owners and may include a homeowners' association. All appropriate documents shall be recorded in the Office of the Town Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit to construct the sign. 
(e)  Where a residential development has more than one entrance road intersecting with established roadways, the Commission may permit more than one sign meeting the criteria contained herein. Priority shall be given where new entrance roads intersect with existing collector or arterial streets and to larger developments such as those in excess of 20 lots. 
One permanent detached residential development sign designating the name of the Multiple-Dwelling Development, Planned Residential Development, or Planned Elderly Residential Development which meets the following criteria: 
(a)  The sign may be single or double sided and not exceed 12 square feet in area per side. 
(b)  The sign and structure supporting the sign shall not exceed five feet in height. 
(c)  Only materials allowed to be utilized for the sign shall be approved by the Commission. 
(d)  The sign shall be located outside of the road right-of-way. The applicant shall provide written documentation which demonstrates that appropriate instruments will be executed that guarantee the perpetual maintenance of the sign. All appropriate documents shall be recorded in the office of the Town Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit to construct the sign. 
(e)  Where the residential development has more than one entrance road intersection with established roadways, the Commission may permit more than one sign meeting the criteria herein. Priority shall be given where new entrance roads intersect with existing collector or arterial streets. 
(f)  The sign(s) may be externally illuminated provided that the source of illumination shall not be visible from any public road. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Off-premises signs for nonprofit organizations. Government, religious, fraternal, and other nonprofit organizations may erect one off-premises sign for the purposes of directing traffic to the location of the nonprofit organization. Such sign, if approved by the Commission, shall be placed on a Town street sign. The size, design, and materials used shall be consistent with the Unified Traffic Control Manual. In no case shall a sign exceed two square feet in area. All signs shall be made and installed by the Town of Avon Department of Public Works. The cost of manufacturing such signs shall be borne by the applicant. The Commission shall determine whether the location of the nonprofit organization warrants a directional sign for reasons relating to public safety. 
4.  Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones. 
a.  Permitted signs[. Wall] identification signs not exceeding the sign area specified for that zone in the following table: 
Zone Sign Area CR 1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage for signs located less than 150 ft. from the right-of-way; and no sign shall exceed 100 sq. ft. 1.5 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage for signs located between 150 ft. and 250 ft. from the right-of-way, and no sign shall exceed 200 sq. ft. 2 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage for signs more than 250 ft. from the right-of-way; and no sign shall exceed 300 sq. ft. CS, CPA, CPB, IP and I 1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage; area of each sign shall not exceed 100 sq. ft.  
Each occupant in a multi-tenant building is allowed to display a maximum of one wall sign except that by special exception the Commission may permit a maximum of one wall sign per building elevation for any tenant space which includes more than one building elevation provided that the total square footage of all signs does not exceed that allowed in the foregoing table. The occupant in a single-tenant building may display a maximum of one wall sign per building elevation, the total square footage of all signs not to exceed that allowed in the foregoing table, and provided that all signs are similar in design, color, and content. 
b.  Signs allowed by special exception. 
(1)  Detached identification signs. One sign per lot, or per consolidated parcel, not exceeding 12 square feet in area and not exceeding eight feet in height above the ground, for identification of an occupant, building or complex may be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VII.C.5. To assist the public in identifying the street address of a place of business and as an aid to public safety, applicants seeking approval of a detached sign shall include a street number to be located on the top of the proposed sign. This number shall be flush-mounted with the top of the sign. An applicant shall utilize a street number as assigned by the Avon Tax Assessor. Numbers may not be depicted utilizing letters or Roman numerals. The number shall be housed in an area no larger than 12 inches in height and 24 inches in length and contain numbers which are a minimum of nine inches in height. To aid in public safety, the area used for the number shall be similar in design, construction, and color to the main portion of the sign. 
The street number shall be exempt from the height and area requirements otherwise specified in this regulation. 
(2)  Low-profile detached identification signs. One sign per lot not exceeding 24 square feet in area and not exceeding five feet in height above the ground for identification of an occupant, building, or complex may be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria in Section VII.C.5. No low-profile detached identification signs are allowed in the NB Zone. To assist the public in identifying the street address of a place of business and as an aid to public safety, applicants seeking approval of a detached sign shall include a street number to be located on the top of the proposed sign. This number shall be flush-mounted with the top of the sign. An applicant shall utilize a street number as assigned by the Avon Tax Assessor. Numbers may not be depicted utilizing letters or Roman numerals. The number shall be housed in an area no larger than 12 inches in height and 24 inches in length and contain numbers which are nine inches in height. To aid in public safety, the area used for the number shall be similar in design, construction, and color to the main portion of the sign. 
The street number shall be exempt from the height and area requirements otherwise specified in this regulation. 
The Commission may allow two smaller, one-sided, low-profile detached identification signs per lot as a special exception where it finds that: 
(a)  Both signs are similar in content and design; 
(b)  The combined area of both signs shall not exceed 24 square feet; 
(c)  Signs will be spaced at intervals such that only one sign will be legible at any time from any traveling direction on the adjacent street; and 
(d)  The proposed design and its incorporation into the landscape is more attractive on the particular site. 
The Commission may allow two smaller, two-sided, low-profile detached identification signs per lot as a special exception where it finds that: 
(a)  The combined area of both signs shall not exceed 24 square feet and both are similar in content and design; 
(b)  The building for which the signs are requested is in excess of 20,000 square feet in area; 
(c)  The building is served by two or more main driveways; 
(d)  Signs will be spaced at intervals such that only one sign will be legible at any time from any traveling direction on the adjacent street; and 
(e)  The approval of two signs will aid the public and improve traffic safety. 
(3)  Permanent detached identification signs with removable advertising panels. Within the CR, CS, OP, CPA, and CPB zones, a second detached identification sign may be permitted for businesses within a multitenant plaza having 5 or more tenants. Signs shall be designed in a manner that allows for small advertising panels to be readily changed on a frequent basis. These panels may be used to advertise individual businesses with an emphasis on those businesses that have limited or no visibility to a public street, and may also be used to advertise products, services, or special sales promotions. The following additional standards and criteria shall apply: 
a.  Sign location: Signs may be freestanding or attached to the primary low-profile detached sign. Where possible, the sign shall be located near the entrance drive in order to aid in public safety. 
b.  Sign design: The framing and supports for the sign shall be minimal in design. The sign shall be similar architecturally and utilize complementary materials and colors to the primary detached identification sign. 
c.  Sign size: A multitenant plaza with 5-10 businesses up to 12 square feet in area. 
A multitenant plaza with more than ten businesses up to 24 square feet in area. 
d.  Temporary signage: Properties receiving approval under this section shall continue to have rights to a 30-day new business sign under Section VII.C.2.g.(6) but not a two-week temporary sign under Section VII. C.2.g. (3). 
e.  Sign illumination: Only external illumination is permitted. The source of light shall be shielded from the road and adjacent properties. 
f.  Owners' responsibilities: 
1.  The property owner shall design a system/schedule which provides equity to all tenants who may have an interest in placing a panel on this sign. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to manage and enforce the rules. 
2.  The property owner shall submit a plan to the Commission designed by a licensed architect or sign manufacturer for approval. This plan shall be an actual construction drawing with details on how panels may be readily interchanged. 
3.  Failure by the property owner, or any subsequent owner, to follow the responsibilities indicated and approved by the Commission, may result in the termination by the Commission of any special permit approval which has been granted. Should the permit be terminated, the owner shall remove the sign within 30 days of such termination. 
(4)  Roof signs. Roof signs not exceeding the sign area for wall signs under Section VII.C.4.a. may be permitted by the Commission as a special exception, in accordance with the criteria established in Section VII.C.5.a. and b., where roof signs are, in the opinion of the Commission, more architecturally and aesthetically attractive because of building design. Any tenant utilizing roof signs will not be permitted wall signs. 
(5)  Park entrance signs. Each Commercial Park and Industrial Park may maintain one sign identifying the Park at each major entrance. The location, materials, color, size, content and lighting shall be subject to approval by the Commission as a special exception. 
(6)  Gas price signs. One sign not exceeding 12 square feet indicating the price of gasoline being sold on the premises may be approved by the Commission as a special exception provided that the letters/numbers do not exceed 15 inches in height, the sign is mounted on pump island or main identification sign and the sign height does not exceed eight feet. 
(7)  Walls signs in an OP-Zone. One sign per building not to exceed 32 square feet, for identification of the address and either the occupant, building or complex, may be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in accordance with the criteria established in Section VII.C.5.a. and b. The Commission may approve more than one wall sign for a building which is not part of a larger office complex and which is occupied by multiple tenants. In such instance, each tenant shall be permitted a maximum of 1 (one) wall sign and the total area of all signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(8)  Walls signs in [an] NB-Zone. Each building is allowed one square foot of sign area per lineal foot of building frontage. The location, materials, color, individual sign sizes, content, and lighting shall be subject to approval by the Commission as a special exception. 
(9)  Emergency medical care. An approved emergency medical care facility, as defined in Section II, may be permitted one sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area or five feet in height which identifies the type of available medical treatment services and which indicates the hours the facility will be open. This sign, if approved, shall be in addition to any other sign which may be allowed by these regulations. 
(10)  Second wall sign in CR Zone. A second wall sign on the same building elevation may be permitted by the Commission as a special exception under the following conditions: 
(a)  The retail building is in excess of 50,000 square feet. 
(b)  The retail building has two main points of egress. 
(c)  The retail building frontage is in excess of 300 feet. 
The two wall signs shall be similar in design and comply with the approved sign theme. The total square footage of both signs shall adhere to the total square footage permitted for a single sign per Section VII.C.4.a. 
c.  Park sign themes. Signs in CP-A, CP-B, and IP Zones shall conform to themes approved by the Commission for materials, color, size, shape and content and shall be compatible with other existing signs in the area. 
d.  Multi-tenant building signs. Where more than one occupant exists in a building, all signs shall be of compatible shape, lettering, materials and placement on the building. 
5.  Special exception criteria for signs. Before granting special exception approval for a sign, except for roof signs, the Commission must find that: 
a.  The location, size and other aspects of the proposed sign will be in harmony with the orderly development of the area and will not alter the essential characteristics of the area, 
b.  The landscaping, lighting, materials and design elements of the proposed sign are attractive and suitable in relation to site characteristics, the architecture of the building and the style of other buildings in the immediate area; and 
c.  One or more special circumstances or conditions, which are unique to the premises and not shared by other premises in the neighborhood, diminish recognition of the business conducted therein; limit easy identification of a commercial complex; or create a potential traffic hazard. Such special circumstances or conditions shall include, but not be limited to the location of the building on the lot; location of buildings on adjacent lots; topography; or the configuration of the lot. 
D.  Site development requirements for a coverage increase on certain commercial and industrial properties. 
    Purpose: To allow an increase in building coverage for certain commercial and industrial sites in exchange for certain specific on-site improvements or off-site arrangements related to sustainability and resilience. 
    The maximum site coverage for commercial sites is limited as shown in Column 1 below. 
    The coverage increases which may be applied for are shown in Column 2 and Column 3. 
Zone: 
Maximum Permitted Lot Coverage Stage 1: 
Up to 25% increase Stage 2: 
Up to 50% Increase Office Park: 10% 12.5% 15% Neighborhood Business: 10% 12.5% 15% Commercial Park A: 20% 25% 30% Commercial Park B: 20% 25% 30% Industrial Park: 20% 25% 30% Commercial Retail: 25% 31.25% N/A Commercial Specialized: 25% 31.25% N/A Industrial: 25% 31.25% N/A  
  
    An increase in building coverage over the permitted coverage may be applied for as follows: 
1.  A special exception and site plan application is required to be filed showing existing and proposed conditions; and 
2.  The Commission may grant the requested increase in coverage in stages as shown above or it may grant a maximum increase in coverage of up to 50 percent of the currently permitted maximum coverage as shown above; and 
3.  As part of the application and in order to gain approval, the applicant shall show all other requirements of site development and special exception requirements of Section VIII, are met; and 
4.  Coverage increases may only be applied for as follows: Stage 1 only or Stage 1 and 2 combined; and 
5.  This coverage increase is a one-time only increase and may not be reapplied once a specific site has obtained the maximum applicable increase from the originally permitted coverage maximum as shown in the table above; and 
6.  Possible sustainable design principles to consider: All items must be above and beyond any existing applicable Code requirements. A long term maintenance agreement is also required for each coverage increase item; and 
7.  Rehabilitation or desirable expansion of existing structures using sustainable menu items herein is required; and 
8.  Incorporation of appropriate low impact development (LID) strategies into the plan for the site/area is required. 
    Coverage increase items: An increase of up to 25 percent of the currently permitted maximum coverage of the site may be permitted by the applicant selecting and agreeing to properly design, install and maintain in perpetuity at least one item from each of the following categories. Items must be compatible but not redundant. Stage 1 items are to be used first and may not be bypassed. For Stage 2 application at least two compatible and coordinated items from each category must be selected. The Commission may, for good cause shown, adjust these requirements to gain a more desirable project for either a Stage 1 or Stage 2 application. 
    Commission determination on the acceptability of any coverage increase item is final. 
(a)  Energy: Generation/conservation/efficiency. 
1.  Architecture of significant merit and including green building practices: Certification by Energy Star, National Green Building Standard, Green Globes, LEED, or other verified certification in excess of CT Building Code requirements. Peer review architect/sustainability consultant may be required to be paid for by applicant. 
2.  Use of properly designed and located solar arrays in parking lots as vehicle cover. Owner is responsible for any necessary easement acquisition. For Stage 1 coverage increase the minimum parking lot solar coverage is 15 percent. For a Stage 2 coverage increase minimum parking lot solar coverage must total 30 percent. In addition the provision of at least three public electric vehicle charging stations where public access is available and desirable is required for either Stage 1 or Stage 2. 
3.  The site development includes the design and construction of a qualified green roof on at least 50 percent of the entire existing structure and 100 percent of new structure and energy conservation/ green energy use/ production, green roofs/cool roofs, and exterior lighting with energy reduction specifics such a qualified energy saving lighting. 
4.  Building: (All required for this credit). 
a.  Orientation to be optimized for solar gain using passive or active techniques; and 
b.  Site organization and building orientation to minimize heat loss above code requirements; and 
c.  Architecture: Facades, (variety of features to break down mass and scale of large buildings as they appear.) 
5.  The building is designed and constructed to a very high level of energy efficiency (LEED gold or platinum level or other similar rating standard level.) This may include highly energy efficient building materials, windows and doors and items such as rooftop solar panel utilization. 
(b)  Stormwater: Pervious cover/stormwater management. The total site impervious cover (building, parking and all walkways) may be increased by up to 15 percent in acknowledgement of a credit for site impervious cover reduction of 25 percent may be granted for 1-3 of the following: 
1.  Placement of pervious or replacement of existing impervious surface(s) with permeable materials. Pro rata percent of credit is to be coordinated with Town Engineer and based on valid design information of the material and technique to be used based on site and lab testing as may be required. 
2.  Use of low impact development (LID) techniques determined to be acceptable and desirable for the subject site by Commission staff and Town Engineer and as may be approved by the Commission. This may include a zero increase in the rate and zero increase in the total volume of stormwater runoff from the developed site. 
3.  Optimize parking design, location and screening, pervious parking and locate parking to side or rear of building so as to reduce visual impact, or construct low earthen berms, masonry or stone walls as may be appropriate for the site to screen parking from abutters or public roadways. 
(c)  Water conservation. 
1.  High level of water conservation through the use of water conservation plumbing fixtures to be coordinated with FVHD and Building Official, including the use of greywater system(s), as permitted by applicable codes for either reuse or landscape watering. 
2.  Landscaping and stormwater facilities, to include the use of low water use and native plant materials. Incorporate stormwater design with required landscaping and planting of at least three overly large landscape specimen trees on the site. Maintenance plan required. 
(d)  Site design and land use/agricultural preservation. 
1.  Connectivity, (to onsite or off site pedestrian, bicycle and "desirable" vehicular linkages. Possible sidewalk construction to town standard or better, if and where appropriate. Connectivity pathways to be constructed as appropriate to the specific application using pervious materials. 
2.  Building transition to surrounding uses, to provide transition in massing and height between existing/proposed building and abutting use(s). 
3.  A proper permanent development rights restriction as approved by the Commission and documentation approved by the Town Attorney, may be acquired and donated to the Town of Avon for a privately owned property/Open Space Parcel or Agricultural land property as identified in the Avon POCD Chapter 13 as may be approved by the Commission. Such a restriction shall be determined to be of acceptable, proportionate coordinated value with the proposed coverage increase, and is to be coordinated with all appropriate staff and Town Attorney. 
(E)  Other significant sustainable principles and tactics as may be proposed by staff or applicant and which may be found acceptable to the staff and the Commission as technology advances and which may be found as appropriate can be included and proposed to be used for such a request. 
(Amend. of 6-3-08(3), eff. 7-3-08; Amend. of 5-21-13, eff. 6-20-13; Amend. of 7-15-14(1); eff. 7-23-14; Amend. of 9-9-14, eff. 9-17-14; Amend. of 5-23-17(3), eff. 6-1-17; Amend. of 6-12-18, eff. 6-20-18; Amend. of 10-17-17(2), eff. 10-25-17) 
Section VIII. - Special exception criteria. 
    In considering an application for special exception (except for signs), the Commission shall determine that the following specific conditions are met: 
A.  Suitable location for use. That the location and size of the proposed use and the nature and intensity of use in relation to the size of the lot will be in harmony with the orderly development of the area and compatible with other existing uses. 
B.  Suitable structures for use. That the kind, size, location and height of structure and the nature and extent of landscaping on the lot are appropriate for the use and will not hinder or discourage the appropriate use of adjoining property or diminish the value thereof. 
C.  Neighborhood compatibility. That the design elements of the proposed development are attractive and suitable in relation to the site characteristics and style of other buildings in the immediate area, and that the proposed use will not alter the essential characteristics of the area or adversely affect property value in the neighborhood. 
D.  Adequate parking and access. That the parking and loading facilities are adequate and properly located and the entrance and exit driveways are laid out to achieve maximum safety. 
E.  Adequate streets for use. That streets providing access to the proposed use are adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility, and have adequate capacity for the additional traffic generated by the proposed use, and the proposed use will not impede the implementation of the Traffic Circulation Plan. 
F.  Adequate emergency access. That the proposed use shall have easy accessibility for fire apparatus and police protection and is laid out and equipped to further the provision of emergency services. 
G.  Adequate public utilities. That the water supply, the sewage disposal, and the stormwater drainage shall conform with accepted engineering criteria; comply with all standards of the appropriate regulatory authority; and not unduly burden the capacity of such facilities. 
H.  Environmental protection and conservation. That the proposed plans have provided for the conservation of natural features, drainage basins, the protection of the environment of the area, and sustained maintenance of the development. 
I.  Consistent with purposes. That the proposed use will not have any detrimental effects upon the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and that the proposed use will not conflict with the purposes of the regulations. 
Section IX. - Special regulations. 
A.  Multiple-Dwelling Development. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit variations in height, bulk, density, and residential use types which would not otherwise be possible; and permit flexible site design so that the development may be constructed in harmony with and preserve natural site features. 
2.  Procedure. 
a.  Multiple Dwelling Developments may only be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in certain zones where indicated. The Commission shall determine that all the specific conditions of Section VIII are met. 
b.  Before any building permits are issued for buildings in a given phase, a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission shall be posted by the developer to guarantee the construction of the site improvements and to cover erosion and sedimentation control. 
In addition, a separate bond shall be posted at the same time to guarantee the provision to the Town of as-built drawings of all improvements on the site. 
3.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Single and Multiple Dwelling Unit buildings[;] 
b.  Playgrounds, recreation areas, parks, open spaces and natural areas[;] 
c.  Accessory uses and structures; such as private garages, swimming pools, clubhouses, recreation facilities; and other structures and facilities which are customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal uses. 
4.  Area and height requirements. 
Minimum parcel size 5 acres Maximum lot coverage 15% Maximum density 4 units/acre (See Section III.D.) Minimum front yard 60 ft. Minimum side/rear yards 30 ft. except that yards abutting a land use other than multiple dwellings shall be 60 ft. Maximum building height 3 stories  
5.  Utility requirements. 
a.  Roads. Roads shall conform to the applicable section of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Avon except that the Commission may modify width of pavement and curbs upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. 
b.  Water. A public water supply is required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Director of Health. 
c.  Sewage. Public sewers are required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Town Engineer and Director of Health. 
d.  Other utilities. All other utilities shall be located underground. 
6.  Land use and site development requirements. 
a.  Parking. Parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section VII.B. of these regulations. Spaces shall be provided with convenient access to the front entrances of the buildings. 
b.  Landscaping. A landscape buffer conforming to the requirements for a B Bufferyard as specified in Section VII.A.5., shall be provided around the perimeter of the property. Additional buffering may be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Commission. 
However, where variations in topography, natural features, existing vegetation, or compatible land uses obviate the need for such a buffer, the Commission may modify or waive this requirement. 
The Commission may require suitable landscaping within a Multiple Dwelling Development to assure privacy of individual residential units. 
c.  Open space. Consolidated open space, totaling at least 15 percent of the site, shall be provided within the development. Open space shall be located so as to preserve significant natural site features and maximize the utility of the open space to the residents. 
d.  Building locations. All buildings erected in a Multiple Dwelling Development shall observe the following location requirements: 
(1)  Principal buildings shall be separated at least: 
Thirty feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building where either wall has openings; 15 feet or half the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building where neither wall has openings; 
Ten feet or the height of the accessory building, whichever is greater, from an accessory building; and 
Twenty-five feet from the edge of pavement of any main road, cul-de-sac, or parking area. 

(2)  Accessory buildings shall be located at least: 
Twenty-five feet from the edge of pavement of any main road, and 
Ten feet from the edge of pavement of any cul-de-sac, parking area, or other accessory building. 
(3)  Garages exiting directly onto cul-de-sacs shall have driveways at least 20 feet in length. Garages shall not exit directly onto main roads. 
(4)  Porches and decks shall observe the above separation requirements. 
(5)  The Commission may modify the requirements of this section provided that, in the Commission's sole discretion, the public health, safety, and welfare are safeguarded. 
e.  Living area. Each unit in a Multiple Dwelling Unit building of any type shall contain at least 600 square feet of living area for a one-bedroom unit, plus, at least an additional 200 square feet of living area in the unit as a whole for each additional bedroom. 
f.  Maintenance. In Multiple Dwelling Developments, the applicant shall present sufficient information to the Commission to demonstrate that adequate provisions have been made for the sustained maintenance of the development in general and also for the sustained maintenance of the roads and open space. 
B.  Cluster Development. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit variations in residential developments which would not otherwise be possible; permit flexible site design so that development may be constructed in harmony with and preserve natural site features; and permit residential developments which are sensitive to parcel configuration, topography, natural features, and the surrounding neighborhood. 
2.  Procedure. 
a.  Cluster Developments may only be permitted by the Commission in Residential Zones, except the R-15 Zone, as a special exception. The Commission shall determine that all specific conditions of Section VIII are met. 
b.  Applications which propose subdivision of the property shall submit plans of the proposed subdivision complying with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Avon. 
c.  Before any building permits are issued for buildings in a given phase, a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission shall be submitted by the developer to guarantee the construction of the site improvements and to cover erosion and sediment control. 
In addition, a separate bond shall be posted at the same time to guarantee the provision to the Town of as-built drawings of the improvements on the site. 
3.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Playgrounds, recreation areas, parks, open spaces, and natural areas. 
c.  Accessory uses and structures; such as private garages, swimming pools, clubhouses, recreation facilities, and other structures and facilities, which are customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal uses. 
4.  Area and height requirements. 
Minimum parcel size 10 acres Maximum lot coverage 15% Maximum building height 35 feet Maximum building height 21/2 stories  
5.  Utility requirements. 
a.  Roads. Main roads within the development shall be public, but cul-de-sacs may be private. All roads shall be built to the structural specifications of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Avon, except that the Commission may modify the width of pavement, curbs, and drainage requirements for private cul-de-sacs upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. 
b.  Water. A public water supply is required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Director of Health. 
c.  Sewage. Public sewers are required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Town Engineer and Director of Health. 
d.  Other utilities. All other utilities shall be underground. 
6.  Land use and site development requirements. 
a.  Density. Gross density shall not exceed that of the existing zone. (See Sections III.D and IV.A). 
b.  Landscaping. A landscape buffer conforming to the requirements for a B Bufferyard as specified in Section VII.A.5 shall be provided around the perimeter of the property. Additional buffering may be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Commission. 
However, where variations in topography or natural features, existing vegetation or compatible land uses obviate the need for such buffer, the Commission may modify or waive this requirement. 
The Commission may require suitable landscaping within a Cluster Development to assure privacy of individual residential units. 
c.  Open space. Consolidated open space shall be provided within a Cluster Development as much as possible. Areas not committed to residential use and containing significant natural features shall be preserved through the use of conservation easements or through dedication to either the Town of Avon, if requested, or suitable conservation organizations. 
d.  Building locations. All buildings erected in a Cluster Development shall observe the following location requirements: 
(1)  All buildings adjacent to public streets shall observe the front yard setback requirements established in Section IV.A. of these regulations. 
(2)  All buildings shall be set back at least ten feet from any property line within a Cluster Development. 
(3)  Principal buildings shall also be separated at least: 
Thirty feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building, or an accessory building on a separate lot; 
Ten feet or the height of accessory building, whichever is greater, from an accessory building on the same lot; and 30 feet from the edge of pavement of any private street. 
(4)  Accessory buildings shall be located at least 20 feet from the edge of pavement of any private street, or other accessory building. 

(5)  Garages exiting directly onto cul-de-sacs shall have driveways at least 20 feet in length. 
(6)  Porches and decks shall observe the above separation requirements. 
(7)  The Commission may modify the requirements of this section provided that in the Commission's sole discretion, the public health, safety and welfare are safeguarded. 
e.  Living Area. The living area requirements of Section IV.A.7 shall apply. 
f.  Maintenance. In Cluster Developments, the applicant shall present sufficient information to the Commission to demonstrate that adequate provisions have been made for the sustained maintenance of the development in general and also for the sustained maintenance of the roads and open space. 
C.  Planned Residential Development. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit variations in height, bulk, density, and residential use types which would not otherwise be possible; permit flexible site design so that development may be constructed in harmony with and preserve natural site features; and assist and provide for the orderly development and management of moderately priced housing for low- and moderate-income families. 
2.  Procedure. 
a.  Planned Residential Developments may only be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in certain zones where indicated. The Commission shall determine that all the specific conditions of Section VIII are met. 
b.  Before any building permits are issued for buildings in a given phase, a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission shall be posted by the developer to guarantee the construction of the site improvements and to cover erosion and sedimentation control. 
In addition, a separate bond shall be posted at the same time to guarantee the provision to the Town of as-built drawings of all improvements on the site. 
3.  Requirements for PRDs which contain a moderately priced home component. 
a.  Occupancy of moderately priced homes. A moderately priced home shall be occupied by the initial purchaser until subsequent sale. Each purchaser of a moderately priced home and his/her attorney shall sign an acknowledgment in a form provided by the Town Planner stating that such attorney has explained this requirement to the prospective purchaser and that such purchaser acknowledges and intends to occupy said home for as long as he/she owns the home. 
b.  Initial sale price. To ensure that homes shall be purchased by families with moderate incomes, the applicant shall sell a minimum of 25 percent of all homes within the development in accordance with the following formula rounded to the nearest house: 
1/3  Sale price not to exceed 2.75 times median family income as reported by the most recently available HUD figures for a family of four in Hartford County. 
1/3  Sale price not to exceed 3.0 times median family income as reported by the most recently available HUD figures for a family of four in Hartford Country. 
1/3  Sale price not to exceed 3.25 times median family income as reported by the most recently available HUD figures for a family of four in Hartford Country. 
c.  Unit sales. To ensure that, at the completion of the Planned Residential Development, at least 25% of all units are moderately priced housing units, the applicant shall obtain at least one Certificate of Occupancy for a moderately priced housing unit for every three Certificates of Occupancy for market rate units. In addition, the applicant shall provide an interim report to the Commission upon the sale of 50% of all units demonstrating compliance with this requirement. A final report shall be provided prior to the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy for the last unit. 
d.  Adherence to regulations. The Commission reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to take such actions or institute such proceedings as it deems necessary and appropriate to ensure adherence to these regulations. 
4.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Single-family and two-family dwellings. Two-family dwelling units shall not account for more than 10% of the total units. 
b.  Playgrounds, recreation areas, parks, open spaces, and natural areas. 
c.  Accessory uses and structures; such as private garages, swimming pools, clubhouses, recreation facilities and other structures and facilities; which are customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal uses. 
5.  Area and height requirements. 
a.  Single-family and two-family dwellings without a moderately-priced housing component. 
Minimum parcel size 30 acres Maximum lot coverage 15% Maximum density 3 units/acre (See Section III.D.) Minimum front yard 60 ft. Minimum side/rear yards 30 ft. except that yards abutting a land use other than Planned Residential Development shall be 60 feet. Maximum building height 21/2 stories  
b.  Single-family and two-family dwellings with a moderately priced housing component. 
Minimum parcel size 15 acres Maximum lot coverage 15% Maximum density 3.75 units/acre (See Section III.D.) Minimum front yard 60 ft. Where variations in topography or natural features, existing vegetation, or compatible present or future land uses obviate the need for such a buffer, the Commission may modify or waive this requirement. Minimum side/rear yards 30 ft. except that yards abutting a land use other than PRD shall be 60 feet. Where variations in topography or natural features, existing vegetation, or compatible present or future land uses obviate the need for such a buffer, the Commission may modify or waive this requirement. Maximum building height 21/2 stories  
6.  Utility requirements. 
a.  Roads. Roads shall conform to applicable design requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the, except that the Commission may modify width of pavement, width of right-of-way, and curbs after considering the recommendation of the Town Engineer. 
b.  Water. A public water supply is required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Director of Health. 
c.  Sewage. Pubic sewers are required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Town Engineer and Director of Health. 
d.  Other utilities. All other utilities shall be underground. 
7.  Land use and site development requirements. 
a.  Parking. Parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section VII.B. of these regulations. Spaces shall be provided with convenient access to the front entrances of the buildings. 
b.  Landscaping. A landscape buffer conforming to the requirements for a B Bufferyard, as specified in Section VII.A.5, shall be provided around the perimeter of the property. Additional buffering may be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Commission. 
However, where variations in topography or natural features, existing vegetation or compatible land uses obviate the need for such a buffer, the Commission may modify or waive this requirement. 
The Commission may require suitable landscaping within a Planned Residential Development to assure privacy of individual residential units. 
c.  Open space. Consolidated open space, totaling at least 15% of the site, shall be provided within the development. Open space shall be located so as to preserve significant natural site features and maximize the utility of the open space to the residents. 
d.  Building locations. All buildings erected in a Planned Residential Development shall observe the following location requirements: 

(1)  Principal buildings shall be separated at least: 
In developments without a moderately priced housing component, 30 feet, or the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building where either wall has openings; 
In developments which provide a moderately priced housing component as defined under Section VI.C.3.c., 20 feet from another principal building where either wall has openings; 
Fifteen feet, or half the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building where neither wall has openings; 
Ten feet or the height of the accessory building, whichever is greater, from an accessory building; and 
Twenty-five feet from the edge of pavement of any main road, cul-de-sac, or parking area. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall be located at least: 
Twenty-five feet from the edge of pavement of any main road; and 
Ten feet from the edge of pavement of any cul-de-sac, parking area, or other accessory building. 
(3)  Garages exiting directly onto cul-de-sacs shall have driveways at least 20 feet in length. Garages shall not exit directly onto main roads. 
(4)  Porches and decks shall observe the above separation requirements. 
(5)  The Commission may modify the requirements of this section provided that, in the Commission's sole discretion, the public health, safety, and welfare are safeguarded. 
e.  Living area. Living area requirements shall be the same as for single-family dwellings (specified in Section IV.A.7.) except that in any planned residential development containing a moderately priced home component, dwellings more than one story in height shall contain at least 700 square feet of living area on the ground floor. 
f.  Maintenance. In Planned Residential Developments, the applicant shall present sufficient information to the Commission to demonstrate that adequate provisions have been made for the sustained maintenance of the development in general and also upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer and Director of Health. 
g.  Other utilities. All other utilities shall be located underground. 
D.  Planned Elderly Residential Development. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit variations in height, bulk, density, and residential use types which would not otherwise be possible in order to meet the special needs of the elderly and handicapped; and permit flexible site design so that development may be constructed in harmony with and preserve natural site features. 
2.  Procedure. 
a.  Planned Elderly Residential Developments may only be permitted by the Commission as a special exception in certain zones where indicated. The Commission shall determine that all the specific conditions of Section VIII are met. 
b.  In Planned Elderly Residential Developments, the applicant shall present sufficient information to the Commission to demonstrate that adequate restrictions have been placed on the property to limit occupancy to elderly and handicapped persons. 
c.  Before any building permits are issued for buildings in a given phase, a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission shall be posted by the developer to guarantee the construction of the site improvements and to cover erosion and sedimentation control. 
In addition, a separate bond shall be posted at the same time to guarantee the provision to the Town of as-built drawings of all improvements on the site. 
3.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Single detached and Multiple Dwelling Unit buildings[.] 
b.  Parks, open spaces and natural areas. 
c.  Accessory uses and structures; such as private garages, swimming pools, community buildings, and other structures and facilities; which are customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal residential use. 
4.  Area and height requirements. 
Minimum parcel size 5 acres Maximum lot coverage 15% except as may be otherwise allowed in Section IX.D.7. Maximum density 8 units/acre (See Section III.D.) Minimum front yard 60 ft. Minimum side/rear yard 40 ft. except that yards abutting single family residential development shall be 80 feet. Maximum building height 2 stories  
5.  Utility requirements. 
a.  Roads. Road shall conform to the applicable section of the subdivision regulations of the Town of Avon except that the Commission may modify width of pavement and curbs upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. 
b.  Water. A public water supply is required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Director of Health. 
c.  Sewage. Public sewers are required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Town Engineer and Director of Health. 
d.  Other utilities. All other utilities shall be located underground. 
6.  Land use and site development requirements 
a.  Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of one space per bedroom. Guest parking shall be provided at the rate of 0.25 spaces per bedroom. In accordance with Section VII.B.5. the Commission is authorized to waive the immediate installation of not more than 25% of the parking spaces if the applicant demonstrates that this will satisfy the parking needs for the development. 
b.  Landscaping. At least 50% of the parcel shall be devoted to natural and landscaped areas. 
A landscape buffer conforming to the requirements for a B Bufferyard as specified in Section VII.A.5., shall be provided around the perimeter of the property. Additional buffering may be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Commission. 
However, where variations in topography or natural features, existing vegetation or compatible land uses obviate the need for such a buffer, the Commission may modify or waive this requirement. 
The Commission may require suitable landscaping within a Planned Elderly Residential Development to assure privacy of individual residential units. 
c.  Building locations. All buildings erected in a Planned Elderly Residential Development shall observe the following location requirements: 
(1)  Principal buildings shall be separated at least: 
Thirty feet, or the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building where either wall has openings; 
Fifteen feet, or half the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building where neither wall has openings; 
Ten feet, or the height of the accessory building, whichever is greater, from an accessory building; and 25 feet from the edge of pavement of any main road. 

(2)  Accessory buildings shall be located at least: 
Twenty-five feet from the edge of pavement of any main road; and ten feet from the edge of pavement of any cul-de-sac, parking area, or other accessory building. 
(3)  Garages exiting directly onto cul-de-sacs shall have driveways at least 20 feet in length. Garages shall not exit directly onto main roads. 
(4)  Porches and decks shall observe the above separation requirements. 
(5)  The Commission may modify the requirements of this section provided that, in the Commission's sole discretion, the public health, safety, and welfare are safeguarded. 
d.  Living area. Each unit in a Planned Elderly Residential Development shall contain at least 550 square feet of living area for a one-bedroom unit and at least 700 square feet of living area for a two-bedroom unit. No unit shall have more than 900 square feet. 
No individual dwelling unit shall have more than two bedrooms. Dwelling units with two bedrooms shall not exceed 50% of the total number of dwelling units, unless modified by the Commission. 
e.  Maintenance. In Planned Elderly Residential Developments, the applicant shall present sufficient information to the Commission to demonstrate that adequate provisions have been made for the sustained maintenance of the development in general and also for the sustained maintenance of the roads and open space. 
f.  Fire protection. An applicant shall be required to provide an automatic fire suppression system in all projects where more than one dwelling unit is contained within the same building. 
7.  Additional standards. Where a proposed project has a density of no more than four dwelling units per acre and meets the provisions of the U. S. Fair Housing Act as amended as it pertains to "Housing for Older Persons," the Commission may waive the requirements related to unit size and number of allowable bedrooms and increase maximum lot coverage where a proposal meets the following additional criteria: 
a.  Each dwelling unit shall be occupied by: 
[(1)]  Persons who are 55 years of age or older. 
[(2)]  A spouse of an occupant pursuant to 7.a.(1) above. 
[(3)]  Occupant pursuant to 7.a.(2) above who survives his or her spouse. 
[(4)]  Occupant pursuant to 7.a.(2) above whose spouse has entered into a long-term continuing care facility. 
[(5)]  Children 21 years of age or older may reside with their parent(s). 
[(6)]  Paid caregiver. 
b.  In no event may a dwelling unit be occupied by more than four residents. 
c.  The proposed development shall be a Common Interest Ownership Community as defined in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
d.  The Commission may increase the maximum allowable lot coverage up to 20% in the IP Zone where the Commission finds that the proposed plan is superior to a plan possible under the standards of the IP Zone with respect to the following additional criteria: 
(1)  Landscaping which exceeds the minimum requirements. 
(2)  Lower projected traffic volumes as compared with what would occur with other uses allowed as of right in the IP Zone. 
(3)  Low intensity of site lighting. 
(4)  Noise levels substantially less than standards required by the regulations and State Statutes. 
(5)  At least 75% of the cumulative living area of all units shall be on the first floor. 
4.[E.]  Ridgeline protection overlay zone. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect Traprock Ridges in order to preserve their unique environmental attributes, their groundwater recharge function, and the visual and historic assets of these distinctive ridgeline areas. 
2.  Definitions. For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section, the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
Alteration. A change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a building, the movement of all or any part thereof, or the substantial reconstruction thereof, in order to produce a substantial change in appearance, character, or construction. It also means an enlargement, whether by increase in height, coverage, volume, or floor area. 
Building . Any structure other than (A) a "facility" as defined in Section 16-50i of the Connecticut General Statutes or (B) structures of a relatively slender nature compared to the buildings to which they are associated, including but not limited to chimneys, flagpoles, antennas, utility poles, and steeples, provided such structures are accessory to a building or use permitted by these regulations and not the principal use or structure on the lot. 
Clear-cutting . The harvest of timber in a fashion which removes from any 200-square-foot or larger area all or substantially all trees measuring two inches or more in diameter at a height of four feet. 
Development . The construction, reconstruction, alteration, or expansion of a building equal to or greater than 100 square feet in area. 
Passive recreation . Nonmotorized recreation not requiring development as defined herein, nor requiring any clear-cutting or alteration of the existing topography, nor any activity regulated pursuant to this section. Such passive recreation shall include but not be limited to hiking, bicycling, picnicking, and bird-watching. 
Quarrying . The removal, excavation, processing, or grading of stone, fill, or other earth products, regardless of the methods utilized (e.g., blasting, crushing, excavation equipment). Earth which is to be removed as may be necessary to construct a basement for a single-family home or regrading which may be necessary to install an on-site subsurface sewage disposal system shall not be considered quarrying. Any other removal shall be subject to all other pertinent sections of this regulation. 
Ridgeline . The line on a traprock ridge created by all points at the top of a 50 percent or greater slope (two horizontal for each vertical unit of distance), which slope is maintained for a distance of at least 50 horizontal feet measured perpendicular to the contours of the slope, and which consists of surficial basalt geology . All slopes disturbed by human intervention shall be measured as they existed immediately prior to such disturbance, as best such pre-existing conditions can be determined by available topographic maps or other records. 
Ridgeline setback area . The area bounded by (A) a line that parallels and is placed a horizontal distance of 150 feet off the more wooded side of all ridgelines as defined herein and (B) that lowest contour line created where less than a 50 percent slope (two horizontal for each vertical unit of distance) exists for a distance of 50 horizontal feet on the rockier side of all ridgelines as defined herein. This area is generally shown as an overlay to the Official Zoning Map. 
Selective timbering . The removal of no more than ten percent (10%) of the total number of living trees or no more than 10% of the total number of trees in excess of six inches in diameter within that portion of any ridgeline setback area located on the lot on which such removal is to occur. The ten percent limitation shall be cumulative from the effective date of these Ridgeline Protection Overlay Zone Regulations. 
Traprock ridge . Talcott Mountain and Pond Ledge Hill[.] 
Visual impact observation points . Off-site locations within the Town of Avon from which proposed activities within a ridgeline setback area may reasonably be expected to be visible. 
3.  Delineation of regulated areas. The Commission may prepare, for illustrative purposes, a map that generally and approximately delineates the ridgelines and ridgeline setback areas as defined herein. However, the precise location of the boundaries of ridgeline setback areas shall be determined and governed by measurements made on the affected properties in accordance with the definitions in Subsection 2. The actual presence and location of ridgeline setback areas as determined by qualified professionals shall govern the applicability of this regulation to a proposed development. "Qualified professionals" shall include, as relevant, licensed land surveyors and geologists. In cases where a landowner or applicant disputes the designation of any land as a regulated area, he or she shall have the burden of proving that designation inapplicable. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or any other agent of the Commission may make a determination based on mapping and field observation that the area in question does not meet the criteria required to be within the ridgeline setback area and, therefore, does not require a special permit from the Commission. 
4.  Special exception requirements. In addition to any other permit, special exception or other approval required under these regulations, a special exception shall be required for any development or clear-cutting activities proposed for or occurring within a ridgeline setback area, except that a special exception under this section shall not be required for the following activities: 
a.  Emergency work necessary to protect life or property. 
b.  Activities for which a complete zoning application was filed prior to the effective date of the Ridgeline Protection Overlay Zone Regulations, provided that such application was approved and the approval remains in effect. 
c.  Selective timbering. 
d.  Passive recreation. 
e.  Building additions that cumulatively do not exceed a building footprint of 1,500 square feet in area, measured from the date of adoption of this amendment, when added to homes which were in existence as of the effective date of this regulation. Clear-cutting shall be allowed without special permit only in the area required to accommodate the actual footprint of the proposed addition plus an area extending 15 feet from the outside walls of the addition. This exemption shall not apply to any homes which have been constructed as part of a prior subdivision approval granted by the Commission which contained conditions placing limits on tree clearing and/or requiring the preservation of trees. 
f.  Maintenance of property which may include tree trimming and/or the cutting of a select number of trees to maintain views which were in effect as of the date of the adoption of this regulation. In an effort to document existing views, a property owner may present photographic evidence or survey data to the Office of the Town Planner. This information along with any other data which a property owner may choose to provide shall be kept on file in the Office of the Town Planner. This documentation may be provided at the option of the property owner. 
5.  Standards for granting a special exception for activities within ridgeline setback areas. 
    In addition to the requirements of Article VIII of the Zoning Regulations, the Commission shall require compliance with the following: 
a.  That adequate safeguards have been taken to minimize the visual impact of proposed activities as viewed from public highways, public parks, or other areas accessible to the general public. Visual impacts may include but are not limited to unnatural gaps, cuts, projections, or other obviously artificial alterations of existing natural tree lines, ridgelines, prominent topographic features, or rock formations; the use of materials which by their color, reflectiveness, finish, size, or orientation disrupt the natural or historic character of a ridgeline; the size, height, shape, and location of buildings; the height, intensity, coverage, and glare from proposed lights. Such safeguards may include but are not limited to: 
(a)  Restricting the removal of trees and other vegetation; 
(b)  Requiring supplemental landscaping; 
(c)  Restricting structure colors and reflectivity of windows and roofs; 
(d)  Requiring buffers and setbacks from ridgeline; 
(e)  Restricting exterior lighting; 
(f)  Limiting the height and mass of structures; and 
(g)  Requiring utilities to be installed below ground. 
The Commission may require that clear-cutting occur in a staggered or other pattern that reduces the visual impact of such cutting and may further require that clear-cutting be staged over a period of time to allow for regrowth of remaining vegetation. Additionally, the Commission may regulate the location, and require the relocation, of proposed buildings to reduce visual impact. Whenever possible, development and clear-cutting within 75 feet of any ridgeline, as defined in these Ridgeline Protection Overlay Zone Regulations, shall be avoided. The Commission may also require the installation of flags, balloons, or other on-site markers prior to a decision on any application in order to allow evaluation of visual impacts as seen from various vantage points. 
b.  That the viability of the area as a wildlife resource (habitat, breeding ground, foraging area, migratory pathway, etc.) is protected. Steps to protect these areas may include but are not limited to restricting the size of lawn areas or other clearings; restricting clear-cutting to certain seasons of the year or to certain areas, patterns, methods of removal; or applying other restrictions that it deems necessary to minimize the impact on wildlife and wildlife habitats. The Commission may require an analysis of the potential impacts of the proposed activity on wildlife, such analysis to be prepared by a qualified biologist. 
c.  That the groundwater quality and recharge potential of the area is preserved. The Commission may require an analysis of the possible impacts of the proposed activity on groundwater quality and recharge. In order to minimize such impacts, the Commission may require restrictions on the size or location of septic systems; the use of biofilters, detention ponds, retention ponds, and other methods of stormwater management that protect surface and subsurface waters; the regulation of the storage, handling or usage of hazardous materials or waste, including but not limited to fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides; and any other restrictions or limitations which the Commission may reasonably deem appropriate. 
d.  That areas of archaeological and historic importance have been identified and adequate steps have been taken to preserve and/or record these areas. 
e.  That the stability of the ridgeline is protected and that erosion potential is kept to a minimum by minimizing changes to the existing topography, preserving existing vegetation, requiring the revegetation of disturbed areas, and requiring the installation and maintenance of sedimentation and erosion control structures as needed. Steps to protect the stability of the ridgeline may include but are not limited to requiring retaining walls or other methods to minimize the cutting and filling of slopes; requiring reforestation or landscaping of quarries upon reaching finished grade or of other areas disturbed by development or clear-cutting; and requiring that driveways, roads, and other improvements requiring grading shall be approximately parallel to existing contours. 
6.  Site plan requirements. An application for any special exception required under subsection[s] 4 and 5, foregoing, shall be accompanied by the following site plan information. The Commission may waive the requirement for all or a portion of this information upon a finding that it is not essential to determining compliance with the special exception criteria contained in Section 5. 
a.  The applicant shall submit a plan showing the proposed or existing location of each structure, road, driveway, and other manmade feature on the lot. The plan shall show the maximum first-floor topographic elevation and the maximum elevation of the highest point of each building and structure. 
b.  The applicant, in consultation with the Town Planner, shall provide a list of visual impact observation points. These points shall be located through mapping and field observation. The applicant shall place aerial markers at points corresponding to the highest point of each proposed building and structure. The applicant shall provide photographs taken from visual impact observation points of the development site with aerial markers in place. The Commission shall verify the visual impact areas and may add other areas to be analyzed for visual impact in addition to proposed structure sites, including sites of proposed or existing roads, driveways, and other manmade features. 
c.  The applicant shall provide a map showing the location of all existing trees having a diameter of six inches or more at a height of four feet. The map shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor and shall be certified to A-2 standards of accuracy. 
d.  Where existing vegetation is insufficient to provide, in the judgment of the Commission, adequate visual screening of visual impact areas on a particular lot, the applicant shall prepare a landscaping plan specifying the location, number, type, species, and size of plant and tree material that will be added to the lot. The plan shall be designed to screen those portions of the visual impact areas that will be observable from the visual impact observation points. 
e.  The applicant shall submit a plan with appropriate graphics and color renderings, specifying methods and mechanisms of minimizing the visual impacts of existing and proposed structures, roads, driveways, and other manmade features. Such methods and mechanisms shall include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Restrictions on structure and roof colors to earth tones, which shall include a range of colors including brown and black, but shall not include bright or bold colors. 
(2)  Restrictions on the height of structures whenever the height is expected to exceed the height of the existing or proposed vegetation screening it from the visual impact observation points at a point in time five years from the time of the installation of plant material. 
7.  Prohibited operations and uses in ridgeline setback areas. The following shall be prohibited in the ridgeline setback areas: 
a.  Quarrying. 
b.  Lighting poles ten feet or more in height. All lights shall be designed to prevent excessive glare off the property. 
c.  Air conditioning, heating, or ventilating equipment that projects above the plane of any roof surface, other than accessory chimneys. 
8.  Financial security. The Commission may require, as a condition of approval of any application for activities within a ridgeline setback area, that the permittee post a bond with surety, letter of credit, or other form of financial security acceptable to the Commission, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of these regulations and with the terms and conditions of the approval. 
F.  Transfer of Development Rights (TDR). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a regulation to enable the transfer of development rights in areas identified by the Commission as having a high priority for preservation (sending areas) to areas identified by the Commission as being appropriate for multi-family development (receiving areas). These areas are identified on the official Zoning Map and shall constitute overlay zones. The goal of this regulation is to preserve valuable natural resources and open spaces while directing development to the appropriate locations. 
2.  Transfer of Development Rights. Land owners in the receiving overlay zone may purchase development rights from land owners in the sending overlay zone. These development rights may then be transferred to the receiving area such that housing density may be increased. An applicant must accurately define the sending area by preparing a survey drawing meeting the requirements of a Class A-2 survey. A special exception application shall be filed with the Commission. An applicant must demonstrate that all special exception criteria contained in Section VIII of these regulations, as well as those contained in Item #5 of this section have been satisfied. In lieu of the actual ownership of land in either the receiving zone or the sending zone, an applicant may demonstrate to the Commission that he or she has an option to purchase such land or rights. In all instances, the owners of all properties in both the sending and receiving areas shall be required to sign all applications submitted to the Commission. The Transfer of Development Rights may only be used to increase the number of units permitted as a multiple dwelling unit development, as defined in Section II. 
3.  Permitted Density. The Transfer of Development Rights may be used to increase density up to eight units per acre. For purposes of this section, development rights are needed to increase density beyond four units per acre (the maximum density allowed under Section IX - Multiple Dwelling Development). 
4.  Transfer Formula. The following formula shall be applied in determining how density may be transferred: 
[(A) + (B)] x4 = (C) Total # of acres of parcel in the receiving area after 
application of the Developable Land Calculation + Total # of acres of parcel in the sending area after 
application of the 
Developable Land Calculation x4 = The maximum # of units which may be constructed in the receiving area*  
*The maximum # of units which may be transferred from the sending area to the receiving area shall be limited such that the maximum density on the parcel to be developed (sending area) does not exceed 8 units per acre after application of the Developable Land Calculation. 
The following is an example of how the transfer of density may be accomplished: 
(A) Transfer In Parcel = 13 acres in total (Receiving Area) 2 acres of wetland soils 2 acres of steep slopes 1 acre of flood plain _____8 Acres Total after Application of Developable Land Calculation (B) Transfer Out Parcel = 12 acres total (Sending Area) 1 acre of wetland soils 1 acre of steep slopes 0 acres of flood plain _____10 Acres Total after Application of Developable Land Calculation  
Number of units after density transfer: 
[(13-5)+(12-2)] x4 = C (8+10) x4 = C 18 x4 = 72  
5.  Special Exception Criteria. The Commission shall not approve an application for a TDR unless the applicant has successfully demonstrated compliance with Section VIII of these regulations, as well as the following: 
a.  Building Design. Building architecture, scale, mass, and design shall relate to the context of the sites surroundings. Design goals described in the Plan of Conservation and Development shall be met. 
b.  Landscape Design. The project shall include a significant program of landscaping which enhances the aesthetics of the project, provides an appropriate buffer to less dense adjoining residences if applicable, and contributes to the project in a way that provides the appearance of less density than that which is actually proposed. These goals may be met by design, the quantity and size of landscape plants, and other features such as the introduction of public spaces, gardens, and ornamental structures. 
6.  Area and Height Requirements. 
Minimum Parcel Size 5 acres Maximum Lot Coverage 20% Maximum Density 8 units/acre (See Section III.D.) Maximum Building Height 35 feet Maximum Footprint of 
any Individual Building 6,000 square feet Minimum Front Yard *50 feet Minimum Side/Rear Yard 30 feet except yards that abut a land use other than a TDR or Multiple Dwelling 
development shall be 60 feet.  
 The Commission may increase or decrease the required front yard setback based on a review of how the proposed project relates to other existing structures which are proximate to the subject application. 
7.  Land Use and Site Development Requirements. An application for Site Development Plan approval shall be submitted simultaneously with a request for special exception to transfer density. This application shall meet all of the minimum requirements of Section X. 
a.  Utility Requirements. 
(1)  Roads. Roads shall conform to the applicable section of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Avon except that the Commission may modify width of pavement and curbs upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. 
(2)  Water. A public water supply is required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Director of Health. 
(3)  Sewage. Public sewers are required. The Commission may waive this requirement in unusual situations upon recommendation of the Town Engineer and Director of Health. 
(4)  Other Utilities. All other utilities shall be located underground. 
b.  Land Use and Site Development Requirements. 
(1)  Parking. Parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section VII.B. of these regulations. Spaces shall be provided with convenient access to the front entrances of the buildings. 
(2)  Landscaping. A landscape buffer conforming to the requirements for a B BUFFERYARD as specified in Section VII.A.5., shall be provided around the perimeter of the property. Additional buffering may be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Commission. 
However, where variations in topography, natural features, existing vegetation, or compatible land uses obviate the need for such a buffer, the Commission may modify or waive this requirement. 
(3)  Building Locations. All buildings erected in a Multiple Dwelling Development shall observe the following location requirements: 
Buildings located adjacent to existing public roads must observe the setback requirements in Section IX. F. 6. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall be separated at least: 
30 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building where either wall has openings; 15 feet or half the height of the building, whichever is greater, from another principal building where neither wall has openings; 
Ten feet or the height of the accessory building, whichever is greater, from an accessory building; and 
25 feet from the edge of pavement of any proposed main road, cul-de-sac, or parking area. 

(b)  Accessory buildings shall be located at least: 
25 feet from the edge of pavement of any proposed main road, and 
Ten feet from the edge of pavement of any proposed cul-de-sac, parking area, or other accessory building. 
(c)  Garages exiting directly onto culs-de-sac shall have driveways at least 20 feet in length. Garages shall not exit directly onto main roads. 
(d)  Porches and decks shall observe the above separation requirements. 
(e)  The Commission may modify the requirements of this section provided that, in the Commission's sole discretion, the public health, safety, and welfare are safeguarded. 
(4)  Living Area. Each residential unit shall contain at least 600 square feet of living area for a one-bedroom unit, plus, at least an additional 200 square feet of living area in the unit as a whole for each additional bedroom. 
(5)  Maintenance. The applicant shall present sufficient information to the Commission to demonstrate that adequate provisions have been made for the sustained maintenance of the development in general and also for the sustained maintenance of the roads and open space. 
8.  Recording Documentation in Avon Land Records. Prior to the recording of the special exception in accordance with Section 8-26e of the CT General Statutes, the applicant must record in the office of the Town Clerk, notice of restriction indicating that no development of the transfer out property is possible. Restrictions shall be established which prevent the future development of the property except that land in the transfer out area may be sold and utilized for agricultural purposes or open space. In addition, the owner may elect to retain rights to cut timber on the property consistent with a Forest Management Plan prepared by a licensed forester. This recorded notice shall be accompanied by the Survey Map described in Item #3, which accurately defines the area which is subject to the restriction. Such documents shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney. Once recorded, these restrictions may not be modified. 
G.  Attainable Housing Overlay Zone (AHOZ). 
1.  Purpose. The Attainable Housing Overlay Zone (AHOZ) is intended to create additional housing opportunities within Avon while promoting the appropriate development and protection of Avon's historic areas and other areas of the community. It also provides an opportunity for the creation of mixed use development and housing. This AHOZ regulation is authorized under CGS Section 8-13 (m-x) as amended. 
2.  Nature of Zone. 
a.  The AHOZ exists in addition to the current (underlying) zone for the property. 
b.  The AHOZ enables a property owner to apply for approval of a housing or mixed use development using the provisions of this Section instead of those for the underlying zone. 
c.  The provisions of the AHOZ are an option for the property owner and such owner would voluntarily choose to comply with these provisions when or if new housing as authorized herein is proposed. 
d.  In the event any conflict between the provisions of this section and any other section of the regulations, the provisions of this section shall control. If the specific matter is not addressed by this section, then the other section(s) of the Regulations shall control, unless revised by the Commission. 
3.  Process. 
a.  The overall process for development within a AHOZ district includes: 
(1)  Establishment of the AHOZ district (a zone change application to the Zoning Commission in accordance with Section X.A. of these regulations) including a declaration of the proposed type of sub-district(s) and plans and drawings depicting the proposed development; 
(2)  Approval of a site plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section X of these regulations; 
(3)  Filing of approved plans; and 
(4)  Issuance of building permits by the Town of Avon. 
b.  Pre-application meetings for any proposed development are strongly recommended. 
4.  Description of Sub-Districts. Due to the diversity of desired development patterns in different parts of Avon, the Attainable Housing Overlay Zone consists of six different sub-districts as described below: 
a.  Mixed Use (AHOZ-MXD): On arterial roads and other areas with potential for development with mixed use developments and/or buildings. 
b.  Mixed Housing (AHOZ-MXH): A development including a combination of housing types in the following paragraphs. 
c.  Multi-Family (AHOZ-MF): Existing buildings and other areas with potential for development with multi-family housing. 
d.  Townhouse (AHOZ-TH): Areas with potential for residential townhouse development (a residential building consisting of three or more attached units in which each unit shares a wall extending from foundation to roof with the adjacent unit(s) and has exterior walls on at least two sides). 
e.  Duplex (AHOZ-DX): Areas with potential for development with duplex housing units designed to be compatible with single-family units in adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
f.  Single Family (AHOZ-SF): Areas with potential for development with single-family units compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
5.  Permitted Principal Uses. The following uses are permitted in the various sub-districts subject to granting a detailed zone change by the Planning and Zoning Commission: 
a.  Mixed Use. 
(1)  Mixed use development and/or mixed use buildings as defined in Section G.4.a. with a mix of residential and commercial uses, with a residential density at up to 20 units/acre of site area (not including any area designated as wetland, watercourse, pre-development slopes greater than 25 percent, or 100-year or 500-year floodplain). 
(2)  Uses and structures accessory thereto. 
b.  Mixed Housing. 
(1)  Two or more housing types at maximum densities for each as provided herein. 
(2)  Uses and structures accessory thereto. 
c.  Multi-Family. 
(1)  Multi-family residential development at up to 20 units/acre of site area (not including any area designated as wetland, watercourse, slopes greater than 25 percent, or 100-year or 500-year floodplain). 
(2)  Uses and structures accessory thereto. 
d.  Townhouse. 
(1)  Townhouse residential development at up to ten units/acre of site area (not including any area designated as wetland, watercourse, slopes greater than 25 percent, or 100-year or 500-year floodplain). 
(2)  Uses and structures accessory thereto. 
e.  Duplex. 
(1)  Duplex residential development (two-unit buildings) at up to ten units/acre of site area (not including any area designated as wetland, watercourse, slopes greater than 25 percent, or 100-year or 500-year floodplain). 
(2)  Uses and structures accessory thereto. 
f.  Single Family. 
(1)  Single family residential development at up to six units/acre of site area (not including any area designated as wetland, watercourse, pre-development slopes greater than 25 percent, or 100-year or 500-year floodplain). 
(2)  Uses and structures accessory thereto. 
6.  Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards including height and setback standards of the underlying zone shall continue to apply except that the Planning and Zoning Commission may, through granting of a separate special permit, modify any dimensional standard in order to: 
a.  Facilitate the creation of housing opportunities as provided in this section. 
b.  Address on-site constraints or protect important resources. 
c.  Enhance the design of the development and/or surrounding neighborhoods. 
d.  Be approximately consistent with the setbacks of nearby buildings in order to create a desirable streetscape. 
7.  Housing Affordability Requirements. 
a.  At least twenty percent of all dwelling units constructed in a development approved under this section of the regulations shall be deed-restricted to be affordable and attainable to and occupied by households earning 80 percent or less of the area median income for Avon, as determined and reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
b.  When a calculation performed under this subsection results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. 
c.  Each such attainable unit shall be subject to a housing restriction acceptable to the Town Attorney and the Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall be recorded on the Avon Land Records and shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  An identification of the affordable housing units within the development. 
(2)  A requirement that such affordable unit shall only be occupied by a household earning 80 percent or less of the area median income for Avon, as determined and reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(3)  A statement of whether the affordable units will, at the time of initial occupancy, be rented or owner-occupied. 
(4)  A detailed statement of the method for determining the rental rate or sale price or resale price of an affordable housing unit at any point in time. 
(5)  A statement that the term of the deed restriction for each affordable unit shall be a minimum of 30 years from the date of first occupancy of that affordable unit. 
d.  The applicant shall prepare and submit a final "Housing Affordability Plan" in accordance with the requirements of CGS § 8-30g, section 8-30g-1 et seq. of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies and the "Housing Affordability Plan Requirements" as adopted by the policy of the Zoning Commission and as the same may be modified from time to time, including: 
(1)  The name and address of the proposed administrator of the deed restricted affordable units. 
(2)  Provision that the proposed administrator shall file an annual report to the Planning and Zoning Commission by January 31, in a form specified by the Zoning Commission, certifying compliance with the provisions of this section. 
8.  Additional Provisions. 
a.  Unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, all developments approved under this Section shall be served by public water and public sewer. 
b.  Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, any development approved under this section shall provide for off-street parking as follows: 
(1)  As provided in Section VII of the Zoning Regulations; or 
(2)  At a ratio of 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit if shown by the applicant based on submitted credible evidence and accepted by the Commission to be adequate parking for the proposed development. 
c.  Any developments proposed under this section shall, unless modified by the Commission, construct or improve the sidewalks abutting the project site in order to enhance the pedestrian nature and character of the proposed development and the surrounding area. 
9.  Building Design and Construction Guidelines. Since design of buildings and sites is an important part of integrating housing at permissible densities into the community, all development in the AHOZ shall be designed to a high level of architectural character so that the quality of the overall design of any development will be an important positive addition to the area. This consideration will be an important consideration as part of the review and granting of any approval for such a development. 
a.  Overall Character. 
(1)  Proposed development projects should enhance the general character and add to the architectural desirability of a historic New England community and where appropriate, complement the scale and architecture of adjacent buildings. 
(2)  An overall design theme (including building placement, building massing, exterior treatments, signage and other design considerations) shall be established where harmony in textures, lines, and masses is provided and monotony is avoided. 
(3)  The illustrative AHOZ design guidelines on the following pages shall be used by applicants and the Commission as a general reference for desirable characteristics of buildings and sites. 
(4)  The design and site development provisions of the Avon Town Center Study shall also be used, when and where appropriate. 
(5)  A desirable streetscape and attractive landscape transitions to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
(6)  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, shield unsightly areas, provide shade, and relate to the natural environment and topography. 
b.  Building Placement and Siting. 
(1)  Buildings shall be organized in a coordinated and functional manner that is compatible with site features and the desirable characteristics of adjoining areas. 
(2)  In general, new buildings shall be placed near to the public street and shall be oriented with the main façade parallel to the public street in order to strengthen the overall streetscape. The Commission may modify or waive this requirement when the applicant demonstrates that a greater setback or alternative orientation such as the main façade perpendicular to the street, will enhance the overall effect of a historic New England community and/or allow for the creation of a public amenity (such as a wider sidewalk, a public seating area, etc.). 
(3)  Off-street parking and loading shall not be located between buildings and a public street unless approved by the Commission and any parking area visible from a public street or public sidewalk, shall be screened with landscaping, walls, fencing, or combination thereof. 
(4)  Buildings shall be designed and located on the site so as to retain the existing topography and desirable natural features of the land to the extent feasible. 
c.  Building Mass. 
(1)  Monolithic building forms shall be avoided through the use of variations in length of unbroken exterior walls, structure placement, color, texture and/or material and variations in the height of buildings or use of architectural features such as balconies, cornices, step-backs, or other articulating features. 
(2)  The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and the existing or planned character of the area. 
(3)  Architectural features shall be evaluated based on the scale of the building(s), the quality of the design, and the relationship to surroundings. 
(4)  Façades and rooflines shall be articulated and/or varied to reduce the appearance of inappropriate bulk and provide architectural interest. 
d.  Exterior Materials and Colors. 
(1)  Exterior building materials and their placement on a building shall be consistent with the overall look of a historic New England community. 
(2)  Building materials shall have durable quality and shall be selected for harmony or compatibility of the building with adjoining desirable materials. 
e.  Doorways and Windows. 
(1)  In mixed use and multi-family developments, recessed doorways are preferred. Where a recessed doorway is not used, an awning or similar architectural overhang is encouraged. Adequate lighting for the doorway shall be incorporated into the design of the doorway. 
(2)  Windows should be taller than they are wide and windows on upper floors should not be larger than windows on lower floors. 
(3)  Windows should be inset from the exterior wall surface and shall have visually prominent sills, lintels, or other forms of architectural detailing to add visual relief to the wall. 
f.  Roofs and Mechanical Equipment. 
(1)  Roof forms should be appropriate for a historic New England community and complement the principal building in terms of style, detailing, and materials. 
(2)  Roof overhangs (eaves and cornices) should be a minimum of two feet or as appropriate to the proposed architecture. 
(3)  Any mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view using landscaping, walls, fencing, parapets or other architectural elements, or combination thereof. 
(4)  Utility and service equipment areas shall be screened from public view with materials compatible with the building. 



(Amend. of 4-24-07, eff. 5-24-07; Amend of 9-27-16(1), eff. 10-5-16) 
Section X. - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  Administration. 
1.  Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be submitted to the Clerk of the Commission on forms prescribed by the Commission and with supporting plans, materials, and other information required by the Commission. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees as established by the Town Council. 
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications except site development plans. Proceedings on such applications shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be submitted in conformance with the following requirements: 
a.  Site development plan. Site development plan applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commission for any development of Commercial or Industrial Land Uses, any special exception application, (except signs), and any development on the Educational Land or Recreation/Open Space Zones. 
Applications for site plan approval shall be accompanied by six copies of detailed site development plans at no less than 40 feet to the inch, showing each phase of development for review by the Commission. These plans shall show the following data unless specifically waived by the Town Planner: 
(1)  Title block, developer, property owner, north point, scale, location map, and seals of the engineer, architect, landscape architect, or surveyor preparing the plan. Each plan shall be prepared by the appropriate design professional as authorized by State licensing authorities. 
(2)  Boundaries of property certified to a State of Connecticut A-2 Survey Standard. 
(3)  Grading plans showing existing and proposed contours at not more than two-foot vertical intervals, Certification by Registered Land Surveyor that above information is in accordance with National Map Accuracy Standards. Wetlands and all wetland regulated areas, flood plains, and soil type should be delineated. 
(4)  Existing and proposed roads, pedestrian walkways, driveways, loading and parking areas. 
(5)  Location and dimension of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, walls, and area fences. Approximate age of existing structures and sites of historical significance should be noted. Building setback lines shall be shown. 
(6)  A zoning data schedule clearly showing the following minimum requirements in that zoning district and as proposed on that site development plan: zone designation, lot size, yard areas, building footprint, building gross floor area, percent of building coverage, building height, number of stories, parking spaces, percent of impervious area, percent of landscaped area, percent of landscaped area within parking lots. 
(7)  Location, nature, and extent of watercourses and water bodies. 
(8)  Utility plans showing location, size and design of existing and proposed storm drainage, sewage disposal, refuse containment, water supply facilities, and electric and telephone lines. Design calculations, soil types, deep test hole data and percolation test data shall be shown for on-site sewage disposal system. 
(9)  Landscape plans showing location, size (at time of planting and maturity) species and type of proposed landscaping including all existing trees of 12 or more inches in diameter, measured at a trunk height of three feet above the ground. Heavily wooded areas shall be shown by foliage lines. 
(10)  Location, dimensions, areas, type, color, materials, and illumination of all proposed exterior signs. 
(11)  Location, design and intensity of all proposed exterior lighting. 
(12)  An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan as specified in Section III.I. 
(13)  Building elevations, building floor plans, statistical data, and other information considered necessary by the Commission for adequate study of the proposal. 
(14)  A plan showing the location of buildings, streets, driveways, and other facilities on the subject land and adjoining properties within 500 feet. 
Before the Commission approves a site development plan, the Commission shall determine that the data shown on the Plan meets all of the requirements of these regulations. 
The Commission may require that a bond be posted by the applicant, in an amount and form acceptable to the Commission, to ensure that the improvements shown on the plan are implemented. 
A site development plan shall be valid for one year from date of approval, unless construction of buildings is in progress, or unless an extension of time has been granted by the Commission. Requests for extensions shall be made well in advance of the date of expiration. 
A Mylar copy of the approved site development plan shall be signed by the Chairman of the Commission and filed in the Office of the Building Official before any building permits are issued for the activities shown on the approved plan. 
Building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be issued only in conformance with the approved plans on file in the Office of the Building Official. 
Staff approval. When minor changes to approved site development plans are requested which do not require additional parking spaces, do not impact on necessary landscaping, or which may be required by field conditions, approval may be granted by the Town Planner, Building Official, and Town Engineer. An application, fee, and plans shall be filed in the Planning Office. Where a judgment is made by the Town Planner that such changes are more significant and do not meet the foregoing standards, a site plan application shall be required. One Mylar copy of the approved plan must be filed by the applicant unless waived by the Town Planner. 
b.  Special exceptions. Special exception applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commission for any development of buildings, structures, activities or uses designated in the regulations as special exception. 
Applications for special exception (except for signs) shall be accompanied by an overall plan of development at no less than 100-scale for the entire parcel. Such plan of development shall show the layout and location of proposed buildings, structures, roads, utilities, parking areas, landscaped areas, landscape buffers, other improvements, existing and proposed contours and any other information. In addition, a plan shall be submitted which shows the location of buildings, streets, driveways, and other facilities on the subject land and adjoining properties within 500 feet. 
Applications for special exception (except signs) shall also be accompanied by a site development plan application complying with the requirements of this section. Before the Commission approves a special exception, the Commission shall determine that the application is in conformance with the general criteria established in Section VIII, and the specified criteria of any subsection of these regulations. In approving an application, the Commission may impose conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and property values. 
Special exception authorization granted by the Commission shall expire one year from the date it is granted unless construction of structures authorized as special exception is begun or use of property for the purpose for which the special exception authorization was granted has begun. 
c.  Zone change. Zone change applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commission for any proposal to alter the zoning designation of any parcel or parcels of land in the Town of Avon. 
Applications for zone change shall be accompanied by an overall plan at no less than 200 scale for the entire parcel. Such plan shall show the existing and proposed zoning designations, and the location of buildings, streets, driveways, and other facilities on the subject land and adjoining properties within 500 feet. Before the Commission approves a zone change request, the Commission shall determine that the proposed zone change will be in conformance with the plan of development and the purposes of these regulations and that the uses permitted in the proposed zone will not adversely affect the public health, safety, welfare, and property value. 
When the Commission votes to approve a zone change, the effective date of the change(s) shall be 30 days from the date that the vote was taken unless an alternate effective date is chosen by the Commission. 
d.  Amendment to Zoning Regulations. Applications for amendments to the Zoning Regulations shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commission for any proposal to amend, change, or repeal these regulations. 
Before the Commission approves any amendment to these regulations, the Commission shall determine that the proposed amendment will not hinder the attainment of the purposes of these regulations and that the public health, safety, welfare and property values will not be adversely affected. 
When the Commission votes to amend any section of these regulations, the effective date of the change(s) shall be 30 days from the date that the vote was taken unless an alternate effective date is chosen by the Commission. 
2.  Building Department. Applications to the Building Department shall be submitted in conformance with the following requirements: 
a.  Building permits. The Building Official shall require that an application for a building permit be accompanied by adequate supporting plans, materials, and other information necessary to determine that the proposed building, structure, alteration, activity, or use complies with all the provisions of these regulations, and any requirements or conditions applied by the Planning and Zoning Commission or other agency, or is a valid non-conforming use under these regulations. To ensure compliance with building height requirements, an applicant shall calculate the average grade around the proposed structure and the building height as it relates to this average grade and submit this data at the time of application for a permit. The requirement for this calculation may be waived by a majority vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission at a meeting of the Commission or by telephone poll conducted by the Town Planner. 
No building permit shall be issued until the Building Official has certified that the proposed building, structure, alteration, activity, or use complies with all the provisions of these regulations and any requirements or conditions applied by the Planning and Zoning Commission or other agency, or is a valid nonconforming use under these regulations. 
b.  Certification of plan compliance. 
During the process of construction, the following certifications shall be submitted to the Building Official by a Registered Land Surveyor: 
(1)  Certification as to elevation and location of top of foundation prior to framing of building or construction of wall. 
(2)  Certification as to elevation and location of all utilities and sub-grade of all paved areas prior to paving. 
(3)  Certification as to as-built conditions of all improvements shown on the site development plan prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy. 
Certifications for items (1) and (2) may be in the form of a letter or Mylar map, as determined by the Town Engineer, and may be waived at the discretion of the Town Engineer or by the Commission. 
The as-built conditions map described in (3) is to include the following information. Should special or unique conditions exist, additional information may be required. All sheets should be on photographic Mylar. In addition, a computerized map in digital format acceptable to the Town Engineer shall be submitted. 
(1)  Title block, developer, property owner, north point, scale, and seal of the surveyor preparing the plan. 
(2)  Boundaries of property certified to a State of Connecticut A-2 Map Survey Standard. 
(3)  Pedestrian walkways, driveways, loading, parking areas, parking lot striping, and limits of all paved surfaces. 
(4)  Location distance to property lines and dimensions of all buildings, structures, walls, fences, exterior lighting and refuse containment areas. 
(5)  Utility plans showing location/elevation of storm drainage, sewage disposal, water supply facilities, and electric and telephone lines. 
(6)  The zoning data schedule included as part of the approved record plan clearly showing the minimum requirements of the zoning district, those approved on the site development plan and as-built conditions. This table is to be included on the as-built map. 
REQUIRED/ AS-BUILT Zoning data Allowed Approved Conditions ZONE: CS Min. lot area 30,000 sf 84,795 sf 84,795 sf Min. lot width 150' 293.85' 293.85' Max. lot coverage 25% 11% 10.97% Max. front yard 40' 96' 96' Min. side yard 20' 25' 25' Min. rear yard 20' 20' 20' Max. building height 2 st/35' 2 st/29' 2 st/29' Min. building footprint 1,500 sf 9,115 sf 9,119 sf Bldg. gross floor area 17,600 sf 17,672 sf Min. landscaped area 50% 51.45% 52.6% Parking Ratio 5/1,000 sf 5/1,000 sf 5/1,000 sf Total parking 88 sp 88 sp 88 sp Total reserve parking spaces 0 sp 0 sp 0 sp Percent of landscape planting within parking lot 20% 34% 33.8%  
SAMPLE ZONING DATA SCHEDULE 
(7)  A detailed statement on the Mylar map which lists all as-built conditions that differ from the record plan approved by the Commission. If an as-built map is being prepared in connection with a request for a temporary certificate of occupancy, a second statement shall be included on the Mylar map which details required site improvements not completed to date. A cash bond shall be required for all improvements which have not been completed. 
(8)  A written statement prepared by the landscape contractor which provides a detailed comparison between the approved landscape plan and all plants which were installed so as to demonstrate compliance with the approved landscape plan. 
c.  Certificate of Occupancy. No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose, until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Official, stating that the premises or building complies with all the provisions of these regulations. Such a certificate is also required for any change, extension or alteration in a use. 
A Certificate of Occupancy shall be applied for at the same time that the building permit is applied for and, if approved by the Building Official, shall be issued within ten days after notification from the permittee that the premises are ready for occupancy. 
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling unit until the public right-of-way to such building is made accessible to vehicular traffic on a year round basis. 
B.  Enforcement. 
1.  Authority. 
These regulations shall be administered and enforced by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall appoint a Zoning Enforcement Officer and may appoint Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officers who shall be confirmed by the Town Manager. Once appointed and confirmed, the enforcement officers shall be the Commission's duly authorized agents. 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall administer the zoning enforcement program; and, may delegate responsibilities as appropriate to such Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officers as may exist. 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer and assistants are hereby authorized to inspect and examine any building, structure, place, or premises and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist there in violation of any provision of these regulations. 
2.  Penalties. The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provisions of these regulations shall have been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who shall commit, take part or assist in any such violation or who shall maintain any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be subject to the remedies and sanctions provided by Connecticut General Statutes, in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
C.  Zoning Board of Appeals. 
1.  Powers and duties. 
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties, which shall only be exercised in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and in accordance with the public interest and the development of the neighborhood: 
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, or decision made by the Enforcement Officer; and 
To vary the application of the Zoning Regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent and with due consideration for conserving the public health, convenience, welfare and property values. 
2.  Procedure. 
All appeals and applications made to the Board of Appeals shall be submitted to the Clerk of the Board on forms prescribed by the Board and with supporting plans, materials, and other information required by the Board. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as established by the Town Council. 
The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on all applications and appeals. All proceedings shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Any action required by the appellant as a result of decisions or orders made by the Board must be taken within the time affixed by said Board. 
Any action required by the appellant as a result of variances granted by the Board must be taken within one year from the effective date or the variance shall become null and void. 
The Board of Appeals shall not be required to hear any application for the same variance or substantially the same variance for a period of six months after a decision by the Board or by a court on an earlier such application. 
3.  Variances. No variance in the strict application of any provisions of these regulations shall be granted by the Board of Appeals unless it finds all of the following: 
a.  That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or building for which the variance is sought, which are peculiar to such land or building and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the neighborhood, or in the zoning district at large, and have not resulted from any act subsequent to the adoption of these regulations whether in violation of the provisions hereof or not, 
b.  That the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the literal enforcement or strict application of the provisions of the regulations would result in exceptional difficulty, unusual hardship, or deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land, 
c.  That the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or buildings, and that the variance granted by the Board is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose, and 
d.  That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the purposes and intent of these regulations; will accomplish substantial justice; and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
These findings shall be fully described in the record of the Board. 
D.  Validity. Should any phrase, clause or section of these regulations be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other phrase, clause or section of these regulations. 
APPENDIX E - TOWN COUNCIL POLICIES 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Flag Lowering NO. 1 DATE: October 3, 1968 AMENDED: December 11, 2006  
The flags are to be flown at half-mast at the following times: (1) the day of funeral for any active member of the armed services who was a resident of the Town at the time of death; (2) the day of funeral for a person in an official position in the Town at the time of death; and (3) any day on which the Governor of the State of Connecticut declares flags are to be flown at half-mast. The town manager may approve a deviation from this policy after consultation with the Council Chairman or any other member of the Council. (See Policy #8) 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Sale of Town Real Property NO. 2 DATE: June 19, 1969 AMENDED: February 6, 2003  
It shall be the policy of the Town of Avon to follow procedures outlined below in the sale of any town-owned real property: 
1.  If a parcel of property that the Town desires to sell would not qualify as a buildable lot under the Town's zoning regulations, the Town shall first approach adjoining property owners to determine if they might be interested in purchasing the parcel. 
2.  If one or more adjoining owners are interested in purchasing the non-qualifying parcel, the following procedure shall apply: 
(a)  The Town Manager shall obtain an impartial appraisal of the parcel and shall offer to sell the parcel by sealed bids to the interested adjoining owners at an aggregate price not less than the greater of: (i) the appraised fair market value; or (ii) the sum of taxes, interest and lien fees owing on such parcel. 
(b)  The parcel may be sold to two or more adjoining property owners. However, the Town shall not be obligated to sell only a portion of the non-qualifying parcel. 
(c)  When selling a non-qualifying parcel to adjoining property owners, the Council may waive the requirements set forth in subsection (a) for a minimum sale price or the use of sealed bids if the Council determines that such a waiver is in the interests of the community. 
If adjoining property owners do not elect to purchase the property, the provisions of Section 3 below shall apply. 
3.  If the parcel of property that the Town desires to sell would qualify as a buildable lot under the Town's zoning regulations or if adjoining property owners do not elect to purchase a non-qualifying parcel, the Town Manager shall proceed to sell the property on a sealed bid basis. Bidding shall be open to all persons, and notice of the proposed sale shall be mailed to adjoining property owners and shall be published in a newspaper serving the Town at least ten days in advance of the date for submission of bids. There shall be a minimum price of the greater of (i) the appraised fair market value or (ii) the sum of taxes, interest and lien fees owing on such parcel. If the highest bid is below the minimum price, the Council may waive the minimum price if it finds such waiver to be in the interests of the community. 
4.  Closing costs and adjustments and other costs incidental to the sale of said property shall be borne by the Town and purchaser in the manner customary in the Hartford County area. In no case shall the Town bear title search and legal opinion fees. 
5.  The Town shall comply with all existing laws and ordinances regarding the sale of Town property, including but not limited to Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-24. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Recognition of NO. 3 Officials and DATE: July 1, 1969 Town Employees AMENDED: April 8, 1999 AMENDED: September 10, 2008  
The Town Council, in recognition of service on a board, commission, committee, agency or town employee, may present to anyone who has served five to ten years a Seal of the Town of Avon pin, ten to 20 years an acyclic plaque and frame, 20 years or more a clock, provided such a person is not serving in another appointed or elected office, board, commission, committee, agency or town employee assigned to another position within the Town of Avon. Persons who have served on several boards, commissions, committees or agencies will be awarded a recognition of service award based on cumulative years of service. 
The Town Council may present to a Town employee upon retirement in recognition of 25 years or more of service, a chair, rocker or clock, as a symbol of the Town of Avon's appreciation. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Town-owned Trees NO. 4 DATE: June 4, 1970  
Town Manager's Policy. Town-owned trees shall not be removed or cut down by the Town, unless they are dying, dangerous or defective. 
Consensus of the Town Council. The Town Manager may permit abutting property owners to remove healthy trees at their own expense. Conditions of approval to be as required by the Town Manager. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Use of Town Property NO. 5 DATE: July 2, 1970  
The use of Town property shall be subject to approval by the Town Council. Approval will be contingent upon the event being under local sponsorship, and in accordance with Ordinance #49. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Insurance for Firemen NO. 6 DATE: September 17, 1970 AMENDED: October 21, 1971 AMENDED: October 21, 1977 AMENDED: April 8, 1999  
The Town of Avon shall assume the cost of personal property lost or damaged, as a result of responding to, working at, or returning from an emergency, with a limit of $500.00 per person, per incident. The claims are to be filed with the Town through the Fire Department's Board of Directors. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Winter Maintenance and NO. 7 Non-Public Roads DATE: October 15, 1970  
1.  For the purpose of this policy, there are three categories of non-public roads: 
a.  Private Road. Road never accepted by the Town nor bonded, under approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission, for future acceptance as a public thoroughfare. 
b.  Abandoned Road. Road formerly dedicated for public use but subsequently abandoned by the Town, or road for which no State Town-Aid funds are allocated. 
c.  Unaccepted Road. Road under construction and bonded to the Town for completion and eventual acceptance as a public thoroughfare. 
2.  Public funds shall not be expended for winter maintenance (snow removal, salting and sanding) of private roads. Residents of private roads are responsible for winter maintenance of said roads in the same manner as normal maintenance. If residents of a private road desire that the Town provide winter and/or normal maintenance, they may petition the Town to bring the road up to Town road standards through the assessment procedure. 
3.  As unaccepted roads are intended for public dedication, the Town of Avon will provide winter maintenance for said roads, provided only that they are paved and under the following conditions: 
a.  The road is part of a school bus route; 
b.  The developer owning the road requests said maintenance in writing to the Town Manager and signs the standard agreement form, "Winter Maintenance on Unaccepted Roads." 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Death of Town Officials NO. 8 DATE: October 19, 1972 REVISED: June 2, 1988  
In the event of the death of any present town official, present or retired employee, or the death of an immediate family member of same; 
A.  Flowers will be sent to the funeral, surviving spouse or children and/or contribution will be made to a designated charity. Maximum total expenditure shall be $50.00. (Policy #1) 
B.  At the discretion of the Town Council: 
1.  Town Hall flag may be flown at half-mast on day of the funeral, in accordance with the Town Flag Policy. 
2.  Commemorative resolution honoring the deceased may be adopted. 
3.  Other recognition may be made as deemed appropriate by the Council. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Indemnification of NO. 9 Public Officials DATE: October 19, 1972  
Editor's note- Town Council Policy No. 9 described above was removed from the Code at the town's instruction. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Town-owned Fire NO. 10 Protection Facilities DATE: February 1, 1973  
The management, care, maintenance and operation of all lands, equipment and other property of the Town of Avon which is used for municipal fire protection services, is hereby vested in the Avon Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. This Policy shall not prohibit the Town of Avon from providing certain services or other assistance to the Avon Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Use of Town Hall NO. 11 Facilities DATE: October 14, 1975  
1.  Arrangement for the use of Town Hall facilities by community groups shall be made with the Office of the Town Manager. 
2.  Official Boards, Commissions and Committees shall have priority for use of Town Hall facilities. 
3.  The Town Manager shall assign a group to the Town Hall facilities based upon availability and anticipated attendance or may assess the appropriateness of use of another Town facility. 
4.  Town Hall facilities shall not be available for personal gain, profit-making purposes or games of chance. 
5.  Following approval of arrangements, a key for the Town Hall shall be obtained at the police department and returned to the police department immediately following use of the facility. 
6.  Kitchen facilities and meeting rooms in the Town Hall shall be used in accordance with posted rules and regulations. 
7.  As custodial services are not provided, facilities and furnishings must be left as found with all refuse properly disposed, lights and heating/air conditioning turned off and doors locked. 
8.  It will be the responsibility of the group to replace furnishings or articles found missing from Town Hall immediately after use. 
9.  Any group violating the above rules shall be subject to refusal for further use of Town Hall facilities. 
10.  The Town, through its Town Manager, reserves the right to decline requests or cancel or modify any approved request for use of Town Hall facilities. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Street Lighting NO. 12 DATE: (Undated)  
1.  As a general policy, the Town Manager shall cause public street lights to be erected at intersections of Town roads where at least one of the following conditions applies: 
a.  The police department recommends installation based on factors of safety. 
b.  At least a majority of, but not less than two residences in the immediate area of the proposed light are in favor of its installation. 
2.  The Town Manager may also cause public street lights to be erected at points other than intersections along Town roads where preferably both of the above conditions but at least condition a. is satisfied. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Procedures for Constructing Public NO. 13 Buildings - Avon, CT DATE: June 4, 1974 REVISED: June 4, 1987 REVISED: May 5, 1988 REVISED: July 1, 1999 REVISED: April 4, 2002 REVISED: January 8, 2004 REVISED: February 4, 2010  
    The procedures for the construction of public buildings vary depending upon the type and size of the project. The construction of school buildings is carefully covered by statute and requires strict adherence to procedures. Other public buildings are constructed under provisions of the Town Charter and in accordance with procedures established by the Town Council. 
    The following general procedures are established for constructing Public Buildings: 
1.  The Statement of Needs 
A.  The Town Council is responsible for approving a Statement of Needs for all public buildings. For buildings other than school buildings, the council may also initiate the Statement of Needs; however, for school buildings, the Board of Education, under the authority granted by Section 10-220 of the General Statutes, is responsible for establishing a long-term building program and making recommendations to the Town Council for construction needs based upon such a study. 
B.  Each Town agency office including the Board of Education under Section 9.1.1(d) of the Town Charter is required to submit annually an estimate of expenditures for capital improvements for the next five (5) years at such time as prescribed by the Town Manager. The Town Manager under the aforementioned section of the Town Charter has the duty of annually presenting to the Town Council a five-year capital improvements program and of recommending the project or projects, which should be undertaken in the ensuing fiscal year. Also, under Section 7.3.2(f) of the Town Charter, the Town Manager may recommend to the Town Council any measures he deems necessary or expedient. 
C.  The Town Council at this time or at any time in the procedural steps may, under the authority granted by Sections 4.3.2(q) and 10.3.6 of the Town Charter, submit the matter to other town boards for coordination and report, to a public hearing or hearings for determining public opinion, or to a town meeting or referendum for final determination. 
2.  Building Committee 
A.  After approval of the Statement of Needs, and under authority of the Town Charter, Section 4.3.2(b), the Town Council shall appoint a building committee for all proposed school buildings and may appoint a building committee for all other proposed public buildings. Appointment of a school building committee is required by Section 10-291 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, which provides for building committee approval of plans before construction. There is no mandatory requirement for building committees for other public buildings. 
B.  In appointing a building committee, the Town Council shall by resolution determine its size and makeup and shall establish a "Charge" which will define the extent of the committee's responsibility and actions. The charge may also include site acquisition. 
C.  A normal charge to a building committee shall include the responsibility for preparing plans and specifications, estimating costs, obtaining necessary approvals, employing a contractor and supervising construction. A school building committee charge shall indicate that the committee must approve the site as well as the plans. 
3.  Development of Preliminary Plans and Specifications 
A.  When a building committee has been appointed, the building committee shall produce by its own efforts, after study of the "Statement of Needs", after meeting with the requesting agency, and with professional assistance, a set of preliminary plans and specifications and an estimate of costs. Because an architect is involved in this procedure, it will be necessary for the building committee, after generally defining the scope of the project, to request the Town Council for funds to employ an architect. Engineering work may also be required at this stage and the request for funds should include an appropriation for this work. For all buildings for which no building committee is appointed, the Town Council may itself perform the function of developing plans and specification or may designate a town officer or other person to do so. Under Section 9.5.1(e) of the Town Charter, the Town Council shall recommend the requested appropriation for an architect and for preliminary engineering work to the Board of Finance. The Board of Finance shall follow the appropriation provisions of Section 9.5.1 of the Town Charter. 
B.  Before any land may be purchased, or any Town road may be designated, for use as a site for a public building, the matter must be referred to the Avon Planning & Zoning Commission for a report under Section 8-24 of the General Statutes. If the Commission fails to report or in the event it issues an unfavorable report, the provisions of Section 8-24 of the General Statutes shall be followed. The Town Council must also approve the purchase of land or designation of existing Town land for use as a site for a school or other public building. 
C.  If the building committee has also been charged with the duty of site selection and purchase, then the provisions of Section 10.3.1(a) of the Town Charter pertaining to Board of Finance and Town Meeting approval of real estate purchases is required. Sites to be used for school construction must be approved by the school building committee, Town Board of Education and the State Department of Education under Section 10-291 of the General Statutes. 
4.  Preliminary Plans and Specification for School Buildings 
A.  The State Commissioner of Education maintains advisory services in accordance with the provisions of Section 10-290(a) to advise school boards of education and school building committees on long range planning and education specifications, to review the sketches and preliminary plans and outline specifications for any school building project and to provide advice on the suitability of such projects. 
B.  The preliminary plans, specifications and cost estimates shall be submitted to the Town Council and Board of Finance for review and approval, and for referral to a town meeting for discussion, and a referendum for action under Section 10.3 of the Avon Town Charter. The action of the Town Council, Board of Finance and referendum meeting shall be upon the proper resolutions and documents drawn by Counsel appointed by the Town Council. 
C.  For other public buildings the developed preliminary plans shall be approved by the building committee, referred to the Town Council and Board of Finance for action, and referred to a town meeting and possibly to a referendum for approval. 
5.  Development of Final Plans and Specifications 
A.  As soon as the preliminary plans, specifications and cost estimates have been approved by the appropriate bodies, the building committee will proceed with the development of final plans and specifications. For school buildings the final plans and specifications must be approved by the Town Board of Education and the building committee as set forth in Section 10-291 of the Connecticut General Statutes. The final plans and specifications must be filed with and reviewed by the Commissioner of Education in accordance with Sections 10-291 and 10-292 of the General Statutes and the Commissioner of Education must submit a written report together with recommendations, if any, to the building committee and the Town Board of Education. 
B.  For other public buildings, the final plans and specification shall be submitted to the Town Council for approval. 
6.  Financing 
A.  Reference has already been made to financing the preliminary architect's fees and to the approval of the estimated cost either by referendum or town meeting action. The financing for school buildings will normally be by Bond Issue and other public buildings by a method recommended by the Town Council and approved by the Board of Finance. 
B.  If the financing is to be by Bond Issue, the Counsel appointed by the Town Council in Section 4 of these procedures shall be a qualified Bond Counsel. The Town is also responsible for the selection of a Bond Agent who shall work with the Council in establishing a time schedule for the sale of bonds and shall be responsible for administering the sale procedures. 
C.  In estimating costs, the Committee shall determine, but differentiate, between Capital Improvement Program costs to be bonded and capital costs, which are to be funded by a method other than bonding. The current definition of a Capital Improvement Program cost is that limit (in dollars) and duration (in years) recommended by the Town Council and approved by the Board of Finance for inclusion in the Capital Improvement Program of the Town. For example, furniture, fixtures and equipment not meeting the Board of Finance guidelines for a Capital Improvement Program cost should be determined by the committee but will not be bonded, but financed by other means recommended by the Town Council and approved by the Board of Finance. 
7.  State Construction Grants 
A.  The requirements for obtaining state grants for school building construction are set forth in Chapter 173 of the General Statutes. The initial application shall be completed at the time the preliminary plans and specifications have been approved. In accordance with Section 10-283 of the General Statutes, application for school construction grants must be made by the Superintendent of Schools. 
B.  Caveat: To qualify for State grants for school building construction, the provisions of Chapter 173 of the General Statutes, the corresponding Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies (Section 10-287c-1 et. seq.) and the State's School Construction Guidelines For Schools Districts and Design Professionals (each as amended from time to time) must be followed. 
C.  If state grants are available for other public buildings, the application shall be submitted at the time of completion of preliminary plans to insure compliance of the final plans to the grant requirements. 
8.  Federal Aid 
A.  If federal aid is to be sought for any public building construction, the building committee shall assume responsibility for compliance of the preliminary plans to the appropriate federal regulations. The Chairman of the building committee will normally be designated by the Town Council to proceed with the preparation of the proper documents and to represent these actions. 
9.  Construction 
A.  After the final plans have been approved, and sufficient appropriation made, the building committee shall enter such contract or contracts with a qualified party or parties for all or any portion of the construction effort with each and every party to be selected on the basis of competitive bidding. The sum of all such contract amounts entered into by the Town for the construction of a public building, including the cost of third party services selected, may not exceed the total of the appropriation approved for such purposes. 
B.  The construction shall be in accordance with the approved plans and shall be supervised either by the general contractor or by a construction manager employed by the building committee for that purpose. In the case of school buildings, it is essential under Section 10-291 of the General Statutes that the construction be in accordance with the plan approved by the Commissioner of Education if the project is to be eligible for State grants. 
C.  When construction is completed, the control of the project is relinquished by the building committee to the Town Council and the building committee discharged. 
10.  Conflict of Interest 
A.  It is most important that all activities of the members of a building committee related to its project always be viewed as being above reproach. In order to avoid any impropriety or the appearance of impropriety, all building committee members are to be guided by the following standards. 
B.  Applicability of Standards of Conduct for Public Officials, and Definitions 
In addition to the requirements set forth below, each member of a building committee shall comply with Town Council Policy No. 19 Revised, Standards of Conduct for Public Officials (the "Standards"). The capitalized words used in this Section 10 have the same meanings given them in Section II of the Standards. 
C.  Disclosure 
(1)  Each candidate for membership on a building committee shall (a) prior to appointment to such committee, be furnished with a copy of this section of the Procedure for Constructing Public Buildings, with a copy of the Standards, and with the required annual disclosure form; (b) acknowledge receipt of each to the Town Manager; and (c) file an annual disclosure statement with the Town Clerk as set forth in Section VI of the Standards. 
(2)  General: At each meeting of a building committee, it is incumbent upon each member present to disclose to the committee any interest or relationship of the member or the member's Spouse or Dependent that may constitute a Conflict of Interest under the Standards or a conflict to interest under this Section 10, including but not limited to any interest in or relationship to any person who or Business that may seek to obtain or may be in a position to obtain pecuniary benefit from the pursuit of the project by the committee. 
(3)  Pre-Award: Prior to any discussion at any meeting of a building committee of any bid(s) submitted to the building committee in connection with the project for which the building committee has been charged, the person presiding at such meeting shall inquire of the members present whether: 
(a)  such member has a Conflict of Interest under the Standards; 
(b)  such member or the member's Spouse or Dependent is employed by, or represents in any capacity or manner, any person who or Business that has submitted to any party a bid or quote relative to the project; and 
(c)  such member, the member's Spouse or Dependent, or a Business in which the member has an ownership interest of more than 1% has submitted to any party a bid or quote relative to the project. 
Any member answering such inquiry in the affirmative shall thereafter be ineligible to participate in any discussion or vote with respect to any and all bids. 
(4)  Post-Award: Prior to any discussion at any meeting of a building committee held subsequent to the Town's award of one or more bids with respect to the project for which the building committee has been charged, it is the obligation of each member present to inform the person presiding at such meeting if: 
(a)  such member has a Conflict of Interest under the Standards; 
(b)  such member or the member's Spouse or Dependent is employed by, or represents in any capacity or manner, any person who or Business that has been awarded one or more bids relative to the project; and 
(c)  such member, the member's Spouse or Dependent, or a Business in which the member has an ownership interest of more than 1% has been awarded one or more bids relative to the project. 
Any member answering such inquiry in the affirmative shall be ineligible to continue to serve as a member of such committee and shall forthwith resign from such committee. 
D.  Town Manager Determination 
In the event a member of or a building committee is undecided whether or not a Conflict of Interest under the Standards or a conflict of interest under this Section 10 exists with respect to the project for which the building committee has been charged, the member or the committee may request the Town Manager to seek an advisory opinion in accordance with Section V.A. of the Standards. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Community Aid to Special NO. 14 Events and Projects DATE: September 28, 1983  
Because the Town staff is faced with requests to provide in-kind services and equipment for certain events and affairs and because this type of service and equipment is necessary to bring about a successful conclusion to an event, the Town Council hereby adopts the following policy: 
The Town Manager is hereby authorized to cooperate with civic groups, town groups and agencies in their endeavors, and, if necessary, approve use of Town staff and equipment within the limitation of manpower and equipment available, for a Town function, event, etc., after notification to the Town Council of useage [usage]. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Mailboxes 
Damaged by Town Snowplows NO. 15 DATE: August 15, 1984 REVISED: August 5, 1993 REVISED: May 8, 1997 REVISED: April 5, 2007  
In order to provide fair and uniform resolutions to disputes involving mailboxes damaged by Town snowplows, the Avon Town Council approves the following policy concerning mailboxes. 
A.  All mailboxes should be securely fastened to a sturdy post which is sufficiently anchored in the ground to resist the impact of plowed snow. Information on proper installations is available at the Town Hall. 
B.  In accordance with current postal regulations, the mailbox should be nine inches from the curb or edge of pavement in order to prevent contact by the plow itself. 
C.  If a mailbox is struck by a Town snowplow, the Town will reimburse the owner an amount not to exceed $65.00 for the post and an amount not to exceed $20.00 for the box for a total of $85.00, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works. Payment will not include cost other than materials and will not cover the cost of decorative wood or metal posts, or decorative boxes. 
D.  No box or post will be repaired or replaced if the post shows dry rot or is otherwise unstable. 
E.  The Town Manager or designated representative is authorized to use reasonable discretion in resolving disputes involving unusual circumstances. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Tax Refunds NO. 16 DATE: January 7, 1999  
It shall be the policy of the Town Council to follow the following procedure regarding Tax Refunds. 
The Town Council authorizes the Town Manager, based upon the recommendation of the Tax Collector, to approve tax refunds, in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00, however, any excess tax payments in amounts less than $5.00 will be in accordance with Ordinance 66. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Program of Property Tax Relief for NO: 17 Certain Elderly and Disabled Residents DATE: October 7, 1999 AMENDED: April 5, 2001 AMENDED: December 1, 2001 AMENDED: October 2, 2003 AMENDED: March 3, 2005 AMENDED: May 3, 2007 AMENDED: February 4, 2010 AMENDED: November 3, 2014  
    Purpose. The purpose of this program is to provide a real property tax credit for certain elderly and disabled Avon residents who are not eligible for the tax credit provided by the State of Connecticut under its elderly and totally disabled property tax relief program because their incomes exceed the qualifying income levels under that program. The program is enacted pursuant to the option provided to municipalities under Section 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes. Because of concerns as to the cost and effectiveness of the program the program will automatically expire after two years in the absence of a vote by the Town Council to extend it. 
    Eligibility. To be eligible for the tax credit an Avon taxpayer must meet the eligibility requirements of Section 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes, as they may be amended from time to time, and the maximum income levels established by the Town for the applicable calendar year. Tax credits shall first be effective for property on the Town's October 1, 1999, Grand List. 
    Determination of Maximum Income Levels. The Town Council, with the approval of the Board of Finance, is authorized to establish the maximum income levels that will be allowable for the calendar year in which the program becomes effective and to amend those maximum income levels, upon recommendation of the Board of Finance, from time to time. 
    Administration. The Avon Town Assessor shall adopt such rules, regulations and procedures as deemed necessary or appropriate for the purpose of implementing and administering this tax-credit program. 
    Effective Date. This program shall first become effective for taxes due on the October 1, 1999, Grand List. 
    Expiration of Program. Unless extended by a vote of the Town Council, the program shall automatically expire as of the Grand List of October 1, 2011. 
Editor's note- This program has been subsequently extended. 
ADDITIONAL BENEFIT 
HOMEOWNERS TAX RELIEF-TOWN PROGRAM 
INCOME TOWN BENEFIT $0-$17,300 $900 (+State Benefit) $17,300-$23,200 $900 (+State Benefit) $23,200-$29,000 $900 (+State Benefit) $29,000-$34,600 $600 (+State Benefit) $34,600-$42,200 $600 (+State Benefit) $34,600-$42,200 $600 Unmarried $42,201-$50,000 $845 Married $570 Unmarried $50,001-$55,000 $545 Married $430 Unmarried  
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICY 
SUBJECT: Department of Finance No: 18 Investment Policy Dated: October 30, 2000 Approved: November 2, 2000  

1.0. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of the investment policy is to establish the goals of the Town with respect to investing its funds, to establish parameters within which to achieve those goals, and provide guidance to town officials in making decisions to meet those goals. 
2.0. - Scope. 
    This investment policy applies to the investment of the following funds of the Town of Avon. These funds are accounted for in the Town of Avon's Comprehensive Annual Financial Report and include: 
    2.1 Funds. 
    2.1.1 General Fund; 
    2.1.2 Special Revenue Funds; 
    2.1.3 Capital Projects Funds (Bonded Funds); 
    2.1.4 Enterprise Funds; 
    2.1.5 Trust and Agency Funds; 
    2.1.6 Any new fund created by the Town Council, unless specifically exempted. Funds subject to the Policy are hereafter referred to as the "Funds." 
The following funds are excluded from this policy: 
    2.1.7 Retirement/Pension Funds. This policy does not cover the financial assets of the Town of Avon Employees Pension Retirement Plan. There is a separate investment policy which governs these assets. 
3.0. - Prudence. 
    The Town's investment officials shall invest the funds in accordance with, and be subject to the "prudent person" standard. The prudent person standard shall include the obligation of such officials to report deviations from expectations, including significant market price changes, immediately to the Manager, and in writing to the Council in a timely fashion so that appropriate action can be taken to control adverse developments. 
4.0. - Investment objectives. 
    The primary objectives, in priority order, of the Town of Avon's investment shall be: 
    4.1. Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the investment program. Investments of the Town of Avon shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to insure the preservation of capital in the portfolio. Safety will be achieved by investing in only permitted investments, for such term, through a diversified portfolio, as set forth in this policy. 
For each fund subject to this policy, the Finance Office shall prepare a projected cash flow for the period ending no earlier then the close of the then current fiscal year, which will be updated periodically. 
    4.2. Liquidity. The Town of Avon's investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the Town to meet all reasonably anticipated operating expense requirements. 
The investment officer shall ensure that investments mature at such times and amounts, or are otherwise available in the form of same day available, liquid funds so as to meet the projected cash flow requirements, and a reasonable reserve of not less than one-twelfth of budgeted expenditures for the then current fiscal year. 
No single investment shall have a maturity in excess of five years unless approved by the Council. 
    4.3. Yield. The Town of Avon's investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return, taking into account the Town's investment risk constraints, liquidity needs and permitted investments. 
5.0. - Delegation of authority. 
    The Director of Finance subject to the approval of the Treasurer and Town Manager, shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with this investment policy. Procedures should include references to custody, repurchase, wire transfer, and bank security agreements, banking service contracts, include the implementation of such transactions and reporting requirements. Such procedures shall include specific delegation of authority to persons for specific aspects of investment transactions. No person may engage in an investment transaction or aspect thereof except as provided under the terms of this policy and the procedures established by such approved policy. The Director of Finance shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of subordinate officials. 
6.0. - Ethics and conflicts of interest. 
    Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall not engage in personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. Employees and investment officials shall disclose in writing to the Treasurer (the Treasurer shall disclose to the Council) any material financial interests of themselves or their immediate families in financial institutions that conduct investment business with the Town of Avon. The payment of any commission, fee or thing of value to an officer or employee or a member of their family for making the investment or based upon its performance shall constitute a conflict of interest. Employees and officers shall not undertake personal investment transactions with the same individual with whom business is conducted on behalf of the Town of Avon. 
7.0. - Authorized financial dealers and institutions. 
    Investment officials may select from time to time financial institutions and broker/dealers to provide investment services, including advice or investments. A current list identifying the approved financial institutions and broker/dealers and investment advisors approved for use by the Town shall be maintained and provided to the Town Council whenever revised. Security broker/dealers must be authorized to provide investment services in the State of Connecticut. The primary selection criteria worthiness. These may include "primary" dealers, regional dealers that qualify under Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c3-1 (uniform net capital rule). No public deposit shall be made except in a qualified public depository as defined by Section 36a-330 of the General Statutes, or in an amount not exceeding FDIC insurance as provided in Section 7-402 of the General Statutes. 
    All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire to become qualified bidders for investment transactions must supply the following: 
(1)  Current audited financial statements; 
(2)  Proof of National Association of Securities Dealers certification; 
(3)  Trading resolution; 
(4)  Proof of Connecticut State registration; and 
(5)  Certification of having read and understood the municipality's investment policy. 
    Not less than frequently then annually, the financial condition and registrations of qualified bidders will be reviewed by the Director of Finance. 
    A current audited financial statement is required to be on file for each financial institution and broker/dealer in which the Town invests. 
    All repurchase agreement transactions will be conducted through primary dealers of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and qualified banks (as defined in Section 8.0) which have executed master repurchase agreements with the municipality. 
8.0. - Authorized and suitable investments. 
    All investments must be authorized by CGS 7-400 through 7-402 and 3-27a through 3-27d, and, in addition: 
    8.1.1 If total deposits, including certificates of deposits, exceed $100,000.00, the financial institution's long-term debt must be rated at least A-1 by Stand [Standard] and Poors and rated C by Thomson Bank Watch and its short-term debt must be rated at least A-1 by Standard and Poors and TBW-1 By Thomson Bank Watch, or its total risk-based capital ratio must exceed ten percent, and the Town must have an executed security agreement with the financial institution that is in compliance with the Federal Institution Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA). 
    8.1.2 Fully-collateralized repurchase agreements with primary dealers of the Federal Reserve or qualified public depositories, with possession of collateral by a third-party custodian bank, (unless prevailing practices amongst institutions do not provide for third-party collateral possession) for overnight, weekend or holiday investment is permitted. Collateral must consist of obligations of the U.S. government or its agencies. Reverse repurchase agreements are not permitted under this policy. 
    8.1.3 Investments in shares of investment companies or trust with fluctuating net asset values, while permitted by CGS7-400, are not permitted under this short-term investment policy. 
    8.2 No investments may be made in "derivative" securities, such as futures, swaps, options, inverse floaters, CMT floaters, leveraged floaters, dual index floaters, COFI floaters, and range floaters. These types of securities can experience high price volatility with changing market conditions, and their market values may not return to par even at the time of an interest rate adjustment. 
    Provided they are otherwise permitted by law, investments may be made in adjustable or variable rate securities whose interest rates move in the same direction as standard short-term money market interest rate benchmarks, such as LIBOR, 90-day Treasury bills, one-month commercial paper and the prime rate, and conform with other investment guidelines of the municipality, pool or fund. The values of these securities tend to return to par upon the scheduled adjustment of interest rates. Some parties in the financial services industry considers these types of adjustable rate securities to be derivatives, other do not. 
    8.3 All investments must be make [made] in U.S. dollar-denominated securities. 
    8.4 The provision of this section shall not prohibit the Town from making an investment (for example in money market, pooled or mutual funds) which meets the criteria as an investment permitted to be acquired by Connecticut municipalities pursuant to the above referenced statutes. 
9.0. - Safekeeping and custody. 
    All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements, entered into by the Town shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment (DVP) basis. Securities will be held by a third party custodian as evidenced by safekeeping receipts. 
10.0. - Diversification. 
    The Town will diversify its investments by security type and institution. With the exception of U.S. Treasury securities and authorized pools, the Town officials shall have as a goal that no more than 50 percent of the Town's total investment portfolio will be invested with a single financial institution, except for sweep account purposes. The goal may be exceeded where, in the judgment of the officials, the excess percentage will be divested upon the maturity of outstanding investments within one-month period, and reinvested so as to meet the 50% goal. 
11.0. - Internal controls. 
    The Director of Finance shall establish and maintain a system of internal controls, which shall be designed to prevent and control losses of public funds arising from fraud, employee error, misrepresentation by third parties, or imprudent actions by employees and officers. 
12.0. - Reports. 
    Regular periodic reports summarizing the investment portfolio by security types and maturities shall be provided to the Town Manager. A detailed portfolio listing, including cost and market valuations and maturities, as well as any narrative necessary for clarification. 
13.0. - Investment Policy Adoption. 
    The Town's investment policy shall be adopted by resolution of the Town Council. The policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis and any modifications made thereto must be approved by the Town Council. 
    Any investment held at the time of this policy's adoption that does not conform with the policy shall be exempted from the requirements of the policy. At maturity or liquidation, all monies shall be reinvested only as provided by this policy. 
GLOSSARY 
The following is a glossary of key investing terms, many of which appear in the Town of Avon Investment Policy. 
This glossary has been adapted from an article, entitled "Investment terms for everyday use," that appeared in the April 5, 1996 issue of Public Investor. GFOA'S subscription investment newsletter. 
Accrued interest. The accumulated interest due on a bond as of the last interest payment made by the issuer. 
Agency. A debt security issued by federally sponsored agency. Federal agencies are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. Government. Federally sponsored agencies (FSA) are backed by each particular agency with a market perception that there is an implicit government guarantee. An example of federal agency is the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA). An example of a FSA is the Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA). 
Amortization . The systematic reduction of the amount owed on a debt issue through periodic payments of principal. 
Average life. The average length of time that an issue of serial bonds and/or term bonds with a mandatory sinking fund feature is expected to be outstanding. 
Basis point. A unit of measurement used in the valuation of fixed-income securities equal to 1/100 of 1 percent of yield, e.g., "1/4" of 1 percent is equal to 25 basis points. 
Bid. The indicated price at which a buyer is willing to purchase a security or commodity. 
Book value. The value at which a security is carried on the inventory lists or other financial records of an investor. The book value may differ significantly from the security's current value in the market. 
Callable bond . A bond issue in which all or part of its outstanding principal amount may be redeemed before maturity by the issuer under specified conditions. 
Call price. The price at which an issuer may redeem a bond prior to maturity. The price is usually at a slight premium to the bond's original issue price to compensate the holder for loss of income and ownership. 
Call risk. The risk to a bondholder that a bond may be redeemed prior to maturity. 
Cash sale/purchase. A transaction which calls for delivery and payment of securities on the same day that the transaction is initiated. 
Collateralization. Process by which a borrower pledges securities, property, or other deposits for the purpose of securing the repayment of a loan and/or security. 
Commercial paper. An unsecured short-term promissory note issued by corporations, with maturities ranging from two to 270 days. 
Convexity. A measure of bond's price sensitivity to changing interest rates. A high convexity indicates greater sensitivity of a bond's price to interest rate changes. 
Coupon rate. The annual rate of interest received by an investor from the issuer of certain types of fixed-income securities. Also known as the "interest rate". 
Credit quality. The measurement of the financial strength of a bond issuer. This measurement helps an investor to understand an issuer's ability to make timely interest payments and repay the loan principal upon maturity. Generally, the higher the credit quality of a bond issuer, the lower the interest rate paid by the issuer because the risk of default is lower. Credit quality ratings are provided by nationally recognized rating agencies. 
Credit risk. The risk to an investor that an issuer will default in payment of interest and/or principal on security. 
Current yield (current return). A yield calculation determined by dividing the annual interest received on a security by the current market price of that security. 
Delivery Versus Payment (DVP) . A type of securities transaction in which the purchaser pays for the securities when they are delivered either to the purchaser or his/her custodian. 
Derivative security. Financial instrument created from, or whose value depends upon, one or more underlying assets or indexes of asset values. 
Discount. The amount by which the par value of a security exceeds the price paid for the security. 
Diversification. A process investing assets among a range of security types of sector, maturity, and quality rating. 
Duration. A measure of the timing of the cash flows, such as the interest payments and the principal repayment, to be received from a given fixed-income security. This calculation is based on three variables: term to maturity, coupon rate, and yield to maturity. The duration of a security is a useful indicator of its price volatility for given changes in interest rates. 
Fair value. The amount at which an investment could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation sale. 
Federal Funds (Fed Funds). Funds placed in Federal Reserve Banks by depository institutions in excess of current reserve requirements. These depository institutions may lend Fed Funds to each other overnight or on a longer basis. They may also transfer funds among each other on a same-day basis through the Federal Reserve banking system. Fed Funds are considered to be immediately available funds. 
Federal Funds Rate. Interest rate charged by one institution lending federal funds to the other. 
Government securities. An obligation of the U.S. Government, backed by the full faith and credit of the government. These securities are regarded as the highest quality of investment securities available in the U.S. securities market. See "Treasury Bills, Notes and Bonds". 
Interest rate. See "coupon rate". 
Interest rate risk. The risk associated with declines or rises in interest rates which causes an investment in fixed-income security to increase or decrease in value. 
Internal controls. An internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the entity are protected from loss, theft, or misuse. The internal control structure is designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The concept of reasonable assurance recognized that 1.) The costs of a control should not exceed the benefits likely to be derived, and 2.) The valuation of costs and benefits requires estimates and judgments by management. Internal controls should address the following points: 
1.  Control of collusion. Collusion is a situation where two or more employees are working in conjunction to defraud their employer. 
2.  Separation of transaction authority from accounting record keeping. By separating the person who authorizes or performs the transaction from the people who record or otherwise account for the transaction, a separation of duties is achieved. 
3.  Custodial safekeeping. Securities purchased from any bank or dealer including appropriate collateral (as defined by state law) shall be placed with an independent third party for custodial safekeeping. 
4.  Avoidance of physical delivery securities. Book-entry securities are much easier to transfer and account for since actual delivery of a document never takes place. Delivered securities must be properly safeguarded against loss or destruction. The potential for fraud and loss increases with physically delivered securities. 
5.  Clear delegation of authority to subordinate staff members. Subordinate staff members mush [must] have a clear understanding of their authority and responsibilities to avoid improper actions. Clear delegation of authority also preserves the internal control structure that is contingent on the various staff positions and their respective responsibilities. 
6.  Written confirmation of transactions for investments and wire transfers. Due to the potential for error and improprieties arising from telephone and electronic transactions, all transactions should be supported by written communications and approved by the appropriate person. Written communications may be via fax if on letterhead and if the safekeeping institution has a list of authorized signatures. 
7.  Development of a wire transfer agreement with the lead bank & third-party custodian. The designated official should ensure that an agreement will be entered into and will address the following points: controls, security provisions, and responsibilities of each party making and receiving wire transfers. 
Inverted yield curve. A chart formation that illustrates long-term securities having lower yields than short-term securities. This configuration usually occurs during periods of high inflation coupled with low levels of confidence in the economy and a restrictive monetary policy. 
Investment Company Act of 1940. Federal legislation which sets the standards by which investment companies, such as mutual funds, are regulated in the areas of advertising, promotion, performance reporting requirements, and securities valuations. 
Investment policy. A concise and clear statement of the objectives and parameters formulated by an investor or investment manager for a portfolio of investment securities. 
Investment-grade obligations. An investment instrument suitable for purchase by institutional investors under the prudent person rule. Investment-grade is restricted to those obligations rated BBB or higher by a rating agency. 
Liquidity. An asset that can be converted easily and quickly into cash. 
Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP). An investment by local governments in which their money is pooled as method for managing local funds. 
Mark-to-market. The process whereby the book value or collateral value of a security is adjusted to reflect its current market value. 
Market risk. The risk that the value of a security will rise or decline as a result of changes in market conditions. 
Market value. Current market price of security. 
Maturity. The date on which payment of a financial obligation is due. The final stated maturity is the date on which is the issuer must retire a bond and pay the face value to the bondholder. See "weighted average maturity". 
Money market mutual fund. Mutual funds that invest solely in money market instruments (short-term debt instruments such as Treasury bills, commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, repos and federal funds). 
Mutual fund. An investment company that pools money and can invest in a variety of securities, including fixed-income securities and money market instruments. Mutual funds are regulated by the Investment Company Act of 1940 and must abide by the following Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) disclosure guidelines: 
1.  Report standardized performance calculations. 
2.  Disseminate timely and accurate information regarding the fund's holdings, performance, management and general investment policy. 
3.  Have the fund's investment policies and activities supervised by a board of trustees, which are independent of the adviser, administrator or other vendor of the fund. 
4.  Maintain the daily liquidity of the fund's shares. 
5.  Value their portfolios on a daily basis. 
6.  Have all individuals who sells [sell] SEC-registered products licensed with a self-regulating organization (SRO) such as the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD). 
7.  Have an investment policy governed by a prospectus which is updated and filed by the SEC annually. 
Mutual Fund Statistical Services. Companies that track and rate mutual funds, e.g., IBC/Donaghue, Lipper Analytical Services, and Morningstar. 
National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD). A self-regulatory organization (SRO) of brokers and dealers in the over-the counter securities business. Its' regulatory mandate includes authority over firms that distribute mutual fund shares as well as other securities. 
Net asset value. The market value of one share of an investment company, such as a mutual fund. This figure is calculated by totaling a fund's assets which includes securities, cash and any accrued earnings, subtracting this fund's liabilities and dividing this total by the number of shares outstanding. This is calculated once a day based on the closing price for each security in the fund's portfolio. (See below). 
[(Total assets) - (Liabilities)]/(Number of shares outstanding) 
No load fund. A mutual fund which does not levy a sales charge on the purchase of its shares. 
Nominal yield. The stated rate of interest that a bond pays its current owner, based on par value of the security. It is also known as the "coupon," "coupon rate," or "interest rate". 
Offer. An indicated price at which market participants are willing to sell a security or commodity. Also referred to as the "ask price". 
Par. Face value or principal value of a bond, typically $1,000.00 per bond. 
Positive yield curve. A chart formation that illustrates short-term securities having lower yields than long-term securities. 
Premium. The amount by which the price paid for a security exceeds the security's par value. 
Prime rate. A preferred interest rate charged by commercial banks to their most creditworthy customers. Many interest rates are keyed to this rate. 
Principal. The face value or par value of a debt instrument. Also may refer to the amount of capital invested in a given security. 
Prospectus. A legal document that must be provided to any prospective purchaser of a new securities offering registered with the SEC. This can include information on the issuer, the issuer's business, the proposed use of proceeds, the experience of the issuer's management, and certain certified financial statements. 
Prudent person rule. An investment standard outlining the fiduciary responsibilities of public funds investors relating to investment practices. 
Regular way delivery. Securities settlement that calls for delivery and payment on the third business day following the trade date (T+3); payment on a T+1 basis is currently under consideration. Mutual funds are settled on a same day basis; government securities are settled on the next business day. 
Reinvestment risk. The risk that a fixed-income investor will be unable to reinvest income proceeds from a security holding at the same rate of return currently generated by that holding. 
Repurchase agreement (repo or RP). An agreement of one party to sell securities at a specified price to second party and a simultaneous agreement of the first party to repurchase the securities at a specified price or at a specified later date. 
Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act. Applies to all money market mutual funds and mandates such funds to maintain certain standards, including a 13-month maturity limit and a 90 day average maturity on investments, to help maintain a constant net asset value of $1.00. 
Safekeeping. Holding of assets (e.g., securities) by a financial institution. 
Serial bond. A bond issue, usually of a municipality, with various maturity dates scheduled at regular intervals until the entire issue is retired. 
Sinking fund. Money accumulated on a regular basis in a separate custodial account that is used to redeem debt securities or preferred stock issues. 
Swap. Trading one asset for another. 
Term bond. Bonds comprising a large part or all of a particular issue which come due in a single maturity. The issuer usually agrees to make periodic payments into a sinking fund for mandatory redemption of term bonds before maturity. 
Total return. The sum of all investment income plus changes in the capital value of the portfolio. For mutual funds, return on an investment is composed of share price appreciation plus any realized dividends or capital gains. This is calculated by taking the following components during a certain time period. (See below) 
(Price Appreciation) + (Dividends paid) + (Capital gains) = Total Return 
Treasury bills. Short-term, U.S. government, non-interest bearing debt securities with maturities of no longer than one year and issued in minimum denominations of $10,000.00. Auctions of three and six-month bills are weekly, while actions of one-year bills are monthly. The yields on these bills are monitored closely in the money markets for signs of interest rate trends. 
Treasury notes. Intermediate U.S. government debt securities with maturities of one to ten years and issued in denominations ranging from $1,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 or more. 
Treasury bonds. Long-term, U.S. government debt securities with maturities of ten years or longer and issued in minimum denominations of $1,000.00. Currently, the longest outstanding maturity for such securities is 30 years. 
Uniform net capital rule. SEC Rule 15c3-1 outlining capital requirements for broker/dealers. 
Volatility. A degree of fluctuation in the price and valuation of securities. 
Volatility risk rating. A rating system to clearly indicate the level of volatility and other non-credit risks associated with securities and certain bond funds. The ratings for bond funds range from those that have extremely low sensitivity to changing market conditions and offer the greatest stability of the returns ("AAA" by S&P, "V-1" by Fitch) to those that are highly sensitive with currently identifiable market volatility risk ("CCC" by S&P, "V-10" by Fitch). 
Weighted Average Maturity (WAM). The average maturity of all the securities that comprise a portfolio. According to SEC rule 2a-7, the WAM for SEC registered money market mutual funds may not exceed 90 days and no one security may have a maturity that exceeds 397 days. 
When issued (WI). A conditional transaction in which an authorized new security has not been issued. All "when issued" transactions are settled when the actual security is issued. 
Yield. The current rate of return on an investment security generally expressed as a percentage of the security's current price. 
Yield-to-call (YTC). The rate of return an investor earns from a bond assuming the bond is redeemed (called) prior to its nominal maturity date. 
Yield curve. A graphic representation that depicts the relationship at a given point in time between yields and maturity for bonds that are identical in every way except maturity. A normal yield curve may be alternatively referred to as a positive yield curve. 
Yield-to-maturity. The rate of return yielded by a debt security held to maturity when both interest payments and investor's potential capital gain or loss are included in the calculation of return. 
Zero-coupon securities. Security that is issued at a discount and makes no periodic interest payments. The rate of return consists of a gradual accretion of the principal of the security and is payable at par upon maturity. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICIES 
SUBJECT: Standards of Conduct for No: 19 Public Officials Date: April 5, 2001 Revised: November 11, 2009 Revised March 5, 2015  
I.  Declaration of Policy 
    The Town Council and the Board of Education of the Town of Avon deem it to be in the best interests of the Town and its citizens that all elected and appointed officials of the Town, the Board of Education, and all commissions, committees, authorities and other governmental entities of the Town and the Board of Education be independent, impartial and responsible, that public office not be used for personal gain, and that citizens have confidence in the integrity of their government. In recognition of these goals, the Town Council has adopted these standards of conduct. 
    These standards of conduct supplement restrictions that are contained in the Town Charter and in Connecticut law and do not preclude the adoption of additional restrictions or guidelines by other Municipal Entities. Employees of the Town or Board of Education who are not covered by these standards of conduct shall be subject to appropriate standards set forth in the personnel rules of the Town and Board of Education. 
II.  Definitions 
    The following definitions shall apply to these standards of conduct. 
A.  "Board Entity" is defined as the Avon Board of Education and any other commission, committee, authority or governmental entity of the Board of Education. 
B.  "Business" is defined as a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or any other person or entity that operates on a for-profit or not-for-profit basis. 
C.  "Conflict of Interest" is defined as an interest or relationship of a Public Official that has resulted or may result in a violation of these standards of conduct or the standards of conduct or conflict-of-interest rules of the State of Connecticut, the Town Charter or any Municipal Entity. 
D.  "Dependent" is defined as (i) a person under the age of eighteen who resides with a Public Official or (ii) a person who would qualify as a dependent on a federal income tax return. 
E.  "Gift" is defined as anything of value given or paid to a Public Official, except: 
1.  A non-pecuniary gift of nominal value; 
2.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
3.  Meals, accommodations and/or registration or entrance fees in connection with meetings or events in which the Public Official participates in his or her official capacity; 
4.  A gift that would have been offered or given even if the recipient were not a Public Official; 
5.  A political contribution otherwise reported as required by law; or 
6.  Food and beverages consumed on a single occasion. 
F.  "Municipal Entity" is defined as a Town Entity or a Board Entity. 
G.  "Public Official" is defined as (i) the Town Manager, the Superintendent of Schools and the Town Treasurer, (ii) any person elected by the voters who serves without compensation on a Municipal Entity, and (iii) any person appointed by the Town Council or Board of Education who serves without compensation on a Municipal Entity. 
H.  "Spouse" is defined as a person to whom a Public Official is related by marriage, civil union or domestic partnership. 
I.  "Town Entity" is defined as the Town Council, the Board of Finance, the Board of Assessment Appeals, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Building Code Board of Appeals, the Water Pollution Control Authority, the Inland Wetlands Commission, and any other commission, committee, authority and governmental entity of the Town with the exception of a Board Entity. 
III.  Prohibited Activities 
A.  Gifts to Officials. No Public Official shall solicit or accept a Gift from any person or entity that is interested in a matter pending, or anticipated to become pending, before the Public Official or a Municipal Entity of which the Public Official is a member. 
B.  Contracts with Town or Board of Education. No Public Official and no Business in which a Public Official has an ownership interest of more than 1% may provide, or contract to provide, goods or services to any Municipal Entity in exchange for payment or other consideration. 
This restriction shall remain in effect for one year following the termination of office of a Public Official. 
C.  Disqualification of Officials. Except as qualified below, no Public Official shall vote, otherwise participate on behalf of a Municipal Entity or communicate with another Public Official or employee of the Town or Board of Education concerning any matter or proceeding in which the Public Official has a Disqualifying Interest. For purposes of this provision, a "Disqualifying Interest" is defined as: 
1.  A personal or financial interest of a Public Official or of the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official; 
2.  The financial interest of a Business of which the Public Official or the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official is an officer or director, or in which the Public Official or the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official has a financial interest (other than a less than 1% equity interest in a company whose shares or other units of equity are publicly traded); 
provided, however, that: 
3.  A Public Official may participate in a matter involving a determination of general policy if the Disqualifying Interest of the official is shared with a substantial segment of the population of the Town; and 
4.  A Public Official may participate in matters affecting the nature and level of compensation and benefits programs generally applicable to officials or employees of the Town or the Board of Education. 
If participation in a prohibited matter or proceeding would otherwise come within the scope of the Public Official's official responsibility, the official shall, in addition to declining to participate, disclose the nature and extent of his or her Disqualifying Interest to the applicable Municipal Entity, and the disclosure shall be reflected in the minutes of the meeting of the Municipal Entity at which the disclosure is presented. 
D.  Confidential Information. No Public Official may use confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the Town or Board of Education to advance his or her personal or financial interests or the personal of financial interests of the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official, and, except as required by law, no Public Official may, without proper authorization, disclose such confidential information to unauthorized persons. 
E.  Appearance by a Public Official before a Municipal Entity of Which the Official is a Member. No Public Official may appear on his or her own behalf or on behalf of any other person or entity before a Municipal Entity of which the Public Official is a member. 
F.  Appearance by a Compensated Public Official before a Municipal Entity. No Public Official who receives compensation for services to the Town may appear on behalf of a private interest (other than his or her own interest or the interest of a member of the official's immediate family) before any Municipal Entity. 
G.  Representation of a Person or Entity by a Public Official. No Public Official (or, if the official is an attorney, no attorney within the law firm of the Public Official) may for compensation represent or advise a person or entity with respect to a matter that is pending or is expected to be pending in the future before a Municipal Entity of which the Public Official is a member. 
H.  Prohibition against Employment. 
1.  No Public Official of a Town Entity and no Spouse or Dependent of that Public Official may be employed in any capacity by a Town Entity in a circumstance in which the Public Official could exercise direct authority or supervisory control over the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official. No Public Official of a Board Entity and no Spouse or Dependent of that Public Official may be employed in any capacity by a Board Entity in a circumstance in which the Public Official could exercise direct authority or supervisory control over the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official. The prohibitions in this subsection H.1. shall not apply to instances where (a) both the Public Official and the Spouse or Dependent have been elected to offices established by state statute, or (b) the Spouse or Dependent is a part-time employee compensated at less than $2,500 per year or a temporary or seasonal employee. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, including Section H.1, above, the Spouse or Dependent of the Town Manager, the Town Treasurer or any member of the Town Council or the Board of Finance may not be employed in any capacity by a Town Entity. 
IV. Avon Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. 
    It is the finding of the Town Council that the Avon Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. is not under the "jurisdiction" of the Town or any Municipal Entity for purposes of Section 11.1.3 of the Avon Town Charter. 
V. Advisory Opinions and Complaints 
A.  Advisory Opinion. Upon the request of a person who is either a resident of the Town or is liable to the Town for taxes on the most recent Grand List or upon its own initiative, the Town Council, the Board of Education, the Town Manager or the Superintendent of Schools may request an advisory opinion from the Town Attorney concerning a possible Conflict of Interest. 
B.  Complaints as to a Possible Conflict with Respect to Town Officials. 
1.  Any person who is either a resident of the Town or is liable to the Town for taxes on the most recent Grand List may file a complaint with the Town Manager alleging that a Public Official of a Town Entity has acted with a Conflict of Interest. Upon receiving a complaint, the Town Manager shall undertake a preliminary investigation of the complaint and shall determine whether there is prima facie evidence that a Conflict of Interest may have occurred. In undertaking the investigation, the Town Manager shall consult with the Public Official who is the subject of the complaint and may request the assistance of the Town Attorney and such other persons as he or she deems necessary. If the Town Manager does not find that there is prima facie evidence that a Conflict of Interest has occurred, he or she shall so inform the complainant. If the resident elector does not agree with the decision of the Town Manager, he or she may submit the complaint to the Town Council. If the Town Council agrees with the decision of the Town Manager that there is no prima facie evidence that a Conflict of Interest has occurred, the complainant shall be so informed and no further action shall be taken by the Town. 
2.  If the Town Manager or the Town Council, as applicable, finds that there is prima facie evidence that a Conflict of Interest has occurred, the Town Council shall with the assistance of the Town Attorney determine whether a Conflict of Interest has occurred utilizing the same procedures as are set forth in Section 11.4.4 of the Town Charter. 
3.  If the Town Council determines that a Conflict of Interest has occurred, the Town Council shall issue a written finding concerning the Conflict of Interest. If the Public Official was appointed by the Town Council, the Town Council may remove the Public Official from that office if it finds the violation to have been serious. 
C.  Complaints as to a Possible Conflict with Respect to Board Officials. 
1.  Any person who is either a resident of the Town or is liable to the Town for taxes on the most recent Grand List may file a complaint with the Superintendent of Schools alleging that a Public Official of a Board Entity has acted with a Conflict of Interest. Upon receiving a complaint, the Superintendent of Schools shall undertake a preliminary investigation of the complaint and shall determine whether there is prima facie evidence that a Conflict of Interest may have occurred. In undertaking the investigation, the Superintendent of Schools shall consult with the Public Official who is the subject of the complaint and may request the assistance of the Town Attorney and such other persons as he or she deems necessary. If the Superintendent of Schools does not find that there is prima facie evidence that a Conflict of Interest has occurred, he or she shall so inform the complainant. If the resident elector does not agree with the decision of the Superintendent of Schools, he or she may submit the complaint to the Board of Education. If the Board of Education agrees with the decision of the Superintendent of Schools that there is no prima facie evidence that a Conflict of Interest has occurred, the complainant shall be so informed and no further action shall be taken by the Board of Education. 
2.  If the Superintendent of Schools or the Board of Education, as applicable, finds that there is prima facie evidence that a Conflict of Interest has occurred, the Board of Education shall with the assistance of the Town Attorney determine whether a Conflict of Interest has occurred utilizing the same procedures as are set forth in Section 11.4.4 of the Town Charter. 
3.  If the Board of Education determines that a Conflict of Interest has occurred, the Board of Education shall issue a written finding concerning the Conflict of Interest. If the Public Official was appointed by the Board of Education, the Board of Education may remove the Public Official from that office if it finds the violation to have been serious. 
IV. Annual Disclosures of Public Officials 
    Within 30 days following his or her election or appointment and no less frequently than annually thereafter, every Public Official shall provide to the Town Clerk in writing the following information with respect to the Public Official: 
1.  The names and addresses of all Businesses in which the Public Official or the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official is a director, officer, owner, employee, compensated agent, or holder of stock that constitutes one percent or more of the total outstanding stock of any class. For purposes of this disclosure, a compensated agent shall be obligated to identify only those Businesses that individually, during the preceding 12 months, provided compensation to the agent that represented more than 20% of the agent's total gross income for that period. 
2.  The names and addresses of current employers and current position titles, and name and addresses of any other employer during the prior five years and the last position titles of the Public Official with any such prior employers. 
3.  The addresses of all real property located in the Town of Avon that is owned, in whole or in part, by the Public Official or the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official or held in the name of any trust or other entity for the benefit of the Public Official or the Spouse or Dependent of the Public Official. 
4.  Any lease or other contract with the Town of Avon or any Municipal Entity held or entered into by the Public Official. 
To the extent that a disclosure that is required under this Section VI would include information that is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, the Town shall, upon request, take appropriate steps to protect the information from public disclosure. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICIES 
SUBJECT: Electronic Communications between Town NO: 20 Staff and Boards or Commissions DATE: June 24, 2003  
Electronic communications between Town staff and Boards or Commissions may be transmitted per the choice of the individual board or commission member, via their personal or business computer systems. 
If electronic communication is hampered due to software or hardware issues, and that is the preferred mode of communication, the Town shall provide technical support or software to the individual, if so desired, with Board or Commission approval. Requests will also require Town Manager's approval. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICIES 
SUBJECT: Participation in Public Budget NO: 21 Hearings and/or Meetings DATE: June 24, 2003  
Participation in electronic presentations at budget public hearings shall be limited to Town staff or authorized representatives. 
Since participants would have to use their own electronic equipment, and due to time restrictions placed on audience participation, logistics prevents electronic communication from the audience. The audience can continue to participate verbally (within the time limit) or provide handouts to the public. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICIES 
SUBJECT: Recognition of 100th Birthdays NO: 22 DATE: March 31, 2008  
The Town Council, in recognition of the centenarian birthday of a twenty-five or more year resident of Avon will be presented on behalf of the Town Council and community a proclamation. An Avon resident who has resided in Avon less than twenty-five years will receive a congratulatory letter signed by the Chairman of the Town Council. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICIES 
SUBJECT: Debt Policy NO: 23 Approved by the Town Council DATE: May 1, 2008 Approved by the Board of Finance DATE: April 28, 2008  
1.  PURPOSE. The purpose of a debt policy is to establish parameters and guidance to make decisions on capital spending and issuance of debt as a means to fund them. in order to minimize debt service expenditures, the Town shall endeavor to take appropriate actions to maintain its "Aaa/AAA" credit rating from Moody's Investors Service, Inc. and Standard & Poor's, Inc., respectively. 
The foundation of any well-managed debt program is a comprehensive debt policy. In addition to the general parameters, this policy provides guidance to decision makers regarding the timing and purposes for which debt may be issued, types and amounts of permissible debt financing, methods of sale that may be used, and structural features that may be incorporated. 
Finally, this debt policy is the recognition of a binding commitment to full and timely repayment of all debt as an intrinsic requirement for entry into the capital markets. The policy helps to ensure that the Town maintains a sound debt position and that credit quality is protected. 
In summary, the main advantages of a formal debt policy are as follows: 
a.  Enhances the quality of decisions by imposing order and discipline, and promoting consistency and continuity in decision making. 
b.  Rationalizes the decision-making process. 
c.  Identifies objectives for staff to implement. 
d.  Demonstrates a commitment to long-term financial planning objectives. 
e.  Is regarded positively by the rating agencies in reviewing credit quality. 
2.  OBJECTIVES OF ISSUING DEBT. 
a.  The Town will finance capital projects through the issuance of debt for the shortest period practical but in any event not in excess of the anticipated useful life of the financed asset. 
b.  The Town will evaluate debt-funding scenarios as part of its annual Five-Year Capital Improvement Program process in order to prioritize future financing needs. 
The Town will attempt to minimize its reliance on long term debt to the extent consistent with its overall budgetary policies. 
3.  PURPOSES FOR WHICH DEBT MAY BE ISSUED. 
a.  The Town during emergency situations may issue debt to provide for emergency infrastructure repair or replacement. 
b.  The Town generally will only consider financing major capital improvements with a total cost exceeding $600,000.00 through the issuance of long-term debt. Such costs may include planning, design and land acquisition costs for such improvements. Total cost may be adjusted annually if less than one percent (1%) of the current tax levy. 
c.  The Town generally will only consider issuing debt to finance only those projects that have been included in the Five-Year Capital Improvement Program. It is recognized that certain projects for which debt financing should be considered may arise in such a manner that they can not be incorporated in the Five-Year Capital Improvement Program prior to financing, e.g., the coming to the market of a specific property which the Town desires to acquire for open space purposes. 
d.  The Town will not fund current operating expenditures through the issuance of debt (other than in connection with the issuance of tax anticipation notes.) 
4.  LEGAL LIMITATIONS. The Connecticut General Statutes (C.G.S. § 7-374) limit the aggregate amount of indebtedness the Town and its coterminous municipalities may have outstanding and the amount of indebtedness outstanding for particular purposes to various multiples of the total annual tax collections of the Town and its coterminous municipalities. The Town shall not incur indebtedness through the issuance of debt which shall cause aggregate indebtedness, or aggregate indebtedness by purpose, of the Town and its coterminous municipalities to exceed the following: 
a. Aggregate Debt: 7.00 times annual receipts from taxation b. General Purposes: 2.25 times annual receipts from taxation c. School Purposes: 4.50 times annual receipts from taxation d. Water Pollution Control Purposes: 3.75 times annual receipts from taxation e. Urban Renewal Purposes: 3.25 times annual receipts from taxation f. Past Pension Benefit Obligation: 3.00 times annual receipts from taxation  
In calculating the amount of indebtedness of the Town and its coterminous municipalities outstanding there shall be excluded: 
a.  TANs; 
b.  Utilities Financings; 
c.  Assessment Financings; 
d.  Grant Anticipation Financings; 
e.  Contract Revenue Anticipation Financings; 
f.  Water Pollution Control Abatement Order Financings; 
g.  Refunded Obligations. 
5.  TYPES OF DEBT PERMITTED TO BE ISSUED AND CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE. 
Types of Debt Obligations: 
a.  General Obligation (G.O.) Bond Anticipation Notes (BAN's); 
b.  Tax Anticipation Notes (TAN's)-Not Addressed by this Debt Policy; 
c.  Revenue Anticipation Notes (RAN's)-Not Addressed by this Debt Policy; 
d.  Lease Purchase Financing (also known as capital lease financing); 
e.  General Obligation (G.O.) Bonds; 
f.  Revenue Bonds or Special Assessment Bonds; 
g.  Conduit/Tax Increment Financing (TIF)-Not Addressed by this Debt Policy. 
Criteria for Issuance: 
a.  Short Term Debt. 
1.  General Obligation Bond Anticipation Notes: The Town may choose to issue bond anticipation notes as a source of interim financing when deemed prudent. Bond anticipation notes may also be used as a form of short-term permanent financing (generally up to eight years under the current statutes) by renewing the notes over a number of years and reducing the principal amount of notes on renewal. Before issuing such notes, the Town will direct the Town Manager and Director of Finance to contact the Town's Financial Advisor for consultation. Bond anticipation notes may be sold at either a competitive or negotiated sale or by private placement when in the best interest of the Town. 
2.  Tax Anticipation Notes: Not Addressed by this Debt Policy. 
3.  Revenue Anticipation Notes: Not Addressed by this Debt Policy. 
4.  Lease Purchase Financing: Generally, lease purchase financing, in contrast to a true lease, provides for the acquisition of the leased item. Lease purchase financing is appropriate for procuring assets that are too expensive to fund with current receipts in any one year, but with useful lives too short (less than 10 years) to finance with long-term debt. 
i.  Generally, lease purchase financing will be considered for assets that are "like items in the aggregate", that will be needed for only short periods of time, or which are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. 
ii.  Generally, lease purchase financing will not be considered for the purchase or construction of assets with a life expectancy of less than five years or a cost of less than $20,000.00. 
iii.  All lease purchase financings, whether for the Town or the Board of Education, shall require approval by the Town Council and the Board of Finance. As a matter of Federal tax law, tax-exempt lease purchase financings require the Town's approval as the Board of Education can not exercise the Town's borrowing power. 
iv.  Principal and interest payments on a lease purchase financing shall be included in the operating budget of the Town or of the Board of Education, based on the respective purpose of the lease purchase financing. The Board of Education shall enter into an agreement to that effect with respect to each lease purchase financing entered into by the Town for the benefit of the Board of Education. 
* Note that the above policies do not address true or operating leases. Pursuant to such leases the leased item is returned to the lessor at the end of the lease term. Provision for lease payments with respect to such leases should be incorporated into the annual operating budgets for the Town or Board of Education, as applicable. 
b.  Long Term Debt. 
1.  General Obligation (G.O.) Bonds: General obligation bonds (and general obligation BANs) are backed by the Town's pledge of its full faith and credit to pay interest and principal of the obligations. Unless paid from other sources, the bonds are payable from general property tax revenues. The Town has the power under Connecticut General Statutes to levy ad valorem taxes on all taxable property in the Town without limit as to rate or amount, except as to certain classified property such as certified forest land taxable at a limited rate and dwelling houses of qualified elderly persons of low income taxable at limited amounts. 
General obligation bonds should be used only to finance or refinance capital improvements and long-term assets, or other costs directly associated with financing of a project which has been determined to be beneficial to a significant proportion of the citizens of the Town and for which repayment sources, if any, have been identified. Bonding should be used only after considering alternative funding sources such as project revenues, Federal and State grants, and special assessments. 
2.  Revenue or Special Assessment Bonds: Not Addressed by this Debt Policy 
3.  Conduit/Tax Increment Financing (TIF): Not Addressed by this Debt Policy 
c.  Credit Enhancement: So long as the Town maintains it Aaa/AAA rating credit enhancement should not be required in connection with the issuance of its general obligation debt. 
6.  RESTRICTION/LIMITATIONS ON DEBT ISSUANCE. 
a.  Limitations on Issuance of G.O. Debt: This Policy prohibits issuing general obligation debt for current operations (other than in connection with the issuance of tax anticipation notes), enterprise activities, enterprise funds, vehicles/rolling stock, leased or lease purchased items. 
b.  Derivatives Prohibited: This Policy prohibits the issuance of any securities which would commonly be understood to be "derivative." 
7.  STRUCTURAL FEATURES OF DEBT. 
a.  Overview: The Town plans long-term and short-term debt issuances to finance the Town's capital program based on cash flow needs, sources of revenue, capital construction periods, budgetary impact, available financing instruments, and market conditions. At the time a bond issue is structured, the mill rate impact will be evaluated so as to minimize overall tax increases with a target annual debt service increase of 3-5% and to maintain level principal payments where practical. 
b.  Debt Repayment: Generally, borrowings by the Town should be of a duration that does not exceed the economic life of the improvement financed and where feasible should be shorter than the projected economic life. Moreover, to the extent possible, the Town will design the repayment of the debt so as to recapture rapidly its credit capacity for future use. The Town will endeavor to structure new bond issues so as to provide that 50%, at a minimum, of the Town's overall outstanding debt will be retired in the succeeding ten fiscal years. 
8.  CREDIT OBJECTIVES. Many analysts use debt ratios to analyze debt levels. However, the Town recognizes overemphasis on debt ratios should be avoided because debt ratios are but one of many factors which influence bond ratings. Commonly used debt ratios of comparable sized municipalities will provide one measure against which the Town can assess its debt burden. Another measure is to compare the Town against ratios developed by rating agencies such as, Moody's Medians. The analysis is not intended to review the Town's total financial position or to make projections of future expenditures other than debt service. 
The following debt ratios will be considered when reviewing the Town's capacity to issue debt: 
a.  Debt Burden Indicators: 
1.  Debt as a percentage of Net Taxable Grand List. 
2.  Debt per capita. 
b.  Debt Service Indicators: 
1.  Annual general obligation debt service as a percentage of General Fund operating budget expenditures. 
2.  Retirement of 50%, at a minimum, of the Town's overall outstanding debt in the succeeding ten fiscal years. 
c.  Overlapping Debt: There is no overlapping municipal debt for the Town. 
d.  Underlying Debt: The Town has several coterminous taxing districts that may issue debt and levy taxes for repayment of such debt. The debt of these tax districts is considered underlying debt of the Town. While the Town is not responsible for repayment of any tax district debt, such debt is included in the Town's total overall outstanding debt for analysis purposes and for purposes of the statutory debt limitation. 
9.  METHOD OF SALE. 
a.  Competitive Sale: The Town, as a matter of policy, shall seek to issue its debt obligations in a competitive sale unless it is determined that such a sale method will not produce the best results for the Town. In such instances where the Town, in a competitive sale of its debt securities (whether general obligation or non-general obligation debt), deems the bids received as unsatisfactory or does not receive bids, it may enter into negotiation for sale of the securities. 
b.  Negotiated Sale: When determined appropriate, the Town may determine to sell its debt obligations through a negotiated sale. Such determination may be made on an issue by issue basis, for a series of issues, or for part or all of a specific financing program. Selection of the underwriting team shall be made pursuant to selection procedures set forth in this debt policy under "Selection of Consultants and Service Providers" below. 
c.  Private Placement/Limited Public Offering: When determined appropriate, the Town may elect to sell its debt obligations through a private placement or limited public offering. Selection of a placement agent shall be made pursuant to selection procedures developed by the Financing Team. 
d.  Participation in State and Federal Loan Programs: When determined appropriate, the Town may issue debt obligations in conjunction with loans made pursuant to State and Federal programs, e.g., the State of Connecticut programs for providing funding of eligible drinking water and water quality projects. 
10.  SELECTION OF CONSULTANTS AND SERVICE PROVIDERS. 
a.  Solicitation: The Town shall establish a solicitation and selection process for securing professional services that are required to develop and implement the Town's debt program. Goals of the solicitation and selection process shall include encouraging participation from qualified service providers, both local and national, and securing the highest quality services at competitive prices. 
b.  Financing Team: The Town employs outside financial specialists to assist it in developing a bond issuance strategy, preparing bond documents and marketing bonds to investors. The key players in the Town's financing transactions include its internal financial professionals (the Town Manager, the Director of Finance and Finance Department staff, among others), its Bond Counsel, and its Financial Advisor. Other outside firms, such as those providing paying agent/registrar, trustee, credit enhancement, auditing, or printing services, are retained as required. 
c.  Bond Counsel Involvement: The Bond Counsel will issue an opinion as to the legality and, where applicable, the tax-exempt status of all obligations. The Town also may seek the advice of Bond Counsel on other types of financing and on any other questions involving federal tax law applicable to tax-exempt bonds. Bond Counsel also is responsible for the preparation of the resolution authorizing issuance of obligations, various closing documents to complete their sale and issuance, and performance of other services as defined by contract approved by the Town. 
d.  Financial Advisor Involvement: The Town will seek the advice of the Financial Advisor when appropriate and when required by law. The Financial Advisor will advise on the structuring of obligations to be issued, inform the Town of various options, advise the Town as to how choices will impact the marketability of the Town's obligations, and provide other services as defined by contract approved by the Town. To ensure independence, the Financial Advisor neither will bid on nor underwrite any Town debt issues for which it is serving as Financial Advisor. The Financial Advisor will inform the Town Manager and the Director of Finance of significant issues that could affect the marketability of its debt or impact its credit rating. 
11.  REFUNDING OF LONG-TERM DEBT. A refunding of long-term debt involves the refinancing of an outstanding bond issue by issuing new bonds. Most refundings are performed to take advantage of current interest rates that are lower than those rates on outstanding bonds. Such refundings are for interest rate savings. The Town may consider a refunding for three primary reasons: 
a.  To reduce interest costs. 
b.  To restructure debt service, but generally only if the present value of debt service savings exceeds two (2%) percent of the debt service amount of the refunded bonds. 
c.  To eliminate old bond covenants that may have become restrictive. 
12.  DISCLOSURE/ARBITRAGE COMPLIANCE. 
a.  Rating Agencies: Full disclosure of operations and open lines of communication shall be maintained with the rating agencies. Town staff, with assistance of financial advisors, shall prepare the necessary materials and presentation to the rating agencies. A credit rating will be sought from one or more nationally recognized credit reporting agencies as recommended by the Town's financial professionals in conjunction with the Town's financial advisor. 
b.  Arbitrage, Private Activity Use/Payment and Covenant/Representation Compliance: The Town shall establish a system of record keeping and reporting to ensure compliance with arbitrage limitation, arbitrage rebate, and private activity use and payment limitations applicable to its tax-exempt obligations under the Federal tax code. This effort shall include tracking expenditure of and investment earning on proceeds of bond and note issues and lease purchase transactions, calculating rebate payments in compliance with tax law, and remitting any rebateable earnings to the federal government in a timely manner in order to preserve the tax-exempt status of the Town's outstanding debt issues. Additionally, private activity use and payment, general financial reporting and certification requirements embodied in bond covenants, if any, or tax compliance or regulatory agreement covenants or representations in connection with the Town's tax-exempt obligations shall be monitored to ensure compliance with all such covenants and representations. 
c.  Continuing Disclosure: The Town is committed to continuing disclosure of financial and pertinent credit information relevant to the Town's outstanding securities and will abide by the provisions of Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Rule 15c2-12 concerning primary and secondary market disclosure, including requirements regarding annual financial information and material event filings incorporated in the Town's continuing disclosure agreements entered into in connection with the issuance of its debt obligations. 
13.  INTEGRATION WITH CAPITAL PLANNING. The Town prepares a multi-year Capital Improvement Program for consideration and adoption as part of the Town's budget process. Annually, the capital budget identifies revenue sources and expenditures for the current year and the next succeeding four fiscal years as required by the Connecticut General Statutes § 8-24. As part of the capital project planning process, the financial impact of each proposed project will be evaluated and updated annually. To fund the Capital Improvement Program, the Town will use general revenues (pay-as-you-go), debt financing, State and Federal Aid, special assessments or a combination thereof. 
14.  DEBT AUTHORIZATION (CHARTER REQUIREMENTS). The Town shall have the power to incur indebtedness subject to the provisions of the Avon Town Charter, as revised from time-to-time. 
15.  INVESTMENT OF PROCEEDS. The investment of proceeds of debt obligations (including investment earnings) must be in conformance with the Town of Avon Investment Policy approved by the Town Council on November 2, 2002. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICIES 
SUBJECT: True Or Operating Lease Policy No: 24 Approved by the Town Council DATE: April 9, 2008 Approved by the Town Council DATE: April 28, 2008  
    The Town may choose to lease assets rather than buy as leases offer more flexibility in terms of adjusting to changes. In an operating lease, the lessor transfers only the right to use the property to the lessee. At the end of the lease period, the lessee returns the property to the lessor. Since the lessee does not assume the risk of ownership, the lease expense is treated as an operating expense in the income statement and the lease does not affect the balance sheet. 
    Criteria when considering a true or operating lease: 
a.  Generally, a true or operating lease will be considered for assets that are "like items in the aggregate," that will be needed for only short periods of time, or which are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. 
b.  Continued use beyond the lease term. 
c.  Financing terms. 
d.  All operating lease considerations will adhere to the Town's Purchasing Policy. 
e.  Operating lease payments shall be included in the operating budget of the Town or the Board of Education, based on the respective purpose of the lease. 
f.  The entrance into an operating lease, which has unequal payments or is in excess of 60 months, shall require approval by the Town Council and the Board of Finance. 
TOWN OF AVON 
TOWN COUNCIL POLICIES 
SUBJECT: Pavement Cut 
Policy No: 25 DATE: May 2, 2013  
    The purpose of this policy is to preserve the life of street pavement, to provide an improved driving surface and to maintain a more pleasing appearance of our roadway surfaces by minimizing the impact of utility cuts on them. For the purposes of this policy, public roads and public streets are considered identical. 
    Policy 
A.  No cutting of initial or restorative structural paving will be permitted for a period of five years from completion date of installation or resurfacing of a Town of Avon owned road except as an emergency utility repair or under special conditions, such as utility replacement/installation, as approved by the Town Engineer. Structural paving shall be considered as a designed new paving or overlay consisting of an average of not less than 11/2 inches of hot mix asphalt over an existing hard surfaced road. 
B.  Emergency utility repair can generally be defined as a circumstance in which a vital infrastructure service has been damaged, compromised, or has failed resulting in loss of service or constituting a hazard to public safety. New development is not considered an emergency. 
C.  All pavement cuts within the Town's right-of-way, including emergency repairs, require an Excavation Permit issued by the Town of Avon Engineering Department. The contractor performing the work shall be responsible to take out a permit prior to any work being performed, excluding an emergency repair as defined in Section B. When the work is considered an emergency repair the contractor performing the emergency repair shall take out a permit on the first regular business day following the initial repair work. 
D.  All cuts of initial or restorative paving shall include a bond to cover the performance of the repair. The bond shall be held for a period of twelve months from the date of acceptance of final pavement repair. The value of the bond shall be in value of 100% of the estimated cost by the Town to repair. 
E.  The contractor shall carry all the necessary insurance required by the Town of Avon to perform work within the Town's right-of-way 
F.  The Town of Avon Engineering Department is responsible for administering this policy. The details & technical specifications required for pavement cuts are available from the Avon Engineering Department. 
G.  Pavement restoration within a cul-de-sac will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the Town Engineer. 
H.  Directional boring or bore and jack methods of utility construction are strongly encouraged. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances that are included herein. Ordinances listed below without an adoption date were furnished by the Town with amendments incorporated through December 31, 2006. 
Ordinance 
Number Section New Code 
Section 1 1 36-3 3 1 36-2 6 I-VII 53-21-53-27 7 I-VIII 53-81-53-88 9 I-III 53-42-53-44 IV 53-41 11 1 36-1 15 1 2-61 16 I, II 36-4 17 2-1 18 1 13-1 20 I-IV 57-21-57-24 22 I, II 45-2 29 I-VI 9-21-9-26 31 I-VII 62-51-62-57 33 I-IV 20-41-20-44 VII 20-45 35 I 17-24 II 17-21 III 17-23 IV 17-22 V-VII 17-25-17-27 37 I, II 2-2 38 I 45-1 40 I, II 26-71, 26-72 III-VII 26-74-26-78 VIII 26-73 41 I, II 26-21, 26-22 III-XIII 26-25-26-35 XIV 26-24 XV 26-23 44 I-VI 17-2 45 I, II 62-86 46 I, II 43-1, 43-2 III-X 43-4-43-11 XI 43-3 47 I 20-23 II 20-21 III-V 20-24-20-26 VI 20-22 VIII 20-27 48 I 55-31 49 I, II 41-21, 41-22 III-V 41-24-41-26 VI 41-23 50 I, II 15-21, 15-22 III-V 15-23 VI-VIII 15-24-15-26 53 I 62-87 54 I, II 17-41, 17-42 III 17-44 IV 17-43 55 I 45-21 II-IV 45-23-45-25 V 45-22 56 I-IX 26-51-26-59 57 I, II 26-1 58 I 53-101 II-IV 53-103-53-105 V 53-102 60 I, II 55-32 61 I-IV 55-33 62 I, II 53-61, 53-62 III-V 53-64-53-66 VI 53-63 67 I 9-51 II 9-53 III 9-52 IV-VIII 9-54-9-58 68 I-III 55-34 69 I, II 2-21 70 I, II 5-31, 5-32 III-V 5-35-5-37 VI, VII 5-33, 5-34 71 I, II 17-61, 17-62 III 17-65 IV 17-64 V 17-63 72 1 17-1 73 I, II 55-21  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
    This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and amendments of the town used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Amendment 
of Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 55(Ord.)  7- 1-2004 IV 45-25  3- 3-05 App. E, 
Policy 17  5- 3-07 App. E, 
Policy 17 10-24-06 App. C, § 5.01.03  4- 5-07 App. E  4-24-07       Added App. D, § IX(F)  5- 1-07 App. B, §§ 1-20 12-11-07 App. D, A.5.  4-17-08 App. D, §§ IV.A.4.p., IV.A.6.  5-29-08       Added 36-5  6- 3-08(1) App. D, § IVA.2.e.  6- 3-08(2) App. D, § IVA.6.  6- 3-08(1)       Added App. D, § VIIC.3.B.(5)  9- 9-08(1)       Added App. C, § 2.04.15  9- 9-08(2) App. D, § IIC.  9- 9-08(3) App. D, § IIIG.  9-10-08 App. E, 
Policy 3 11-10-08 9-23(b)  3-31-09 App. D, § IIC.       Added App. D, § IVA.4.u.  6- 9-09 App. D, § VIIC.4.b.(6) 11-11-09 I-VI App., D, Policy 19 12- 3-09 2-21(b)(1), (2)  3- 4-10       Added 45-23(3)  3- 9-10       Added App. A, § IVA.2.i. App. A, § IIC.  2- 4-10(1) 1-10 App. E, Policy 13  2- 4-10(2) App. E, Policy 17  3-29-10(1)       Added App. A, § 20  3-29-10(2)       Added App. A, § 21  6- 3-10(Ord.)       Added 51-140-51-150  6-22-10 App. D, § IV A.5. 11- 9-10(Ord.)       Added 36-6 12-14-10 App. D, § VI G.3.e.  4- 5-11 App. D, § V O.5.f.  6- 7-11 App. D, § IV A.6.  6-28-11       Added App. D, § VI I.  7-10-12 App. B, § 9 10- 4-12(1) 2-21 10- 4-12(2) 55-32  1- 3-13(Ord.)       Added Ch. 26, Art. V, 26-99-26-120  5- 2-13(Res.)       Added App. E, Policy 25  5-21-13 App. D, § VII B.2 11-14-13 2-21  7-15-14(1) App. D, § VII.A.2.b  7-15-14(2) App. D, §§ II, VI.C.3.e  9- 9-14 App. D, § VII.C 11- 3-14(Res.) App. E, Policy 17  3- 5-15 App. E, Policy 19  9- 3-15 53-88 10- 1-15 53-88  1-12-16       Added App. D, § VI.I.7  9-13-16 App.D, § III.B.3  9-27-16(1)       Added App. D, § IX.G  9-27-16(2) App. D, § III.G  9-27-16(3) App. D, § II.C       Added App. D, § VI.C.3.f 11- 15-16       Added App. D, § VI.D.3.c  1- 5-17 45-23  5-23-17(1) App. D, § VI.J  5-23-17(2) App. D, § V.J  5-23-17(3) App. D, § VII.C  9- 7-17 43-4(e), 43-5(c) 10-17-17(1)       Added App. D, § VII.D 10-17-17(2) App. D, § II  3-27-18 App. D, § II.C App. D, § VI  6-12-18 App. D, § VII.C  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Connecticut General Statutes. 
G.S. New Code  
Section 1-1 1-2 1-1(q) App. B, § 2.1k. 2-273aa 51-140 4-124c et seq. 45-1 4-124i 45-1 7-3 2-2 7-87 et seq. Char. §§ 1.1-11.13 7-101, 7-102 2-1, 2-2 7-137c 62-51, 62-52 62-54 7-138(c)(7)(D) Ch. 5 7-148(c)(1)(G) Ch. 53, Art. II 7-148(c)(5)(A) 2-21 7-148(c)(6) Ch. 53 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii) 
-(iv) Ch. 53, Art. III 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v) Ch. 53, Art. IV 7-148(c)(7)(B) Ch. 57 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i) Ch. 17, Art. IV 7-148(c)(7)(H)(i) 36-2 7-148(c)(7)(H)(ii) Ch. 43 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iv) Ch. 43 7-148(c)(7)(H)(viii) Ch. 17, Art. IV 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xiv) Ch. 15, Art. II 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) Ch. 9, Art. III 7-148(c)(10) 20-22 7-148(c)(10)(A) 1-7 5-33 17-22 17-43 17-63 26-73 36-1, 36-2 36-4 41-23 43-3 53-41 53-63 53-88 53-102 57-23 7-148a 1-1 7-149 36-4 7-149(c)(3)(A) Ch. 41 7-152c 9-56, 9-57 7-157 Char. § 4.5 7-170-7-186       36-5 7-188 et seq. Char. § 11.10 7-193(a)(1) Char. § 4.3 7-234 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. II 7-245 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. III 7-253a 62-87 7-273b et seq. 62-86 7-274 et seq. Ch. 20 7-278 Char. § 11.4 7-292-7-294 2-61 7-340 et seq. Char. Ch. 5 Char. § 3.5 7-374 App. E 7-381 et seq. Char. § 4.7 Char. Ch. 9 7-391 et seq. Char. Ch. 9 7-398 et seq. Char. Ch. 9 7-402 App. E 7-1931(a)(2) Char. Ch. 7 8-1 et seq. App. D, § I 8-2j App. D, § VI, I. 8-3 App. A, § 2 App. B, § 11.6 App. D, § VI, I. 8-3c App. B, § 7.2 App. B, § 11 App. D, § VI, I. 8-3(g) App. B, § 7.2 App. B, § 11 8-5 et seq. Char. § 3.7 8-6 App. B, § 11.9c. 8-7(d)f. App. B, § 8.3 8-13(m-x) App. D, § IX.G 8-18 et seq. Ch. 45 App. C, § 5.01 8-24 45-2 53-82 App. E 8-25 App. B, § 11.6 App. C 8-26 App. B, § 7.2 App. B, § 11 8-26e App. D, § IX.F.8. 8-30g App.D, § IX.G 8-30g-1 App. D, § IX.G 9-1 et seq. Char. Ch. 2 Ch. 13 9-167a Char. § 11.2 9-183a et seq. 13-1 9-185 Char. § 3.6 9-190 Char. § 3.8 9-199 Char. § 3.6 9-204b Char. § 3.4 10-218 et seq. Char. § 3.4 10-220 App. E 10-240 et seq. Char. § 3.4 10-283 App. E 10-287c-1 et eq.       App. E 10-290(a) App. E 10-291 App. E 10-291, 10-292 App. E 11.2.2 Char. § 11.2 11.3.1 Char. § 11.3 12-1 et seq. Ch. 55 12-81(21)(C) 55-32 12-81(56) 55-31 12-81c 55-33 12-81f 55-32 12-81w 55-34 12-107a-e 62-52 12-110 et seq. Char. § 3.6 12-129n App. E 12-144c 55-21 14-1 17-42 14-1 et seq. 41-25 Ch. 57 14-1(51) 41-22 14-67g 17-23 14-150 20-27 14-150a 17-25 14-251 et seq. Ch. 57, Art. II 16-1 App. A, § 2 App. B, § 4.1d 16-50i App. D, § IX 17a-690 41-24 19a-36 Ch. 26 19a-36a et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 19a-209a 26-1 19a-229 26-35 26-58 26-78 19a-230 26-73 21-27 43-4 21-27 et seq. Ch. 43 21-29 43-4 43-6 21-35 43-3 21-35a et seq. Ch. 43 21-36 et seq. Ch. 43 21-37 Ch. 43 43-4 21-38 43-3 21a-13 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II Tit. 22A App. B, [App. B] 22-327 et seq. Ch. 5, Art. II 22-358 5-36 22a-1 et seq. Ch. 17 22a-27j 45-25 22a-28-22a-35 App. B, § 2.1gg App. B, § 2.1hh App. B, § 5.2 22a-36-22a-45 App. B, § 2.1a 22a-39 App. B, § 5.1 App. B, § 12.1 22a-40 App. B, § 2.1x 22a-41 et seq. 17-2 22a-42 et seq. App. B (note) 22a-42a App. B, § 4.1e App. B, § 15.3 22a-43 App. B, § 16.1 22a-44(b) App. B, § 14.4a 22a-45a App. B, § 5.1 22a-47 App. A, § 2 22a-207 et seq. Ch. 51 22a-207b App. A, § 2 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-208a App. A, § 2 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-208c App. A, § 2 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-208(i) App. A, § 2 22a-241(b) 51-1 22a-247 et seq. 36-4 41-24 22a-257 et seq. 51-1 22a-260(7) 51-1 22a-354a et seq. 17-1 22a-354a-22a-354(bb)       App. A, § 1 22a-354c App. A, § 2 App. A, § 8 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-354d App. A, § 2 22a-354h App. A, § 2 22a-354i(2) App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-354m(d) App. A, § 4 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-354o 17-1 22a-354p App. A, § 8 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-354p(g) App. A, § 5 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 App. A, § 9 App. P, § 22a-354q App. P, § 16 22a-354s(b), 
22a-354s(c) App. P, § 14 22a-354z App. A, § 2 App. A, § 8 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-354-7(d) App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-354-8(c) App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 22a-401 App. B, § 4.1d 22a-403 App. B, § 4.1d 22a-402 App. B, § 5.3 22a-403 App. B, § 5.3 22a-423 App. A, § 2 22a-430 App. A, § 2 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 App. P, § 12 22a-430b App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 App. P, § 12 22a-448 App. A, § 22a-454(e)(1) App. A, § 2 App. A, § 20 App. A, § 21 25-32a App. B, § 8.4 25-130 26-1 27-103 43-6 29-252 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. II 29-253 Ch. 9, Art. III 29-263(b) 9-23 29-265 9-26 29-356 et seq. 36-3 36a-330 App. E 51-164m 57-23 53-204 36-1 53a-115 et seq. 41-24 53a-157b App. A, § 8, 
App. A, § 9 ch. 102 App. B, § 4.1d ch. 103 62-86 ch. 103b 51-140 51-141 51-142 ch. 108 Char. § 9.4 ch. 124 App. D, § I ch. 125 App. C, § 5.01 ch. 173 App. E ch. 391 App. A, § 2 ch. 446d 51-141 ch. 446e 51-141 ch. 446i App. P, § App. P, § 15 ch. 828 App. D, § IX  
