Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[The
Code
of
the
Town
of
Branford
was
adopted
by
Representative
Town
Meeting
10-10-1984.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:3
Chapter 3
ACADEMY ON THE GREEN COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, greens and recreation areas — See Ch.
190.
§ 3-1. Creation.
During the month of January, 1972, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a
commission to be known as the "Academy on the Green Commission," which
Commission shall be appointed in the following manner and shall have the
following powers and duties.
§ 3-2. Composition.
A. The Commission shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Town of Branford, and in addition thereto the Chief
Executive Officer of the Town of Branford shall be an ex officio member
thereof.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall make appointments to the Commission in
the following manner:
(1) Two members shall be appointed from the membership of the
Branford Historical Society.
(2) One member shall be appointed from the membership of the First
Congregational Church of the Town of Branford.
(3) One member shall be appointed from the membership of the Widow's
Son Lodge No. 66, Ancient Free and Accepted Masons.
(4) One member shall be a resident elector of the Town of Branford.
§ 3-3. Terms of office.
The terms of office of said members shall be as follows:
A. The five members shall serve for terms of five years; provided, however,
that initially in January 1972, one member shall be appointed for a term
of one year from February 1, 1972; one for a term of two years from
February 1, 1972; one for a term of three years from February 1, 1972;
one for a term of four years from February 1, 1972. Thereafter, in the
month of January of each succeeding year, a member shall be appointed
for a term of five years.
B. In the event of a vacancy in the term of any member described in
Subsection A hereof, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a successor to
serve for the balance of the term vacated.
C. All terms of office described in Subsection A hereof shall be effective as
of February 1 in any year.
BRANFORD CODE § 3-4
3:4
§ 3-4. Rules and regulations.
Said Commission is empowered to adopt such rules and regulations for the
use of the Academy of the Green as are consistent with the historic nature
of said Academy.
§ 3-5. Acceptance of gifts and donations.
Said Commission is also empowered to accept any gifts, grants, donations
and/or bequests made to it from any source and to utilize the same to
enhance, maintain and/or preserve said Academy.
Chapter 4
ACCOUNTS AND BILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing — See Ch. 75.
§ 4-1. Monthly statement of approved bills.
On or before the fifth day of each month, the Board of Selectmen shall
furnish to the Town Treasurer a list of all orders issued by them in payment
of bills and that the Board of Education shall furnish said Treasurer a list of
all bills approved by said Board during the preceding month.
§ 4-2. Monthly statement of account.
On or before the 12th day of each month, the Town Treasurer shall in
writing notify the Board of Selectmen of the total amount from each account
paid out by them up to and including their last statement.
§ 4-3. Availability for public inspection.
All said Town accounts shall at all times be open to the inspection of the
public.
Chapter 6
ADMISSION OF ELECTORS, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 34.
§ 6-1. Composition.
§ 3-4 ACCOUNTS AND BILLS § 6-1
4:5
A. Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 471 of the February 1965,
Special Session of the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, the
Board for the Admission of Electors for the Town of Branford is hereby
changed and henceforth said Board for the Admission of Electors shall
consist of:
(1) The Town Clerk.
(2) The Registrars of Voters. [Amended 10-10-1984]
B. Said Public Act No. 471 shall be consulted on all questions regarding the
composition of said Board.
Chapter 9
(RESERVED)
Chapter 11
ASSESSOR AND BOARD OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 220.
§ 11-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to Section 7-100k of the General Statutes of Connecticut there
is hereby established an Office of Assessor and a Board of Assessment
Appeals.
§ 11-2. Assessor.
In the Town of Branford there shall be one Assessor appointed by the Board
of Selectmen. Said Assessor shall have state certification and maintain same
during his or her tenure as Assessor. The Assessor shall serve and be subject
to discharge only for just cause.
§ 11-3. Assessor support personnel.
The Assessor shall recommend to the Town Human Resources Department
individuals to hire for clerical staff and other assistants to support the
Assessor function.
§ 11-4. Compensation.
The compensation and benefits for the Assessor and support staff shall be
defined by a contract between the Town of Branford and the municipal
employees unions.
§ 11-5. Board of Assessment Appeals.
§ 6-1 BRANFORD CODE § 11-5
9:6
A. There is hereby established a three-member Board of Assessment
Appeals. One or two of said members shall be elected for a four-year
term at each of the Town's biennial elections. The number to be elected
shall be determined by the number of members whose terms may expire
in the election year. If more than one member is up for election, any
elector of the Town may vote for the full number of members up for
election. The Chairperson of the Board shall be elected by the members
of the Board. All members shall be electors of the Town of Branford. All
members shall be paid a stipend for their service.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint three electors of the Town of
Branford as alternate members of the Board of Assessment Appeals.
Alternate members shall fill in for regular members as required and will
have all the powers and duties of regular members except they may not
serve as Chairperson.
C. The Board of Selectmen may nominate and the Representative Town
Meeting may appoint additional members to the Board of Assessment
Appeals who shall serve for a one-year term beginning on the first
day of any assessment year in which a revaluation becomes effective
and ending on the last day of the assessment year following such year
of revaluation. Appointed members may not serve as Chairman of the
Board.
Chapter 12
ASSISTANT TOWN CLERKS
§ 12-1. Appointments authorized; powers and duties.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, Section 7-19, the Town Clerk
may appoint not more than five Assistant Town Clerks, who, having been
approved by one of the Selectmen and having taken the oath provided for
Town Clerks, shall, in the absence or inability of the Town Clerk, have all his
powers and perform all his duties.
Chapter 15
BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 15-1. Duties.
The Building Inspector shall administer the Building Code and shall be the
building official in the Town of Branford.
§ 15-2. Appointment and term.
The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a
two-year term, expiring on the 31st day of October in each odd-numbered
year.
§ 11-5 ASSISTANT TOWN CLERKS § 15-3
12:7
§ 15-3. Salary.
Said Building Inspector shall receive an annual salary to be set by said
Board of Selectmen, subject to the approval of the Board of Finance and the
Representative Town Meeting.
Chapter 16
COMMUNITY FOREST COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Green Committee — See Ch. 53.
§ 16-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to recognize and promote the importance
of trees in the community and the many benefits they provide, including
property value enhancement, home heating and cooling cost reduction,
noise and light pollution abatement, wildlife habitat and food source, water
purification and soil erosion prevention and atmospheric carbon dioxide
reduction on public property within the Town of Branford.
§ 16-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Community Forest Commission shall be charged with developing
a comprehensive tree management plan for trees located on public
properties, except for those located on the Town Green. The
comprehensive plan shall include an inventory, species diversity,
planting needs, hazardous trees, insect and disease problems and
pattern of regular care, such as pruning. After such plan is submitted to
and approved by the Board of Selectmen, the Commission shall establish
an annual community forestry plan to implement the goals set forth in
the comprehensive plan. The plan shall provide guidance for planting,
maintaining and removing trees from streets, parks and other public
properties.
B. The Commission shall develop an educational program for residents,
property owners, and developers concerning recommendations for
plantings and maintenance of existing trees.
C. The Commission shall organize an annual Arbor Day Celebration to
promote and educate the community about the importance of trees and
the many benefits that trees bring to our community. The Commission's
funding by the Town through tax dollars shall be restricted to
administrative expenses.
§ 16-3. Composition; appointment and terms; vacancies;
compensation.
A. Said Commission shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Town of Branford. In addition, the Tree Warden shall be
§ 15-3 BRANFORD CODE § 16-3
15:8
a nonvoting member of the Commission. The Commission shall not be
comprised entirely of tree-related professionals.
B. All members of said Commission shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and shall serve for terms of three years; provided, however,
that initially, in January 2009, two members shall be appointed for terms
of three years, two members shall be appointed for two years and one
member shall be appointed for a term of one year. The Commission shall
elect a Chairman. Thereafter, in the month of January of each succeeding
year members shall be appointed for terms of three years.
C. In the event of a vacancy in the term of any member, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint a successor to serve for the balance of the
term vacated. Any member may be removed for cause by said Board of
Selectmen.
D. Members shall serve without compensation but shall be compensated for
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties
as approved by the Commission.
§ 16-4. Annual report.
The Community Forest Commission shall submit an annual report to the
Town summarizing its activities for the year.
Chapter 17
COSGROVE ANIMAL SHELTER COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 118.
§ 17-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created the Cosgrove Animal Shelter Commission.
§ 17-2. Membership.
Said Commission shall consist of seven members, at least six of whom
shall be residents of the Town of Branford and one of whom may be a
resident of the Town of North Branford, and shall be appointed by the
Branford Board of Selectmen. Not more than four members shall at the
same time be members of the same political party. Members shall serve
without compensation.
§ 17-3. Terms; vacancy.
A. Each member shall serve a term of four years; provided, however, that of
those members initially appointed, three shall be appointed for terms of
four years, two shall be appointed for terms of three years and two shall
be appointed for terms of two years.
§ 16-3 COSGROVE ANIMAL SHELTER COMMISSION § 17-3
17:9
B. In the event a vacancy occurs in the term of any member, the Board of
Selectmen shall fill said vacancy and any new member so appointed shall
serve until the expiration of such term.
C. The Commission shall elect annually from its membership a Chairperson,
a Secretary and a Treasurer.
§ 17-4. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall advise and assist the Board of Selectmen or Animal
Shelter staff, as appropriate, in connection with the operation of the
Cosgrove Animal Shelter as follows:
A. It shall make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen in connection
with the hiring of professional staff, such as a Shelter Director, a
Municipal Animal Control Officer and assistant animal control officers;
provided, however, that the Municipal Animal Control Officer and said
assistants so appointed hereunder shall be appointed by the proper
appointing authority of the Town of Branford pursuant to its Charter and
Section 22-331 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. It shall assist the Shelter Director, or if none, the next senior Shelter
staff member, in the leasing, acquisition, contracting for and otherwise
arranging for personal property, equipment and services necessary for
the conduct of the Shelter's business, subject however to the
expenditure approval process of the Town of Branford.
C. It shall submit, in cooperation with the Shelter Director, or if none, the
next senior Shelter staff member, an annual operating budget to the
Office of the First Selectman and in accordance with the Charter of the
Town of Branford. All funds of the Commission shall be audited annually,
as part of the Town's audit, and it shall file an annual report of its doings,
which report shall be included in the Town's annual report.
D. It shall assist the Shelter Director, or if none, the next senior Shelter
staff member, to establish goals and objectives for the Shelter, including
strategic planning for future needs, coordinate volunteers, pursue and
apply for any available grants, establish a program of public relations
and marketing particularly as it relates to animals available for adoption,
advise the Board of Selectmen concerning the need for capital
improvements and assist in raising the necessary funding therefor and
organize education and training programs, such as animal first aid and
animal rights.
E. It shall review the general operation of the animal shelter and make
recommendations to the Board of Selectmen or other appropriate Town
officials concerning matters such as the hours of operation of the Animal
Shelter, the qualifications of personnel, the priorities for the
development of services, and the duties of Animal Shelter staff.
§ 17-5. Acceptance of gifts and donations.
The Commission is also empowered to accept any gifts, grants, donations
and/or bequests made to it from any source and to utilize the same to
enhance, maintain and/or preserve the Animal Shelter, the animals cared
for therein or any programs connected therewith.
§ 17-3 BRANFORD CODE § 17-5
17:10
Chapter 19
CENTER REVITALIZATION REVIEW BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Redevelopment Agency — See Ch. 80.
§ 19-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Center Revitalization Review Board.
PRIVATE FUNDING — Any donation or lease of real or personal property
to the Town of Branford by any person, partnership or corporation for
use in connection with revitalization or any project or projects contained
therein or the expenditure by any person, partnership or corporation for the
improvement, in connection with revitalization or any project or projects
included therein, of real property owned by such person, partnership or
corporation, whether solely in connection with the property of said person,
partnership or corporation or in connection with the property of others.
PROJECT — Those projects set forth in a certain report entitled "Proposed
Projects," dated January 29, 1985, as prepared by Selbert Design
Associates.
REVITALIZATION — The implementation of any project or projects for the
improvement or development of the Branford Town Center, which project is
substantially as contained in a certain Branford Town Center Final Report,
dated January 1984, and a certain report entitled "Proposed Projects,"
dated January 29, 1985, both prepared by Selbert Design Associates.
§ 19-2. Board established.
There shall be established in the Town of Branford a Center Revitalization
Review Board, consisting of seven members, to be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen, who shall advise and assist the Board of Selectmen in
connection with the implementation of revitalization, as more specifically
set forth in § 19-4 hereof.
§ 19-3. Terms of members; qualifications.
A. The initial members of the Board shall serve for the following terms:
(1) One member shall serve for a term of one year or until his successor
is appointed and qualified.
(2) Two members shall serve for a period of two years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
(3) Two members shall serve for a period of three years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
§ 17-5 CENTER REVITALIZATION REVIEW BOARD § 19-3
19:11
B. Upon the expiration of the term, as set forth in Subsection A, of each
initial member or any successor or successors who may be appointed
to complete the term set forth in Subsection A, members of the Board
shall be appointed for a term of three years or until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
C. The Board shall include at least one person with special experience or
competence in the field of banking, commercial lending or finance and
at least one person with special experience or competence in the field of
architecture, engineering or construction.
§ 19-4. Duties.
The Board shall advise and assist the Board of Selectmen in connection with
the revitalization, by performing the following duties:
A. It shall consult with the merchants and residents of the affected area in
order to coordinate all aspects of the revitalization in such a manner as
to reduce the disruption to business and other activities in the affected
area.
B. It shall make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen in connection
with the hiring of professional staff, such as architects and construction
managers, if any, in connection with the revitalization.
C. It shall review all projects to be funded by the Town in connection
with the revitalization and shall recommend to the Board of Selectmen
whether each such project should be funded at any given time. In
making such recommendation, the Board shall consider the total amount
of funds available for the revitalization; the appropriate allocation of
said funds among various projects within the revitalization: and the
extent to which private funding has been provided for improvements
in the area most especially affected by said project. In making such
recommendations, the Board shall give preference to those projects
which affect areas of the Branford Center in which private funding has
been expended or committed to the revitalization.
D. It shall report to the Board of Selectmen and the Moderator of the
Representative Town Meeting in writing no less than once each calendar
quarter as to the status of the revitalization and shall appear, by its
Chairman, at such meetings as may be requested by the Board of
Selectmen or the majority of the Representative Town Meeting from time
to time.
E. It shall confer with the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town
in connection with any matters related to the revitalization which may
require action or consent of said Commission.
F. It shall perform such other ministerial and supervisory duties as the
Board of Selectmen may designate from time to time.
§ 19-5. Review of projects prior to expenditure of funds.
No funds of the Town of Branford shall be expended on any project within
the revitalization until such project has been reviewed by the Board and a
recommendation has been issued to the Board of Selectmen by the Board
regarding the same; provided, however, that funds of the Town may be
§ 19-3 BRANFORD CODE § 19-5
19:12
expended upon any project despite the absence of such recommendation
if the Board, within 30 days after a written request from the Board of
Selectmen for a recommendation upon such project, shall fail to deliver the
same to the Selectmen.
§ 19-6. Authority of the Board of Selectmen.
Except as to the extent that any recommendation may be required prior
to action by the Board of Selectmen regarding the expenditure of funds,
as provided in § 19-5, the Board of Selectmen may expend funds for the
revitalization or any project or projects contained therein despite a
recommendation by the Board that said funds not be expended; need not
expend funds for the revitalization or any project or projects contained
therein despite a recommendation by the Board that said funds be
expended; may delete any project or projects which, in the Board of
Selectmen's discretion, is determined to be no longer necessary or
appropriate for the Town; may reduce or change the scope of revitalization
or any project or projects, if, in the Board of Selectmen's discretion, it
is determined that the appropriation will be insufficient to complete
revitalization: and may spend the entire appropriation on revitalization as
reduced and changed.
Chapter 21
JOINT CONSERVATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 21-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created the Joint Conservation and Environmental
Commission (hereinafter "Commission").
§ 21-2. Membership.
Said Commission shall consist of 11 members who shall be residents of
the Town of Branford appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Members shall
serve without compensation.
§ 21-3. Terms; vacancy.
A. Each member shall serve for a term of four years; provided, however,
that of those members initially appointed, four shall be appointed for
a term of four years, four shall be appointed for a term of three years
and three shall be appointed for a term of two years. The composition of
this Commission must include at least two business people, one health
professional and one environmental professional.
B. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the term of any member, the Board
of Selectmen shall fill said vacancy for the expiration of that term.
C. The Commission shall elect annually from their membership a
Chairperson and a Secretary.
§ 19-5 JOINT CONSERVATION AND § 21-4
21:13
§ 21-4. Powers and duties.
In addition to the powers, rights and duties as set forth in Section 7-131a of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, said Commission shall have
the following powers and duties. The Commission shall:
A. Investigate pollution within the Town, including alleged violations of
clean air and clean water standards as established by the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection. It shall recommend to the
Board of Selectmen, the Representative Town Meeting and other Town,
state and federal agencies procedures, ordinances, rules and interlocal
agreements to abate and prevent pollution. It shall conduct such surveys
as may be required, investigate the source and nature of pollution
hazards, review federal, state and Town records and conduct public
hearings for the purpose of obtaining information leading to the
abatement and prevention of pollution. The Commission shall keep
records of such surveys, inspections or hearings.
B. From time to time, work with unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
C. Advise the Board of Selectmen and the Representative Town Meeting
about environmental matters concerning the Town of Branford.
§ 21-5. Cooperation with other organizations.
Said Commission shall work together with the East Shore Health District,
the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, the Feral
Environmental Protection Agency and such other agencies as have been or
may be formed from time to time by one or more municipalities to protect
the environment.
§ 21-6. Required reports.
Said Commission shall annually present a budget and file an annual report
of its doings, which report shall be included in the Town's Annual Report.
The Commission can be called upon, at any time, by the Representative
Town Meeting to render a report of its activities.
§ 21-7. Definitions.
As used in Chapter 21, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLLUTION — The contamination or rendering unclean or impure or the
harmful alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of the
air, land or waters of the Town or harmful thermal effect thereon.
Chapter 24
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS, REGIONAL
§ 21-4 BRANFORD CODE § 24-1
24:14
§ 24-1. State law adopted.
The Town of Branford hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 50, Sections
4-124i to 4-124p, inclusive, of the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut concerning Regional Councils of Government.
§ 24-2. Powers and duties.
The Regional Council of Governments shall be entitled to exercise all of the
rights and authority and shall be subject to all of the responsibilities and
duties provided for in the General Statutes. Said powers and duties shall
consist of consideration of such matters of a public nature common to two
or more members of the Council as it deems appropriate, including matters
affecting the health, safety, welfare, education and economic conditions of
the area comprised by its members.
§ 24-3. Purpose.
The Council shall promote cooperative arrangements and coordinate action
among its members and make recommendations therefor to the members
and such other public and private agencies as exist or perform functions
within the region.
§ 24-4. Planning functions.
A. The planning duties and responsibilities of the Regional Council of
Governments shall be carried out exclusively by a Regional Planning
Commission in accordance with Section 4-124o of the General Statutes.1
B. The Planning Commission shall appoint one of its members to be its
representative to the Regional Planning Commission, said appointment
subject to the concurrance of the First Selectman.
§ 24-5. Representative.
The First Selectman is hereby authorized to represent the Town of Branford
in the deliberations of the Council.
Chapter 26
HUMAN SERVICES BOARD
§ 26-1. Creation.
There is hereby created the Branford Human Services Board.
§ 26-2. Composition.
Said Board shall consist of nine members, who shall be residents of the
Town of Branford.
1. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 69, Planning Agency, Regional.
§ 24-1 HUMAN SERVICES BOARD § 26-3
26:15
§ 26-3. Appointment of members; terms.
Members shall be appointed to said Board by the Board of Selectmen in the
following manner:
A. The terms of office of said members shall be for three years; provided,
however, that initially, in October 1993, there are three members whose
terms expire December 1993, one member whose term expires
December 1994, and three members whose terms expire December
1995. Following the effective date of this chapter, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint two members whose terms shall expire
December 1994. Thereafter, in the month of December of each
succeeding year, three members shall be appointed for a term of three
years.
B. Vacancies arising for whatever reason shall be filled by the Board of
Selectmen for the balance of the term vacated.
§ 26-4. Purpose.
Said Board shall govern the activities and operation of the Branford
Counseling Center, the Branford Social Welfare Department and any other
activities which may be delegated to it. Said Board may adopt bylaws and
establish and implement rules and policies for its operation.
§ 26-5. Ex officio member.
The Chief Executive Officer of the Town of Branford shall serve as an ex
officio member of said Board.
§ 26-6. Acceptance of gifts or donations.
Said Board is empowered to accept any gifts, grants, donations and/or
bequests made to it from whatever source. Any such gifts, grants, donations
and/or bequests shall only be used to further the purposes of said Board.
§ 26-7. Handling of funds.
No funds may be disbursed by said Board without the signatures of the
Town Treasurer, and all funds of said Board shall be audited annually and
shall be made a part of the Town's annual report.
Chapter 30
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 30-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to Section 7-136 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Rev. 1977),
as amended, there is hereby established within the Town of Branford an
Economic Development Commission.
§ 26-3 BRANFORD CODE § 30-2
30:16
§ 30-2. Composition; appointment and terms; vacancies. [Amended
3-13-1985]
Said Commission shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Town of Branford and the First Selectman as an ex officio
member. One of the members shall be an officer or director of the Branford
Chamber of Commerce. All members of said Commission shall be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen and shall serve for a term of three years:
provided, however, that initially, in July 1978, three members shall be
appointed for a term of one year, three members shall be appointed for
a term of two years and three members shall be appointed for a term
of three years. Thereafter, in the month of July of each succeeding year,
three members shall be appointed for a term of three years. In the event
of a vacancy in the term of any member, the Board of Selectmen shall
appoint a successor to serve for the balance of the term vacated. Any
member may be removed for cause by said Board of Selectmen and on
request of such member after public hearing. Members shall serve without
compensation but shall be compensated for necessary expenses incurred in
the performance of their official duties.
§ 30-3. Powers and duties generally.
The powers and duties of the Economic Development Commission shall be
the following:
A. To conduct research into the economic conditions in Branford and to
make recommendations to appropriate officials and agencies in Branford
regarding action to improve its economic condition and development.
B. To seek to coordinate the activities of and cooperate with unofficial
bodies and agencies organized to promote such economic development.
C. To advertise, prepare, print and distribute maps, books, charts and
pamphlets which in its judgment will further its official purposes.
D. To appoint employees and employ consultants necessary for the
implementation of its duties.
§ 30-4. Statutory powers.
Said Commission is hereby designated as the development agency of the
Town of Branford and is hereby authorized to exercise the powers granted
under Chapter 132 of the Connecticut General Statutes (Rev. 1977), as
amended.
§ 30-5. Annual report.
Said Commission shall prepare annually and transmit to the Branford
Representative Town Meeting and the Board of Selectmen a report of its
activities and of its recommendations for improving economic conditions
and development in Branford.
Chapter 32
§ 30-2 ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE § 30-5
32:17
ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE
§ 32-1. Establishment and composition.
There shall be a Commission to study the needs of and coordinate programs
for the aging for the Town of Branford, consisting of the First Selectman as
an ex officio member and nine other members to be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen. All members so appointed shall be persons interested in the
consideration and solution of the problems of the aging, and electors of the
Town. One-third of the members appointed annually shall be representative
of the age group involved.
§ 32-2. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall meet semiannually or more frequently if necessary
to consider the conditions and needs of elderly persons in the community
in relation to housing, economic problems, employment, health services,
recreation and other matters. It shall make recommendations to the Board
of Selectmen and Representative Town Meeting regarding the development
of programs and facilities and integration of public and private agencies in
cooperation with the state and other services to the extent possible. It shall
file an annual report with the Town Clerk.
§ 32-3. Compensation.
The members of the Commission so appointed shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses.
§ 32-4. Terms of office.
The members of the Commission shall serve for three years and until their
successors are designated, except that on January 1, 1971, three members
shall be appointed for a one-year term, three shall be appointed for a twoyear
term and three shall be appointed for a three-year term.
§ 32-5. Organization; funding.
The Commission may organize itself in whatever manner it may determine
in order to carry out its duties. It shall be authorized to seek, receive and
utilize any private or public funds now available or which may be available
in the future and/or real property to be used for programs, activities,
functions and facilities for the elderly of the community.
§ 30-5 BRANFORD CODE § 32-5
32:18
Chapter 34
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Election of Representative Town
Meeting — See Charter, Section 4.
Board of Admission of Electors — See Ch. 6.
§ 32-5 ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE § 32-5
32:19

ARTICLE I
Election of Town Officials
[Adopted 10-10-19842]
§ 34-1. (Reserved)3
§ 34-2. (Reserved)4
§ 34-3. Board of Education.
There shall be elected at each biennial election to be held in the Town of
Branford, in addition to the other officers, three members of the Board of
Education. Each political party shall nominate two candidates, and the three
receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of six years
from the date of their election, pursuant to Section 9-206 of the General
Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958.
2. Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted 10-10-1984 combined, without change, three prior
ordinances adopted 8-28-1947 and 11-13-1962 into the one appearing in this chapter.
3. Editor’ Note: Former § 34-1, Election of Town officers, was repealed 9-11-2013.
4. Editor’ Note: Former § 34-2, Election of Assessor and members of Board of Assessment
Appeals, as amended, was repealed 9-11-2013. For current provisions, see Ch. 11,
Assessors and Board of Assessment Appeals.
§ 34-1 ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE § 34-3
32:21

ARTICLE II
Registry List
[Adopted 9-11-1985]
§ 34-4. Designation of party affiliation.
The registrars of voters shall designate the party affiliation, if any, of each
elector on the registry list with the name of such elector.
§ 34-5. Discontinuance of separate lists.
The separate list of persons making application for enrollment according to
declared political preference of such electors is hereby discontinued.
§ 34-4 ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE § 34-5
32:23
Chapter 38
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 38-1. Establishment; declaration of policy.
A. A Code of Ethics is hereby established for officials and employees of
the Town of Branford, as are hereinafter defined. The purpose of this
code is to establish clear ethical standards of conduct for all who serve
the Town, whether in a paid or volunteer capacity, without discouraging
participation in Town government by the talented and committed
individuals on whose service the Town relies.
B. To this end, the code sets forth those actions that are in conflict with
the best interests of the Town, and requires disclosure of any financial
or personal beneficial interest in matters affecting Branford. This code
seeks to deter conduct that is incompatible with the proper discharge
of duties in the public interest or that would impair independence of
judgment or action in the performance of those duties as set forth herein,
and to establish procedures for determining whether such conduct has
occurred or would occur.
§ 38-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Branford Board of Ethics.
BUSINESS — Any entity through which business for profit or not for profit
is conducted, including, but not limited to a corporation, partnership,
proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization,
limited liability company, limited partnership, or self-employed individuals.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE/SHE IS ASSOCIATED — A business of which
the person or a member of his/her immediate family is a director, officer,
owner, employee, member, compensated agent, or holder of stock which
constitutes 5% or more of the total outstanding stock of any class. In
determining said 5%, the interest of the person shall be aggregated with
that of his immediate family.
COMPLAINANT — A person who files a complaint alleging a violation of the
Code of Ethics.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information, whether transmitted
orally, in writing or by any other means, that is obtained by reason of the
public position or office held and is of such nature that it is not, at the time
of transmission, a matter of public record or public knowledge.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest with a monetary value to the public
employee, public official or his/her immediate family, and which is not
common to the interests of the other citizens of the Town, of $100 or more,
or which generates a financial gain or loss of or confers any benefit with a
value of $100 or more in a calendar year.
§ 34-5 BRANFORD CODE § 38-2
32:24
GIFT — Anything of value, including but not limited to entertainment, food,
beverage, travel, and lodging given or paid to a public official or public
employee to the extent that consideration of equal or greater value is not
received. A gift does not include:
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Spouse, civil union partner, child, parent, sibling or
their spouses/civil union partners.
A political contribution otherwise reported as required by law, or a
donation or payment as described in Subdivision (9) or (11) of
Subsection (b) of Section 9-601a of the Connecticut General Statutes;
A.
B. Services provided by persons volunteering their time;
A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than
loans made at arm's length in the ordinary course of business;
C.
A gift received from:
(1) An immediate family member;
(2) The parent, brother or sister of such immediate family member; or
The child of such immediate family member or the spouse of such
child;
(3)
D.
Goods or services that are provided to the Town and facilitate
governmental action or functions;
E.
F. A certificate, plaque or other ceremonial award costing less than $100;
A rebate or discount on the price of anything of value made at arm's
length in the ordinary course of business without regard to that
person's status;
G.
Printed or recorded informational material germane to governmental
action or functions;
H.
Items of nominal value, not to exceed $10, containing or displaying
promotional material;
I.
An honorary degree bestowed upon a public official or public employee
by a public or private university or college, or other school of learning;
J.
A meal provided in the home of an individual; or a meal provided at an
event and/or the registration or entrance fee to attend such an event,
in which the public official or public employee participates in his/her
official capacity; gifts in-kind of nominal value, specifically excluding
gifts of cash, not to exceed $50, tendered on gift-giving occasions
generally recognized by the public, including Christmas, Hannukah,
birthdays, the birth or adoption of a child, weddings, confirmations or
bar/bat mitzvahs, provided the total value of such gifts received from
any one source, person or entity in any calendar year does not exceed
$250.
K.
§ 38-2 ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE § 38-2
32:25
INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
INDIVIDUAL WITH WHOM HE/SHE IS ASSOCIATED — An individual with
whom the person or a member of his/her immediate family mutually has an
interest in any business with which he/she is associated.
OFFICIAL RESPONSIBILITY — The direct administrative or operating
authority, whether intermediate or final and whether exercisable personally
or through subordinates, to approve, disapprove, or otherwise direct
governmental action.
PERSON — An individual, sole proprietorship, trust, corporation, union,
association, firm, partnership, committee, club or other organization or
group of persons.
PERSONAL INTEREST — An interest in any action taken by the Town in
which an individual will derive a nonfinancial benefit or detriment but which
will result in the expenditure of municipal funds.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — A person employed, whether part-time or full-time,
by the Town of Branford, or any of its boards, commissions, agencies, or
other entities.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — An elected or appointed official, whether paid or
unpaid or full- or part-time, of the Town of Branford, or any of its boards,
commissions, agencies, or other entities, including candidates for office.
RESPONDENT — A person who is alleged, in a complaint filed with the
Board of Ethics, to have committed a violation of the Code of Ethics.
TOWN — The Town of Branford.
§ 38-3. Gifts; disclosure of interest; conflicts of interest.
A. Gifts prohibited. No public official or public employee, or any member
of his/her immediate family, shall accept any gift, as defined herein, that
might tend to influence the performance or nonperformance of his/her
duties or otherwise create an appearance of impropriety.
B. Disclosure of interest. Within 30 days after the end of each fiscal year
(June 30), each public official or public employee having a financial
interest in one or more transactions with the Town totaling $500 or
more in the year shall file a written statement disclosing his/her position
as a Town officer, the nature of his/her interest in each transaction
and the total amount received from such transactions during each year.
Disclosure of any such known interests of the immediate family shall also
be prepared. Such statements shall be signed under oath and in a form
prescribed by the Board of Ethics and shall be filed in the office of the
Town Clerk and reviewed by the Board of Ethics.
C. Conflicts of interest.
(1) No public employee or public official shall engage in or participate
in any business or transaction, including outside employment with
a private business, or have any financial interest, direct or indirect,
or engage in any transaction or professional activity or incur any
obligation of any nature that is in conflict with the proper discharge
of his/her official responsibilities in the public interest, or which
§ 38-2 BRANFORD CODE § 38-3
32:26
would tend to impair his/her independent judgment or action in the
performance of his official duties or responsibilities.
(2) Solicitation or acceptance of gifts.
(a) No public employee or public official shall solicit or accept any
gift from any individual who or entity that to his knowledge
has a personal interest or financial interest in any pending
matter within such public employee's or public official's official
responsibility.
(b) If a gift is offered, he/she must refuse it, return it, or pay the
donor the full value of the gift, or donate it to a nonprofit
organization, provided he/she does not take any corresponding
tax write-off. Alternatively, it may be considered a gift to the
Town, provided that it remains in the Town's possession and use
permanently and is available for the enjoyment and benefit of
the Town and its residents.
(3) No public official or business with which he/she is associated shall
appear or act in any material capacity on behalf of private interests
before any board on which he or she serves, or represent any such
interests in litigation involving an action of that board. Disclosure
and recusal will not suffice to cure a violation of this provision.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent a public official from
appearing in his or her own behalf on a matter before the Town or
a board, provided he or she abstains from deliberating, deciding or
acting with respect to the matter.
(4) Nothing contained in this code shall prohibit or restrict a public
employee or public official from appearing before any board or
commission of the Town on his/her own behalf, or from being a
party in any action, proceeding or litigation brought by or against
the public employee or public official to which the Town is a party.
(5) No public employee or public official shall disclose confidential
information concerning Town affairs, nor shall he/she use such
information for the financial interests of himself/herself or others.
(6) No public employee or public official shall request or permit the use
of Town-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials or property
for personal convenience or profit, except when such are available
to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the
use of such public employee or public official in the conduct of
official business.
(7) No public employee or public official, or a business with which
he/she is associated, or member of his/her immediate family shall
enter into a contract with the Town unless it is awarded through a
process of public notice and competitive bidding.
(8) No public employee or public official may use his/her position or
office for the financial benefit of himself/herself, a business with
which he/she is associated, an individual with whom he/she is
associated, or a member of his/her immediate family, if such benefit
is not common to the interests of the other citizens of the Town.
(9) No public employee or public official shall accept a fee or
honorarium for an article, appearance, or speech, or for
§ 38-3 ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE § 38-3
32:27
participation in an event, in his/her official capacity, unless the fee
or honorarium is donated to the Town or to a nonprofit charity.
(10) No public employee or public official, or member of such
individual's immediate family or business with which he/she is
associated, shall solicit or accept anything of value, including, but
not limited to, a gift, loan, political contribution, reward,
employment or the promise of future employment, based on any
understanding that the vote, official action or judgment of the
public employee or public official would be or had been influenced
thereby.
§ 38-4. Establishment of Board of Ethics; composition; meetings;
rules and regulations.
A. There is hereby established a Branford Board of Ethics for the purpose of
receiving, investigating and acting upon complaints alleging violations of
the Code of Ethics, making recommended rulings regarding complaints
and advisory opinions regarding the enforcement of the Code of Ethics,
and making recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption
of amendments and revisions to the Code of Ethics.
B. The Board of Ethics shall consist of five regular members, electors of
the Town, who are known for their personal integrity. The members shall
be appointed by unanimous vote of the Board of Selectmen for terms
of five years, except that, of the initially appointed members, one shall
serve for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four
years and one for five years. Three members shall constitute a quorum
sufficient to conduct the ordinary business of the Board at a meeting,
for any action by the Board with respect to any action on any complaint
alleging a violation of the Code of Ethics, or for any advisory opinions.
In the event that two or more members of the Board recuse themselves
from participating in any actions with respect to a complaint alleging a
violation of the Code of Ethics or an advisory opinion, a majority of a
quorum shall be sufficient for such action by the Board.
C. The Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary and shall establish
its own rules of procedure. It shall keep records of its meetings and shall
hold meetings at the call of the Chairman and at such times as the Board
may determine.
D. The Board may adopt, after a public hearing, reasonable rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the Code of Ethics for the
administration of the Code of Ethics.
§ 38-5. Issuance of advisory opinions.
A. The Board shall render advisory opinions with regard to the
requirements of the Code of Ethics or possible ethical conflicts or other
issues thereunder upon the written request of a public official or public
employee concerning the requirements of this Code as applied to him
or her. The request shall be made in writing and be sent in a sealed
envelope addressed to the Board in care of the Town Clerk. The request
shall state the name and address of the person making the request and
all facts relevant to the matter in question.
§ 38-3 BRANFORD CODE § 38-5
32:28
B. The Board may request further information from the person making the
request. It shall issue its advisory opinion as soon as practicable. The
opinion shall be in writing and shall be mailed to the person making the
request. Advisory opinions shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board
of Ethics and shall be available to the public except as prohibited by law.
C. A person requesting an advisory opinion may rely on that opinion,
provided the person has disclosed all relevant facts and acts in good faith
consistent with those facts.
§ 38-6. Complaints.
A. Making a complaint. Any Town resident who has a good faith belief that
there has been a violation of this code, may file a complaint as follows:
(1) Form of complaint. It must be:
(a) In writing.
(b) Signed (original signature required).
(c) Acknowledged under oath, by a notary public or Commissioner
of the Superior Court, under penalties of false statement.
(d) Filed with the Board in a sealed envelope addressed to the Board
and marked "confidential." It shall be delivered to the Town Clerk
either by hand or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The
complaint shall be deemed to have been filed on the date of its
receipt by the Town Clerk and shall be treated by the Town Clerk
as a confidential document. The Town Clerk shall forward all
correspondence to the Board.
(2) Substance of complaint. It must:
(a) Identify the name of the person or persons who are alleged to
have committed the alleged violation.
(b) Specify the act or acts that are claimed to constitute the alleged
violation and identify the section(s) of the Code of Ethics, to the
extent possible, that the act or acts allegedly violate.
(c) Specify the facts that should be considered by the Board of
Ethics.
(d) Concern acts that have occurred within five years of the date of
the complaint.
B. Board of Ethics procedure upon receipt of complaints.
(1) Upon the receipt of a complaint, properly submitted, the Board
shall investigate any alleged violation of this code. The Board shall
have no authority to present matters for inquiry or investigation on
its own initiative.
(a) In the conduct of an investigation of an alleged violation of
this code, the Board shall have the power to hold hearings,
administer oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral and
documentary evidence, subpoena witnesses, and require the
production for examination by the Board of any books and
papers that the Board deems relevant in any matter under
investigation or in question. In the exercise of such powers,
the Board may use the services of the Town police, who shall
provide the same upon the Board's request. The respondent
and complainant shall have the right to appear and to be
§ 38-5 ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE § 38-6
32:29
represented by legal counsel and to examine and cross-examine
witnesses. All witnesses will be sworn.
(b) Until such time, if any, that the Board makes a determination
of probable cause relative to the allegations of a complaint,
any allegations and information supplied to or received from
the Board shall not be disclosed to any third party by a
complainant, witness or Board member, except upon the
written request of the respondent unless such information is
required to be disclosed pursuant to the Connecticut Freedom
of Information Act.5
(2) Not later than 15 days after the receipt of a complaint, the Board
shall provide notice of receipt and a copy of the complaint, by
registered or certified mail, to any respondent(s) against whom
such complaint is filed, and the Board shall provide notice of receipt
of such complaint to the complainant(s) in the same manner.
(3) Within 30 days of receipt of a complaint, as set forth above, the
Board shall meet and review the complaint to determine whether
or not the allegations contained therein, if proved, would constitute
a violation of the code. If the Board determines that the complaint
does not contain sufficient facts to constitute a violation, the Board
shall dismiss the complaint and duly notify the complainant and
respondent by registered or certified mail. All records of said
complaint shall remain confidential except upon the written request
of the respondent unless such information is required to be
disclosed pursuant to the Connecticut Freedom of Information Act.
(4) If the Board determines that the complaint alleges sufficient facts
to constitute a violation, the Board shall retain the complaint for
further investigation and duly notify the complainant and
respondent by registered or certified mail within three business
days; and then within 30 days after so determining, the Board shall
commence a preliminary investigation on the allegations contained
therein for the purpose of determining probable cause as set forth
below.
(5) If the Board determines that the complaint alleges sufficient facts
to constitute a violation, the Board shall investigate the complaint
to determine whether probable cause exists for further
proceedings. Any investigation conducted prior to a probable cause
finding shall be confidential unless confidentiality is waived in
writing by the respondent. The respondent may submit a
preliminary written reply to the Board within 10 days after
receiving notice that the complaint has been retained for further
investigation and before a probable cause finding issues.
(6) If the Board finds that the complaint does not warrant further
investigation because of its lack of factual basis, its de minimis
nature, or otherwise, it shall issue a finding of no probable cause
dismissing the complaint. The finding and the complaint shall
remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived in writing by
the respondent. A finding of no probable cause shall be final. The
Board shall forward copies of the finding to the complainant and
§ 38-6 BRANFORD CODE § 38-6
32:30
respondent by certified mail, return receipt requested, within three
business days thereafter.
(7) If the Board finds that there is probable cause, the Board shall
forward copies of the finding to the complainant and respondent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, within three business
days thereafter. Upon a finding of probable cause, the complaint,
the finding, and the information gathered during the investigation,
if any, shall be made available to the public, and all filings and
proceedings that follow shall be public except as required by law;
provided, however, that deliberations may be held in executive
session to the extent permitted by the Connecticut Freedom of
Information Act.6
(8) The respondent shall have 30 days after his or her notification
of a finding of probable cause to file a response with the Board.
The Board may, upon reasonable grounds, extend this deadline for
filing.
(9) The Board shall hold a hearing on any complaint as to which it has
found probable cause unless the Respondent waives a hearing in
writing and the Board decides not to hold one. The hearing shall be
held on written notice of no less than 30 days to the complainant
and respondent sent by the Board by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The Board may, upon reasonable grounds, extend the
date of the hearing at the request of the respondent.
(10) If a hearing is held, the complainant and respondent shall have
the opportunity to be represented by legal counsel, to present
evidence, and to examine and cross-examine witnesses including
the complainant. For purposes of its investigation and at the
hearing, the Board is empowered to administer oaths or
affirmations and may compel the attendance of witnesses by
issuance of subpoenas. It may also require the production of
documents, whether in hard copy or electronic format, by issuance
of subpoenas for their production. The Board shall give effect to the
rules of privilege recognized by the law. The Board may examine
any witness who appears before it, including the complainant and
respondent. The Board may limit the number of witnesses and
the scope of testimony to matters it believes relevant, material,
not unduly repetitious, and necessary to reach a reasoned
determination.
(11) Following the hearing, the Board shall issue a determination as
soon as practicable and shall mail copies to the complainant and
respondent within three business days thereafter. No member may
vote on a determination unless he or she has attended the entire
hearing, if any, and participated in all deliberations. Deliberations
may be held in executive session to the extent permitted by the
Connecticut Freedom of Information Act. A determination of
violation requires a majority vote of members eligible to vote. In
5. Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-200 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-200 et seq.
§ 38-6 ELDERLY, COMMISSION ON THE § 38-6
32:31
the event of a tie vote, the determination shall be that there is no
violation.
(12) A determination of no violation of this code shall be final.
(13) If a violation is found, the Board may, but need not, also recommend
in its determination sanctions which may include, but need not
be limited to, censure, required recusal, disclosure of conflicts,
and removal from appointive office or employment. Any sanctions
imposed under this code shall be separate from, and not in
limitation of, any other actions that may be taken against the
respondent in any proceedings outside this code.
(14) A determination of violation of this code shall be submitted by
the Board within three business days to the Board of Selectmen
and Representative Town Meeting for such action as they deem
appropriate.
(15) The receipt of evidence at any contested public hearing conducted
by the Board shall be governed by the Uniform Administrative
Procedures Act as set forth in Section 4-178 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
C. Board of Ethics confidentiality of complaints and procedures in
investigation, hearings and determinations:
(1) In accordance with Sections 1-82a(a) through (b) and 7-148h(a)
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, until and unless
there is a finding of probable cause, the allegations in a complaint
and any information supplied to or received from the Board of Ethics
shall not be disclosed during the investigation to any third party by
a complainant, respondent, witness or Board member except at the
request of a respondent, unless such information is required to be
disclosed pursuant to the Connecticut Freedom of Information Act.7
(2) No person shall take or threaten to take official action against an
individual for such individual's disclosure of information to the Board
under the provisions of this code. Such retaliatory actions will be
considered a violation of the code. After receipt of information from
an individual, the Board shall not disclose the identity of such
individual without his consent unless the Board determines that such
disclosure is unavoidable during the course of the investigation.
(3) Upon the request of either the complainant or the respondent, 14
days prior to the start of the hearing, and at the expense of the party
requesting it, the Board shall cause the hearings to be recorded and
also a transcription to be made.
(4) If the Board makes a finding of no probable cause, the complaint and
the record of its investigation shall remain confidential, except upon
the request of the respondent unless such information is required
to be disclosed pursuant to the Connecticut Freedom of Information
Act. No complainant, respondent, witness, designated party, or
Board member shall disclose to any third party any information
learned from the investigation, including knowledge of the existence
of a complaint, which the disclosing party would not otherwise have
known.
§ 38-6 BRANFORD CODE § 38-6
32:32
(5) If the Board makes a finding of probable cause, the entire record of
the investigation and hearing shall become public.
§ 38-7. Penalty for false complaints.
The complainant is hereby advised and provided notice that if he or she
intentionally makes a false statement, he/she may be subject to fines of
up to $1,000 and penalties of up to one year of imprisonment under the
provisions of Section 53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, a Class A misdemeanor.
§ 38-8. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of any provision of the code may be punished by public censure
and reprimand. The Board of Ethics may recommend to the Board of
Selectmen and/or the Representative Town Meeting or other appropriate
body (in the case of a public employee) dismissal or suspension from
employment, restitution of any pecuniary benefits received, or other
appropriate recommendations based on the violation committed.
§ 38-9. Expenses and compensation; special counsel.
A. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation for their
services. In the performance of its duties and in the exercise of its
powers, the Board shall not incur any expenses in excess of the funds
appropriated by the legislative body for such purpose.
B. The Board shall have access to Town Counsel and to special legal counsel
of the Board's choosing if Town Counsel is disqualified from assisting
the Board or recuses, or if the Board deems it inadvisable to proceed
with advice from Town Counsel in the circumstances. If special counsel
is retained, the Town's Finance Director or his or her designee shall
negotiate terms of engagement for special counsel.
§ 38-10. Distribution.
The Town Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be available
to every public employee and public official within 60 days after enactment
of this code. Each public employee and public official shall read a copy
before entering upon the duties of his/her office or employment. A signed
statement certifying that he/she has done so shall be returned to the Town
clerk and retained on file. The code will be available on the Branford web
site, or by hard copy if requested.
Chapter 42
FINANCIAL OBLIGATIONS REVIEW
7. Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-200 et seq.
§ 38-6 FINANCIAL OBLIGATIONS REVIEW § 42-1
42:33
§ 42-1. Approval.
All financial obligations to which the Town shall be party, whose term
is greater than one year and whose dollar value exceeds $10,000 per
year, including all contracts and renewals, extensions, amendments or
modifications of any contracts, and grant-eligible school building projects,
shall be subject to approval by the Board of Selectmen with the review of
the Board of Finance, which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 42-2. Advisory review of Board of Education obligations.
All such similar financial obligations which the General Statutes empower
the Board of Education to approve shall also be subject to the advisory
review of the Board of Finance prior to commitment. If said review has not
occurred within 31 days of the request from the Board of Education, said
requirement is waived.
§ 42-3. Contracts between Board of Education and Superintendent
of Schools.
All financial terms, conditions and benefits contained within employment
or other contracts between the Board of Education and the Superintendent
of Schools, which exceed the statutory authorized length of three years,
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Finance and the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 42-4. Exceptions.
All contracts that are required to be brought before the Branford RTM for
its approval are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 45
FIRST SELECTMAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Continuation of position — See Charter,
Section 10.
Elections — See Ch. 34.
§ 45-1. Restrictions on position.
In the event that the Board of Finance includes in its annual budget and
makes said appropriation for the salary of the First Selectman and if the
voters of the Town of Branford, at its next annual meeting or any
adjournment thereof, approve and accept such appropriation so made by
the Board of Finance, then the First Select man shall devote such time as
may be necessary to the full and efficient administration of the affairs of
§ 42-1 BRANFORD CODE § 45-1
45:34
the Town, and said First Selectman shall not during his term of office rent,
hire, lease sell or furnish directly or indirectly to the Town of Branford any
supplies, material or equipment of any sort, and said First Selectman shall
not during his term of office be an officer, director, employee or stock holder
of any person, corporation, association or partnership which shall rent, hire,
sell or furnish directly or indirectly to the Town of Branford any supplies,
material or equipment of any sort.
Chapter 47
FISCAL YEAR
§ 47-1. Uniform fiscal year adopted.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 110 of the 1959 Supplement to the
General Statutes of Connecticut,8 the Town of Branford hereby adopts the
uniform fiscal year and shall begin a new fiscal year on July 1, 1961.
§ 47-2. Annual budget meeting.
The annual budget meeting of the Town of Branford shall be the second
Tuesday of May, commencing with the year 1961, at 8:00 p.m. and shall
be held at some suitable place designated by the Representative Town
Meeting. The annual Town budget and the estimates and recommendations
of the Board of Finance shall be submitted to this meeting for appropriate
action.
§ 47-3. Interim budget.
The Town of Branford shall adopt an interim budget for the period October
11, 1960, to June 30, 1961.
Chapter 50
FLOOD AND EROSION CONTROL BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 161.
§ 50-1. State law adopted.
The provisions of Sections 2383-d to 2398-d, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, Revision of 1949, as amended,9 are hereby adopted.
8. Editor's Note: See Section 7-382 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958.
9. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Sections 25-84 to 25-94 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, Revision of 1958.
§ 45-1 FISCAL YEAR § 50-2
47:35
§ 50-2. Establishment.
The Flood and Erosion Control Board hereby established pursuant to the
provision of Section 2383-d of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision
of 1949, as amended, is designated as the Flood and Erosion Control Board
for the Town of Branford.
§ 50-3. Membership.
Members of the Flood and Erosion Control Board shall be electors of
the Town of Branford holding no salaried municipal office and shall be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen as follows:
A. The five original members of said Board shall be appointed, one member
for a term expiring on the 30th day of April 1958, and one member for a
term expiring on the 30th day of April of each year thereafter until April
30, 1962.
B. In the month of April in each year, one member of the Flood and Erosion
Control Board shall be appointed for a term of five years beginning on
the first day of May next thereafter.
C. Vacancies in the Flood and Erosion Control Board shall be filled by the
Board of Selectmen for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 50-4. Officers and meetings.
The Flood and Erosion Control Board shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary
from among its members and shall meet at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as said Board may determine.
Chapter 52
GREATER NEW HAVEN TRANSIT DISTRICT
§ 52-1. Purpose; authorization to participate.
A. The Town hereby determines that it is in the public interest to ensure
the provision of specialized transit district service to the residents of the
Town of Branford.
B. The Town hereby recognizes the existence of the Greater New Haven
Transit District which was created pursuant to Chapter 103a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, the member cities or towns of which are
currently New Haven, West Haven, East Haven, Hamden and North
Haven.
C. The Town hereby authorizes the Town of Branford through its Board
of Selectmen to apply for membership in and to join the Greater New
Haven Transit District in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 103a
of the Connecticut General Statutes and the Bylaws of the Greater New
Haven Transit District.
Chapter 53
GREEN COMMITTEE
§ 50-2 BRANFORD CODE § 53-1
52:36
§ 53-1. Creation; annual report.
During the month of June 2001, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a
committee to be known as the "Branford Green Committee" to advise the
Board of Selectmen regarding the preservation and maintenance of the
flora located on the Town Green. The Branford Green Committee will submit
an annual report to the Town summarizing its activities for the year.
§ 53-2. Composition.
A. The Committee shall consist of nine members, all residents of the Town
of Branford.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall make appointments to the Committee in
the following manner:
(1) Three members, one from each church on the Town Green;
(2) One member from the Branford Historical Society; [Amended
3-9-2016]
(3) Two members at large, recommendations to be made by the Branford
Green Committee;
(4) One member from the Academy on the Green;
(5) One member from the Branford Garden Club; and
(6) One member from the Shoreline Chamber of Commerce. [Amended
3-9-2016]
§ 53-3. Terms of office.
A. The nine members shall serve for terms of three years; provided,
however, that initially in June 2001, three members shall be appointed
for a term of one year, three members shall be appointed for a term
of two years and three members shall be appointed for a term of three
years. Thereafter, in the month of June of each succeeding year, three
members shall be appointed for a term of three years.
B. In the event of a vacancy in the term of any member described in
Subsection A hereof, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a successor to
serve for the balance of the term vacated.
C. All terms of office described in Subsection A hereof shall be effective as
of June 1 in any year.
Chapter 54
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
§ 54-1. Number. [Amended 5-14-1996]
Until further action by the legislative authority of this town, the number of
Justices of the Peace for the Town of Branford be and the same is fixed at
15.
Chapter 57
LIBRARY
§ 53-1 JUSTICES OF THE PEACE § 54-1
54:37

ARTICLE I
James Blackstone Memorial Library
[Adopted 7-12-1960]
§ 57-1. Establishment of public library.
The James Blackstone Memorial Library is hereby recognized, ratified,
confirmed and established as a public library within the meaning, concept
and intendment of Section 11-20 of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
Revision of 1958.
§ 57-1 LIBRARY § 57-1
57:39

ARTICLE II
Willoughby Wallace Library Committee
[Adopted 10-12-1983]
§ 57-2. Creation.
There is hereby created a Willoughby Wallace Library Committee.
§ 57-3. Composition.
Said Committee shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Town of Branford.
§ 57-4. Appointment and terms.
Members of said Committee shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen
in the following manner:
A. All members shall be appointed for terms of five years; provided,
however, that initially one member shall be appointed for a term of five
years, one member shall be appointed for a term of four years, two
members shall be appointed for terms of three years, two members shall
be appointed for a term of two years and one member shall be appointed
for a term of one year. All appointments shall be made in the month of
December in each year with terms commencing on January 1.
B. In the event of a vacancy in the term of any member, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint a successor to serve the balance of the term
vacated.
§ 57-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-12-1991]
Said Committee shall manage, administer and control the operations and
functions of the Willoughby Wallace Library. The Town Treasurer shall
be responsible for the investment and administration of the Willoughby
Adelbert and Fannie Roxanne Coe Wallace Memorial Fund in accordance
with the terms of the will of Willoughby A. Wallace and after consultation
with the Library Committee. The Committee shall expend the net income
thereof for the upkeep of said library, for the purchase of books and
periodicals and for general library purposes. All withdrawals from said fund
shall require the signature of the Chairman or a designated member of the
Committee and the signature of the Town Treasurer or the Assistant Town
Treasurer.
§ 57-6. Officers and meetings.
Said Committee shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary for its members
and shall meet at the call of its Chairperson and at such other times as the
Committee may determine.
§ 57-2 LIBRARY § 57-6
57:41
Chapter 69
PLANNING AGENCY, REGIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
71.
§ 69-1. State law adopted.
The provisions of Chapter 127 of the 1959 Supplement to the General
Statutes are hereby adopted.10
§ 69-2. Membership.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the Town of Branford shall
be a member of the South Central Connecticut Regional Planning Agency.
§ 69-3. Appointment of representatives. [Amended 12-11-1974]
There shall be two representatives from the Town of Branford on said
Agency, one to be appointed by the Branford Planning and Zoning
Commission and one to be appointed by the Representative Town Meeting.
§ 69-4. Terms of representatives.
A. The original representative appointed by the Representative Town
Meeting Planning and Zoning Committee shall be appointed for a term
expiring on the 31st day of October 1961.
B. The original representative appointed by the Branford Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be appointed for a term expiring on the 31st
day of October 1962.
C. Thereafter, as said original terms expire, each representative shall be
appointed pursuant to the provisions of § 69-3 hereof for a term of
two years beginning on the first day of November next thereafter the
expiration of the preceding term.
§ 69-5. Payment of dues.
The Town of Branford, subject to the approval of the Board of Finance,
shall pay the dues of the Branford representatives to the South Central
Connecticut Regional Planning Agency.
§ 69-6. Absence from meetings.
Any representative who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings
of the Regional Planning Agency and any intervening duly called special
10.Editor's Note: See now Section 8-31a et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 57-6 BRANFORD CODE § 69-6
69:42
meetings thereof shall be considered to have resigned from said Regional
Planning Agency, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing body
described in § 69-3 hereof until the term expires, except that the
requirements of this section may be waived where illness or other
extenuating circumstances make it impossible for a representative to meet
the attendance requirement of this section.
Chapter 71
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION; ZONING BOARD OF
APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Agency — See Ch. 69. Planning and zoning regulations — See Part
III of the Code.
§ 71-1. State law adopted.
The provisions of Chapters 124 and 126 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, Revision of 1966, are hereby adopted.11
§ 71-2. Planning and Zoning Commission designated.
The Zoning Commission, hereby established pursuant to the provisions of
said Chapter 124, is designated as the Planning and Zoning Commission for
the Town of Branford.
§ 71-3. Membership; terms.
Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission and members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be electors of the Town of Branford, holding
no municipal, state or federal employment or office and shall be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen. Said Planning and Zoning Commission and said
Zoning Board of Appeals shall each be composed of five members and three
alternate members. Not more than three members of said Planning and
Zoning Commission and not more than three members of said Zoning Board
of Appeals shall at the same time be members of the same political party.
A. In the month of October in each year, one member of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and one member of the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall be appointed for a term of five years beginning the first day of
November next thereafter. The present members of both shall continue
to serve for their respective appointed terms.
B. In the month of October in each year, one alternate member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed for a term of three
years beginning the first day of November, next thereafter. The present
11.Editor's Note: See Sections 8-1 et seq. and 8-18 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 69-6 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION; § 71-3
71:43
alternate members shall continue to serve for their respective appointed
terms.
C. In the month of October of each year, in which the term of an alternate
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals is to expire, there shall be an
appointment of an alternate member of said Board for a term of five
years beginning the first day of November next thereafter.
D. Vacancies, including alternates, on the Planning and Zoning
Commissions and on the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled by the
Board of Selectmen for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 71-4. Officers.
The Planning and Zoning Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals shall
each elect a Chairman and a Secretary from among its members and shall
meet at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as said Commission
or Board may determine.
§ 71-5. Meetings.
Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the public.
§ 71-6. Removal of members.
Members, including alternates, may be removed for cause by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 71-7. Present members.
All present members, including alternates, of said Planning and Zoning
Commission and said Zoning Board of Appeals shall continue to serve for
their appointed terms.
Chapter 73
PROPERTY, SALE AND DISPOSITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing — See Ch. 75.
§ 73-1. Sale to highest bidder required.
No real or personal property of the Town of Branford, whether new or used,
shall be sold except to the highest responsible bidder after advertising the
sale of the property in some newspaper having a general circulation in the
Town.
§ 71-3 BRANFORD CODE § 73-2
73:44
§ 73-2. Waiver of requirement for bids.
Except to the extent prohibited by law, the requirement for bids hereunder
may be waived by unanimous vote of the Board of Selectmen if, in the
opinion of the Board, such waiver is in the best interests of the Town.
§ 73-3. Land transfers; R.T.M. approval required.
No Town agency, Town officer or the Board of Selectmen shall acquire, sell,
lease, mortgage, abandon, gift, transfer or encumber in any manner real
property of the Town until such action has been approved by a majority vote
of the members of the R.T.M. Nothing herein shall waive the requirements
of Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-24, as amended from time to
time.
Chapter 74
PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSION
§ 74-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the Town of Branford a Public Building
Commission for the purpose of managing and controlling all approved
public building projects specifically assigned to it by the First Selectman,
and to be known as the "Public Building Commission" (hereinafter
"Commission").
§ 74-2. Membership.
Permanent members. The Commission will have five permanent members,
all of whom shall be residents and electors of the Town of Branford,
appointed by the Board of Selectmen, and shall serve for a term of four
years, but initially two members shall be appointed and serve for a term of
four years or until the successors are appointed and qualified; two members
shall be appointed and serve for a term of three years and the remaining
one member for two years. In the event that a vacancy occurs during the
term of any member, the Board of Selectmen shall fill said vacancy. Any new
member so appointed shall serve until the expiration of such term.
A. Ex officio members. The First Selectman and the Chairman of the Board
of Finance shall each be an ex officio member of the Commission. The
Board of Selectmen may appoint such additional ex officio members as
it deems appropriate to serve only on matters relating to the specific
project assignment for which they are appointed. Ex officio members
shall not be entitled to vote on any matter. [Amended 3-9-2016]
B. Temporary members. The Board of Selectmen may appoint up to four
temporary members to the Commission to represent the "user's interest"
in a specific project. Such temporary members shall serve until final
completion and approval of the project by the Town (or the completion
of the Commission's work on such project) and shall serve and vote only
§ 73-2 PROPERTY, SALE AND DISPOSITION OF § 74-2
73:45
on matters relating to the specific project assignment for which they are
appointed. [Amended 3-9-2016]
C. Qualification for office. Each permanent member appointed by the Board
of Selectman shall be qualified by experience or training in fields such as
architecture, engineering, finance, building construction, law, or related
areas and any temporary member appointed shall be qualified by
experience in the development, use or operation of the building which
is the subject of the project for which he or she has been appointed.
[Amended 3-9-2016]
D. Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy in the term of any permanent or
temporary member of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen shall
appoint a successor to serve for the balance of the term vacated. Any
member may be removed for cause by said Board of Selectmen after
public hearing and on written request of such member. Members shall
serve without compensation but shall be compensated for necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.
§ 74-3. Powers and duties.
A. Officers; rules and regulations. The Commission shall appoint its own
chairman and secretary and shall establish its own rules and regulations
for the conduct of its meetings. A copy of said rules and regulations shall
be filed with the town clerk.
B. Scope of responsibilities. The Commission shall manage such approved
building projects as shall from time to time be assigned to it by the First
Selectman. The Commission may assist, at the First Selectman’s request,
in the planning for approved building projects and in the supervision of
the construction of such projects. The Commission may request the First
Selectman to appoint an engineer to work with the Commission at its
discretion.
C. Contracts. Any and all contracts related to public building projects,
including but not limited to school building projects shall be authorized
and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
D. Commission as School Building Committee. Unless otherwise designated
by the RTM with the concurrence of the Board of Selectmen, the
Commission shall be designated as the school building committee as that
term is defined by the Connecticut General Statutes.
E. Final report. Upon completion of each project, the Commission, in
consultation with the First Selectman, shall render to the Board of
Selectmen, the Board of Finance and the RTM a final written report
concerning said project and the Director of Finance shall render a
final written accounting of all income and expenses made under the
related appropriation. Upon approval by the Board of Selectmen of the
Commission’s final report at the final completion of each project, the
project shall be turned over to the appropriate town official or agency.
§ 74-2 BRANFORD CODE § 74-3
73:46
Chapter 75
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Accounts and bills — See Ch. 4.
§ 74-3 PROPERTY, SALE AND DISPOSITION OF § 74-3
73:47

ARTICLE I
Purchases from Town Officers
[Adopted by the Town Meeting12-23-1933]
§ 75-1. Purchases prohibited.
No individual holding a public office in the Town or who is employed by
said Town shall be permitted to furnish trucks, equipment or supplies to
the Town unless such trucks, equipment or supplies cannot be secured
elsewhere in said Town.
§ 75-1 PROPERTY, SALE AND DISPOSITION OF § 75-1
73:49

ARTICLE II
Bidding
[Adopted by the Representative Town Meeting 2-21-1975; amended
in its entirety 4-7-2009]
§ 75-2. Advertising, bidding, and requests for proposals. [Amended
6-11-2014]
A. All goods and services purchased by the Town, including but not limited
to the Board of Education, Sewer Authority and capital project funds
established for the benefit of the James Blackstone Memorial Library
(collectively referred to hereinafter as the "Town"), when the amount of
the purchase exceeds $12,500, shall be awarded through a sealed bid
process, including public opening of such bids, to the lowest responsible
bidder after posting a bid notice on the Town website and either
advertising the same in a newspaper with general circulation or posting
on the Connecticut Department of Administrative Services website.
B. In lieu of bid specifications, a request for proposal may be issued. A
request for proposal may be issued when a desired outcome is sought,
but the method for achieving that outcome is not defined in a detailed
specification, or allows for presenting different options for achieving
the desired outcome beyond proposed specifications. Services or goods
purchased by request for proposal shall be awarded based on a variety
of factors, including project approach, experience, price, and such other
criteria as shall be defined and specifically set forth in the request for
proposal. Requests for proposal shall be posted in the same manner as
bid specifications, and responses shall be sealed in the same manner as
bids.
C. The requirement of advertising and sealed bidding shall not apply to:
(1) Purchases less than $12,500, provided the price is consistent with
the price offered to the general public for the same goods and/
or services and that procedures as may be defined by the First
Selectman are followed.
(2) Emergency situations, where the First Selectman or his designee
authorizes the emergency purchase and the department head or his
or her designee, as soon as reasonably possible, provides a report
on the nature of the emergency and the reason for such emergency
purchase to the Board of Selectmen, to be included in such Board's
minutes.
(3) Contracts in the amount of $75,000 or less for legal services,
accounting, actuarial and auditing services, medical and dental
services, architectural services, engineering services and labor
negotiators.
(4) Any purchases made through the State of Connecticut or other
public sector purchasing cooperative.
(5) Sole source purchases, such as utilities or legal notices, and
including purchases where the purchase of an item or service is
required to match an existing installation or equipment, and there
are no competitive products available that would function equally
well, or if the maintenance costs would be unduly increased by
§ 75-2 PROPERTY, SALE AND DISPOSITION OF § 75-2
73:51
having different makes installed. Sole source purchases for reasons
other than a true lack of second possible vendor shall be approved
by the First Selectman.
(6) Work on bridges, sidewalks, roads, curbing or other pavement, when
the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation has obtained
bids for such work and the Town is able to pay the state price for
such work, or the Town solicits no fewer than three price quotations
for such work from qualified contractors, businesses or persons,
as such qualifications are set forth in a request for qualifications
prepared by the Town and the Town awards such work to the
qualified contractor, business or person submitting the lowest price
quote, provided that the cost of work, material and supplies does not
exceed the sum of $400,000.
§ 75-3. Waiver of requirements; acceptance or rejection of bid.
A. The requirement of advertising and bidding may be waived by a
unanimous vote of the Board of Selectmen that such waiver is in the best
interests of the Town.
B. The Board of Selectmen may by majority vote accept such bid or
proposal as it determines to be the lowest responsible bid or the best
proposal. It may, by unanimous vote, reject any or all bids or proposals,
or waive any informalities in bids or proposals, if such rejection or waiver
of informality is in the best interest of the Town.
§ 75-4. State and federal funds.
Purchases involving projects approved or anticipated to be eligible for
federal or state grants will conform to the specific requirements associated
with the type of funding or grant.
§ 75-5. Violations.
Any person violating this chapter shall be personally liable and responsible
to the Town. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the
requirements of this article.
§ 75-2 BRANFORD CODE § 75-5
73:52
Chapter 78
RECREATION, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 190.
§ 78-1. Creation and responsibility. [Amended 9-14-1977]
There shall be in the Town of Branford a Department of Recreation.
A. The Department will be charged with the responsibility of:
(1) Putting into effect and maintaining a recreation program for the
entire Town.
(2) Setting and publishing rules and regulations and to set and assess
penalties for violations of said rules and regulations.
(3) Maintaining and supervising all facilities and areas that have been or
that may be acquired by the Town and placed under the jurisdiction
of the Department of Recreation by the proper Town authorities.
B. The Directors and Supervisors shall have the authority to eject from any
facility or area any person or persons acting in violation of rules and
regulations as set forth in Subsection A(2).
C. In cases of serious or consistent violations of said rules or regulations,
the Board of Recreation may suspend a person or persons from
participating in all programs, activities and/or use of the facilities,
conducted and coming under the jurisdiction of the Board of Recreation.
D. On all recommended suspensions, the Board of Recreation shall meet
within five business days for the purpose of a hearing on the
recommended suspension.
E. On all recommended suspensions, the Director shall notify the affected
party in writing within 24 hours of said pending suspension hearing and
of his opportunity to be present and to be heard.
§ 78-2. Recreation Board; membership and terms.
A. The Department of Recreation shall be administered by a Board of five
members, not all of whom shall reside in the same section of the Town
and among whom both sexes shall be represented, to be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen in the following manner:
(1) In the month of October 1952, there shall be appointed one member
to serve for a term expiring on the second Monday of October five
years thereafter, one for a term expiring on the second Monday of
October four years thereafter, one for a term expiring on the second
Monday of October three years thereafter, one for a term expiring
on the second Monday of October two years thereafter and one for a
term expiring on the second Monday of October one year thereafter.
(2) Each year thereafter, on or before the second Monday of October,
one member shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve
for a term beginning on the second Monday of October and expiring
§ 75-5 RECREATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 78-2
78:53
on the second Monday of October five years from the time of
appointment.
B. Any vacancies that occur shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen.
C. All members appointed shall serve without pay and until the expiration
of their terms or until their successors shall have been appointed and
qualified.
§ 78-3. Director.
The Board of Recreation shall appoint a Director of the Department of
Recreation, who shall be qualified in the field of Recreation, and may
dismiss such Director for cause. Other necessary personnel of the
Department may be appointed and dismissed by the Director with the
approval of the Board of Recreation.
§ 78-4. Responsibility for decisions.
All decisions pertaining to the responsibilities with which this Department
is charged in § 78-1 hereof shall be made by the Board of Recreation and
shall be appealed only to a Town Meeting.
§ 78-5. Meetings.
The Board of Recreation shall meet regularly and such meetings shall be
open to the public upon request. Each year immediately after the second
Monday in October, the Board shall meet and select from its number one
person to serve as Chairman and another to serve as Clerk for the ensuing
year. At that meeting, the Board shall determine the schedule of its regular
meetings for the ensuing year, such schedule to be changed only by vote of
the Board. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or Clerk, and
the Clerk shall call a meeting to be convened within 10 days of the receipt
of a request for such a meeting duly signed by any two members of the
Board. Notice of such special meetings shall be given to all members of the
Board by first class mail postmarked not later than the third day prior to the
day upon which the meeting is to be held. Three members shall constitute a
quorum at all meetings.
Chapter 80
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
§ 80-1. State law adopted.
The provisions of Chapter 55, being Sections 979 to 988 and Sections 483-d
to 502-d inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1949, as
amended,12 are hereby adopted.
12.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Section 8-124 et seq. of the Connecticut General
Statutes, Revision of 1958.
§ 78-2 BRANFORD CODE § 80-2
80:54
§ 80-2. Agency designated.
The Redevelopment Agency hereby created pursuant to the provision of
Section 980 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1949, as
amended,13 is designated the Branford Redevelopment Agency.
§ 80-3. Membership and terms.
Members of the said Redevelopment Agency shall be electors of the Town
of Branford and shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen with the
approval of the governing body as follows:
A. The five original members of said Agency shall be appointed, one
member for a term expiring on the 31st day of January 1959, and one
member for a term expiring on the 31st day of January of each year
thereafter until January 31, 1963.
B. In the month of January in each year, one member of the Redevelopment
Agency shall be appointed for a term of five years beginning the first day
of February next thereafter.
C. Vacancies in the Redevelopment Agency shall be filled by the Board of
Selectmen for the unexpired portion of the term, subject to the approval
of the governing body.
§ 80-4. Meetings and officers.
The Redevelopment Agency shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman
from among its members and shall meet at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as said Board may determine.
Chapter 82
RESOURCE RECOVERY AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 213.
§ 82-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of Chapter 103b, Sections 7-273aa to 7-273oo, of the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, are hereby adopted.
§ 82-2. Establishment of Authority; designation as Town agency.
A public body politic and corporate of the state to be known as the "South
Central Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority" (the
"Authority") constituting a political subdivision of the State of Connecticut
established and created for the performance of an essential public and
13.Editor's Note: See Section 8-126 of the Connecticut General Statues, Revision of 1958.
§ 80-2 RESOURCE RECOVERY AUTHORITY § 82-2
82:55
governmental function is hereby created for the purposes, charged with the
duties and granted the powers provided in Chapter 103b, Sections 7-273aa
to 7-273oo, and Chapters 446d and 446e of the General Statutes of the
State of Connecticut, as amended, which Authority is hereby designated
as the "Regional Resource Recovery Authority" of the Town of Branford.
The Authority shall be the Regional Resource Recovery Authority for the
Town of Branford, such other member municipalities as shall, by ordinance
concurrent herewith, adopt the provisions of Chapter 103b of the General
Statutes, as amended, create the Authority and designate the Authority
as their Regional Resource Recovery Authority and such other member
municipalities as shall, by ordinance and upon such terms and conditions as
the Authority may determine, hereafter become member municipalities of
the Authority.
§ 82-3. Purpose of Authority.
The Authority is established and created for the primary purpose of
providing solid waste management and disposal services within the region
of the Authority, which shall be the region within the jurisdiction of all of
the member municipalities of the Authority, and which purpose includes
providing for the collection and disposal of residential, commercial and
industrial solid waste, the financing, construction and operation of one or
more solid waste disposal facilities for such purpose and the delivery of
solid waste thereto, including facilities for the incineration of solid waste
and the production of steam, electricity and other by-products for sale.
§ 82-4. Membership.
The membership of the Authority shall consist of one member from each
member municipality of the Authority. Each such member, including each of
the first members of the Authority, shall be appointed by the public official
designated to appoint such member by each such member municipality in
its ordinance adopting Sections 7-273aa to 7-273oo of the General Statutes
of the State of Connecticut, as amended, and creating the Authority (the
Public Official). Members shall serve for terms of three years, except that
the members first members of the Authority shall serve terms commencing
August 1, 1985, and any such member appointed from the Town of Branford
or the Town of East Haven shall serve until July 31, 1986. Any such member
appointed from the Town of Madison or the Town of North Branford shall
serve until July 31, 1987, and any such member appointed from the Town
of Guilford or the City of New Haven shall serve until July 31, 1988,
provided that members shall continue to serve until their successors are
appointed and have qualified. In the event of the resignation, death or
disability of a member from any member municipality, a successor may be
appointed by the chief elected official of such member municipality for the
unexpired portion of the term. The member from any member municipality
may be removed for cause by the Public Official. An alternate member of
any member municipality may be appointed by the Public Official, for the
limited purpose of attending any meeting of the Authority or performing any
function, duty or obligation of the member of such member municipality in
§ 82-2 BRANFORD CODE § 82-4
82:56
the event that an emergency situation, temporary disability or extraordinary
circumstance prevents such member from attending any such meeting or
performing any such function, duty or obligation of such member. For such
limited purposes as such alternate member is appointed, such alternate
member shall have, as to the Authority, powers, rights and privileges
identical to those of the member for whom such alternate member is a
substitute, including but not limited to the weighted vote accorded such
member, and whenever such member is mentioned or described in the
articles or bylaws of the Authority, such mention or description shall apply
with equal force to such alternate member. Members shall be reimbursed
for their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 82-5. Weighting of votes.
In voting upon all matters before the Authority, the vote of the member
from each member municipality shall be accorded a weight determined
as follows: the quotient obtained by dividing the tonnage of solid waste
committed by such member municipality by contract or otherwise to be
delivered to the Authority by the total tonnage of solid waste so committed
by all member municipalities at the time of such vote, which quotient shall
be multiplied by 100 and which product shall be rounded to the nearest
whole number. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the bylaws of the Authority
may require the affirmative vote of not less than two members voting on any
matter before the Authority. For the purposes of this section, prior to the
time that all member municipalities shall have committed to deliver solid
waste to the Authority, the member municipalities shall be treated as having
committed to deliver waste in the following amounts: the Town of Branford,
30,000 tons per year; the Town of East Haven, 18,000 tons per year; the
Town of Guilford, 8,000 tons per year; the Town of Madison, 8,000 tons per
year; the City of New Haven, 67,700 tons per year; and the Town of North
Branford, 7,000 tons per year. Whenever a vote is taken on any matter by
the Authority, the vote shall be determined in accordance with this section.
Members of the Authority holding a majority of the votes so weighted shall
constitute a quorum, provided that no quorum shall be deemed to exist
unless not less than three members shall be present and voting.
§ 82-6. Appointment of members.
Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen or
a majority of them. The Board of Selectmen, acting by a majority vote, is
hereby directed to appoint the first member from the Town of Branford to
the membership of the Authority. Such appointee is instructed to execute
and file, as incorporator of the Authority, the Articles of Incorporation of
the Authority. Such Articles of Incorporation are incorporated herein by
reference in the form set forth in attachments hereto14 and are hereby
approved and adopted.
14.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Town offices.
§ 82-4 RESOURCE RECOVERY AUTHORITY § 82-7
82:57
§ 82-7. Legislation deemed concurrent with that of other members.
This chapter shall be deemed to be concurrent with such ordinances as shall
be enacted by such of the City of New Haven, the Town of East Haven, the
Town of Guilford, the Town of North Branford and the Town of Madison
as may enact ordinances concurrent herewith for the purpose of adopting
Chapter 103b, creating the Authority and designating the Authority its
Regional Resource Recovery Authority, notwithstanding that such
ordinances shall not be adopted simultaneously with this chapter or one
or more of such municipalities shall fail to adopt an ordinance for such
purposes. This chapter shall be deemed concurrent with any of such
ordinances of such municipalities as shall not be inconsistent in any
material respect with the provisions hereof.
Chapter 83
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCE
Social Security — See Ch. 91.
§ 82-7 BRANFORD CODE § 82-7
82:58
ARTICLE I
Retirement System
[Adopted 2-25-1959]
§ 83-1. State law adopted.
The Town of Branford hereby provides for the retirement of its regular
employees, excepting those employees provided for by an independent
retirement system, by accepting and adopting the provisions of Sections
7-425 through 7-459, inclusive, of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
Revision of 1958, and provide that such employees shall be included in Fund
A.
§ 83-1 RESOURCE RECOVERY AUTHORITY § 83-1
82:59

ARTICLE II
Post-Employment Benefits Trust Agreement
[Adopted 7-29-2009]
§ 83-2. Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust.
A. Authority; establishment of Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust.
Pursuant to the authority granted in Section 4 of the Charter and
§ 7-450(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, there is hereby created
and established "The Town of Branford Other Post-Employment Benefits
Trust Agreement" (the "OPEB Trust") to fund certain retiree benefits,
excluding pension benefits, and including health care and other postemployment
employment benefits provided separately from a pension
plan, as provided from time to time by the Town.
B. Establishment of Other Post-Employment Benefits Board. Immediately
upon the enactment of this article, the Board of Finance shall constitute
the Town of Branford Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust Board of
Trustees, hereinafter referred to as the OPEB Board. The members of
said OPEB Board shall receive no compensation for serving as a member
thereof.
C. Powers and duties of the OPEB Board. The Town of Branford and the
OPEB Board are hereby authorized and directed to enter into a trust
agreement to govern the administration, management and investment
of the OPEB Trust and the assets thereof. The Town of Branford, acting
through its Board of Selectmen, and the OPEB Board are further
authorized to modify, amend, cancel or terminate the trust agreement,
as appropriate and in accordance with applicable law. The OPEB Board
is authorized to exercise such powers as are set forth in the trust
agreement.
D. Unless otherwise required by law, wherever the Town (as distinguished
from the OPEB Board of Trustees) is authorized or required to act under
the trust agreement, the Board of Finance shall act on behalf of the
Town.
§ 83-2 RESOURCE RECOVERY AUTHORITY § 83-2
82:61
Chapter 86
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 83-2 BRANFORD CODE § 83-2
86:62
ARTICLE I
Town Clerk
[Adopted 6-13-1973]
§ 86-1. Salary in lieu of fees.
Pursuant to Section 7-34b of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town
Clerk shall receive a salary in lieu of all fees and compensation provided
for in the Connecticut General Statutes. Said salary shall be in an amount
as established by the Board of Finance and approved by the Representative
Town Meeting.15
15.Editor's Note: The salary of the Clerk and other Town officials is set forth annually by
ordinance. Copies of the current Salary Ordinance are on file in the office of the Town
Clerk.
§ 86-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 86-1
86:63
Chapter 88
SHELLFISH COMMISSION
§ 88-1. Establishment; composition; appointment. [Amended
6-24-1998]
There shall be a Shellfish Commission, which Commission shall consist of
seven electors of the Town of Branford who shall be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 88-2. Terms. [Amended 6-24-1998]
All members shall be appointed or reappointed for terms of four years;
provided, however, that in order to fully constitute the membership of
the Commission and stagger the terms of membership, one new member
appointed hereunder shall be appointed for a term of four years, two new
members shall be appointed for terms of three years and one new member
shall be appointed for a term of two years. Appointments shall become
effective and terms shall commence on September 1. Any appointment for
the purpose of filling a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the term being
filled.
§ 88-3. Jurisdiction.
Said Commission shall have charge of all the shellfisheries and shellfish
grounds lying in the Town of Branford not granted to others as of the
effective date of this chapter and not under the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner of Agriculture, including but not limited to all rivers, inland
waters and flats adjacent to all beaches and waters within the limits and
marine bounds of the Town.
§ 88-4. Powers and duties.
Said Commission shall have the power to take the following actions:
A. To issue licenses for the taking of shellfish from the above-described
waters and fix the fees therefor.
B. To designate suitable places in the navigable waters of the Town for the
planting or cultivating of oysters, clams and mussels.
C. To designate the quantities of shellfish to be taken.
D. To designate the sizes of such shellfish which may be taken.
E. To designate the methods of taking.
F. To prohibit the taking of shellfish from designated areas for periods not
in excess of one year.
§ 88-5. Disposition of moneys.
All moneys collected by the Commission under the provisions of this chapter
shall be paid to the Commission and used by it for the protection and
propagation of shellfish under its control.
§ 86-1 BRANFORD CODE § 88-6
88:64
§ 88-6. Management plan.
The Commission shall prepare and periodically update a shellfish
management plan. The plan shall be submitted to the Commissioner of
Agriculture and the Board of Selectmen for review and comment.
§ 88-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any regulation issued by the Commission pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $50 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 88-8. Leases, licenses and real property transfers; First Selectman
approval required, Chapter 73 applicable; commercial prohibition
zones. [Added 6-24-199816 ]
No lease, license or transfer of shellfishing grounds owned by the Town of
Branford shall be permitted without the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
The First Selectman shall execute any documents to effect said lease,
license or transfer on behalf of the Town, subject to the applicable
provisions of Chapter 73 of the Code of the Town of Branford, as amended,
requiring R.T.M. approval for the transfer of any real property of the Town.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no lease, license or transfer of shellfishing
grounds owned by the Town of Branford shall be permitted in the following
in-shore areas:
A. North of the state jurisdiction line, between the East Haven/Branford
border and near Spectacle Island, including Short Beach Cove and
Branford Harbor, as shown on that certain map entitled "Town of
Branford Map of Privately Owned Shellfish Beds Western Division, Scale
1 inch = 600 feet, March 1, 1968, Prepared by W. Flanders Smith &
Based on Map Prepared Heaton R. Robertson in 1950," (the Western
Map), which map is on file with the Branford Town Clerk, to which
reference may be had.
B. North of a line located approximately 1,500 feet off Linden Shore and
Indian Neck, said line extending from the northeast corner of Lot 89, as
shown on said Western Map, to the southern corner of Lot 101, as shown
on said Western Map, to which reference may be had.
C. North of a line located approximately 1,500 feet off Haycock Point in
Hotchkiss Grove, said line extending from the angle point in the eastern
boundary of Lot 105 to the northern shore of Rogers Island, as shown
on that certain map entitled "Town of Branford Map of Privately Owned
Shellfish Beds Eastern Division, Scale 1 inch = 600 feet, March 1, 1968,
Prepared by W. Flanders Smith & Based on Map Prepared Heaton R.
Robertson in 1950," (the Eastern Map), which map is on file with the
Branford Town Clerk, to which reference may be had.
D. North of privately owned or granted Lots 151 through 349, inclusive,
extending from Brown Point in Pine Orchard to the Branford/Guilford
border, as shown on said Eastern Map, to which reference may be had.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 88-8, Moratorium,
added 10-8-1997.
§ 88-6 SHELLFISH COMMISSION § 88-9
88:65
§ 88-9. Moratorium. [Added 4-8-1998]
There shall be a moratorium on leasing or licensing of shellfish beds by the
Shellfish Commission and the Board of Selectmen for a period of six months
from April 8, 1998.
Chapter 89
SIGNPOSTS
§ 89-1. Locations established.
The public signpost heretofore located at Short Beach shall be transferred
to near the Post Office at Short Beach. Stony Creek signpost shall continue
at present location. Paved Street, Mill Plain and one on the Green shall be
discontinued. The one at the Town Hall shall be located within the Town Hall
in the center. This makes the location of the public signposts for the Town
of Branford within the Town Hall in the center, at Short Beach near the Post
Office, and at Stony Creek at its present location.
Chapter 91
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement system — See Ch. 83.
§ 91-1. Membership authorized.
The Town of Branford shall apply, under Public Act No. 277 of the 1951
Public Acts, for membership in the old-age and survivors insurance system
under Title II of the Social Security Act, as amended, for employees of the
Town of Branford, excepting therefrom part-time employees and employees
excluded by Section 3 of said Public Act No. 277. The Town Treasurer
be, and he is hereby directed to make deductions from the wages of the
aforesaid participating employees as required by Section 2 of said Act, and
forward the amount thereof, together with the contribution of the Town of
Branford, to the State Employees Retirement Commission, in accordance
with the provisions of said Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
The effective date of membership granted pursuant to this application shall
be January 1, 1952.
§ 91-2. Execution of agreements authorized.
The Board of Selectmen be and it is hereby authorized and empowered to
execute on behalf of the Town of Branford such agreements with the State
Employees Retirement Commission as may be necessary to accomplish the
§ 88-9 BRANFORD CODE § 91-2
89:66
aforesaid purpose in accordance with the provisions of said Public Act No.
277 and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
Chapter 92
STONY CREEK ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
§ 92-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Stony Creek Architectural Review Board
("ARB") in the Town of Branford.
§ 92-2. Membership.
A. The ARB shall be composed of five voting members appointed by the
Board of Selectmen following submission of a written recommendation
by the Stony Creek Association Board of Directors.
B. No fewer than three voting members shall be residents of Stony Creek.
The remaining voting members shall be residents of the Town of
Branford.
C. The ARB shall include at least one member who is an architect, a
landscape architect or planner who is a member of the American
Institute of Certified Planners.
D. Members of the ARB shall be electors in the Town of Branford.
§ 92-3. Terms.
A. The initial members of the ARB shall serve for the following terms:
(1) Three members shall serve for a term of three (3) years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
(2) Two members shall serve for a term of two (2) years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
B. Upon the expiration of the term set forth in Subsection A, of each initial
member, or any successor or successors who may be appointed to the
initial term, members of the ARB shall be appointed for a term of five
years or until their successors are appointed and qualified.
§ 92-4. Duties.
A. The ARB shall review and make recommendations to the Branford
Planning and Zoning Commission (the "Commission") in matters related
to any application subject to Section 5.8 of the Zoning Regulations of
the Town of Branford (the "Regulations") and for which the Commission
has designated the ARB as its village district consultant under the
Regulations authorized by the applicable state laws and regulations
governing village districts, including without limitation C.G.S. § 8-2(j)(d)
et seq.
B. The ARB shall meet as deemed necessary to fulfill its duties to issue
reports and recommendations with respect to applications referred to it
under the Regulations.
§ 91-2 SOCIAL SECURITY § 92-5
91:67
§ 92-5. Rules and regulations.
The ARB may adopt rules and regulations that are consistent with its duties
and responsibilities and comply with state statute.
Chapter 93
STRATEGIC REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 93-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Town of Branford a Strategic Review
Committee.
§ 93-2. Membership.
A. The Strategic Review Committee shall be comprised of nine voting
members appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
B. A least six voting members shall be members of Town boards,
commissions or nonprofit agencies residing in the Town. The remaining
voting members may be citizens at large.
(1) The represented commissions and agencies should include but not
be limited to the following:
(a) Economic Development Commission.
(b) Board of Education.
(c) Chamber of Commerce.
(d) Branford Land Trust.
(e) Joint Conservation and Environmental Commission.
(f) Board of Finance.
(2) Members chosen to represent these commissions and agencies are
to be chosen by their respective group's membership or Board of
Directors as someone who represents that group's goals and mission.
[Amended 3-9-2011]
C. The First Selectman shall be a nonvoting ex officio member.
D. Members of the Strategic Review Committee shall be electors of
Branford.
E. No member may be absent for two consecutive meetings without
providing acceptable notice to the Strategic Review Committee.
§ 93-3. Terms.
A. The initial members of the Strategic Review Committee shall serve for
the following term:
(1) Four members shall serve for a term of one year or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
(2) Three members shall serve for a term of two years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
(3) Two members shall serve for a term of three years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
B. Upon the expiration of the term, as set forth in Subsection A, of each
initial member, or any successor or successors who may be appointed
§ 92-5 BRANFORD CODE § 93-3
91:68
to the initial term, members of the Strategic Review Committee shall be
appointed for a term of five years or until their successors are appointed
and qualified.
§ 93-4. Duties and responsibilities.
The Strategic Review Committee shall advise and assist the Board of
Selectman in matters of long-term planning for the Town of Branford,
shall advise on planning strategies, and shall facilitate short-term decision
making as required by the Board of Selectmen. The Strategic Review
Committee shall:
A. Serve as the Planning Implementation Committee as recommended in
the 2008 Town Plan of Conservation and Development.
B. Coordinate the collection and sharing of information, suggestions and
proposals concerning long planning for the Town.
C. Make recommendations to the First Selectman, and to the Planning
and Zoning Commission as directed by the First Selectman, concerning
strategic and financial planning for the Town.
D. Study and report on specific issues and monitor specific projects as
requested by the First Selectman.
E. Meet as deemed necessary but at least quarterly.
F. Hold public outreach meetings as necessary, but at least semiannually, to
report to and receive recommendations on issues relevant to the citizens
of the Town of Branford.
§ 93-5. Reports.
The Strategic Review Committee shall provide a comprehensive written
report to the Board of Selectman on an annual basis which shall make
recommendations for long-term and short-term planning for the Town, shall
assess the Town's compliance with the Plan of Conservation and
Development, and shall describe the issues that the Town's citizens have
identified as important in the public meetings during the year. Such report
shall be included in the Town Annual Report, published by the Town Clerk,
as required by state statute.
§ 93-6. Rules and regulations.
The Strategic Review Committee may adopt rules and regulations that are
consistent with its duties and responsibilities and comply with state statute.
Chapter 95
TOWN REPORT, ANNUAL
§ 95-1. Publication and distribution date. [Amended 12-11-1974]
The annual Town report of the Town of Branford as required by the General
Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended, shall be published
and ready for distribution not later than the first day of January each year.
§ 93-3 TOWN REPORT, ANNUAL § 95-2
95:69
§ 95-2. Editing and contents.
Said annual Town report shall be edited so as to meet the requirements of
Sections 7-406, 7-394, 10-224, 12-167 and 19-7417 of said General Statutes,
together with any other provision of the statutes appertaining thereto, and
all other reports of Town officials, departments and agencies considered
to be informative and of general public interest shall be included in said
annual Town report.
§ 95-3. Deadline for filing reports.
All reports, financial or otherwise, of Town officials, departments and
agencies for the preceding fiscal year shall be filed with the Clerk of the
Board of Finance not later than the 31st day of July of each year.
§ 95-4. Deadline for filing records of commitments.
A. All records of commitments made by Town officials, departments and
agencies for the preceding fiscal year shall be filed in the office of the
Selectmen not later than the day following such official's, department's
or agency's regular July meeting but in any event not later than the 15th
day of July of each year, in order that the appropriations made for such
commitments may be properly encumbered.
B. Records of commitments received after the 15th day of July of each
year will be honored only as against appropriations made for the current
fiscal year.
Chapter 99
VETERANS' ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 99-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Veterans' Advisory Committee is to implement the duties
and responsibilities of C.G.S. § 27-135(a) on behalf of the Town of Branford.
§ 99-2. Establishment; qualification of members.
There shall be and is hereby created a Veterans' Advisory Committee, which
shall consist of five members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. All
members of the Committee shall be electors and residents of the Town
of Branford. At least three of the members shall be honorably discharged
veterans of the United States.
§ 99-3. Powers and duties.
A. The Committee may act as the coordinating agency in all matters
concerning veterans and their dependents, coordinating the activities
17.Editor's Note: Section 19-74 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, was
repealed 1971, P.A. 325.
§ 95-2 BRANFORD CODE § 99-3
95:70
of public and private facilities concerned with veterans' reemployment,
education, rehabilitation and adjustment to peacetime living.
B. The Committee may cooperate with all national, state and local
governmental and private agencies in securing services and benefits to
which a veteran or his dependents may be entitled, to the extent feasible.
§ 99-4. Terms; vacancies; compensation.
Full terms for members shall be four years, but initially two members
shall be appointed and serve for a term of four years, two members shall
be appointed and serve for a term of three years and the remaining one
member for two years. In the event that a vacancy occurs during the term
of any member, the Board of Selectmen shall fill said vacancy. Each member
shall serve until such member's successor has been appointed. Members
shall serve without compensation.
§ 99-5. Officers.
The Committee shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and a secretary
for two-year terms. The term of a chairperson shall be limited to four
consecutive years. A member having served four years as chairperson shall
be ineligible for election as chairperson for a period of one year after such
member last served as chairperson.
§ 99-6. Meetings; rules and regulations; quorum.
The Committee shall hold regular meetings and shall designate the time and
place thereof and may from time to time adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations for the conduct of its meetings and execution of its duties. Three
members shall constitute a quorum.
Chapter 102
VOTING DISTRICTS
§ 102-1. Districts established; boundaries.
A. The Town of Branford shall be divided into seven voting districts as
follows:
(1) First District: See Map reference 1000, attached hereto for
boundaries.18
(2) Second District: See Map reference 2000, attached hereto for
boundaries.
(3) Third District: See Map reference 3000, attached hereto for
boundaries.
(4) Fourth District: See Map reference 4000, attached hereto for
boundaries.
(5) Fifth District: See Map reference 5000, attached hereto for
boundaries.
(6) Sixth District: See Map reference 6000, attached hereto for
boundaries.
§ 99-3 TOWN REPORT, ANNUAL § 102-1
95:71
(7) Seventh District: See Map reference 7000, attached hereto for
boundaries.
B. Larger versions of Maps 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 5000, 6000, 7000 shall
be on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.
C. This section shall be effective on April 6, 2012.
§ 102-2. Polling places.
A. The following locations are hereby designated as polling places in each
district:
(1) First District: Branford Community House (corner of Church Street
and Prospect Street).
(2) Second District: St. Therese's Church Hall, 105 Leetes Island Road.
(3) Third District: Orchard House Adult Day Care, 421 Shore Drive.
(4) Fourth District: Fire Headquarters, 45 North Main Street.
[Amended 10-14-2015]
(5) Fifth District: New Indian Neck School (Early Years Center), 12
Melrose Avenue.
(6) Sixth District: Mary T. Murphy School, 14 Brushy Plain Road.
(7) Seventh District: Walsh Intermediate School, 185 Damascus Road.
B. This section shall be effective on March 29, 2010.
Chapter 105
WATER COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood and Erosion Control Board — See Ch.
50.
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
106.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 161.
Water — See Ch. 224.
§ 105-1. Commission created.
There is hereby created the Branford Water Commission.
§ 105-2. Membership; compensation.
Said Commission shall consist of five members who shall be residents and
electors of the Town of Branford appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
Members shall serve without compensation.
§ 105-3. Terms of members; election of officers.
Each member shall serve for a term of five years; provided, however, that
of those members initially appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of
18.Editor's Note: First District through Seventh District boundaries are on file in the Town
offices.
§ 102-1 BRANFORD CODE § 105-3
105:72
five years, one shall be appointed for a term of four years, one shall be
appointed for a term of three years, one shall be appointed for a term of two
years, and one shall be appointed for a period of one year. In the event that
a vacancy occurs in the term of any member, the Board of Selectmen shall
fill said vacancy. The Commission shall elect annually from its membership
a Chairperson and a Secretary.
§ 105-4. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-30-1999]
Said Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To consider, investigate, examine and make judgments and
determinations of those properties and areas within the Town of
Branford that would benefit from the installation of city water to secure
said properties and areas.
B. To employ such engineers, attorneys, brokers, employees and others as
it shall deem necessary.
C. To advise the Town of Branford as to the necessity of bonding, securing
notes or funds to pay for the installation and provision of water to said
properties and areas.
D. To advise and make recommendations to the Branford Representative
Town Meeting regarding water assessments pursuant to Chapter 224.
§ 105-5. Coordination with water authority.
Said Commission shall work together with the South Central Regional
Water Authority, or its successors, on the proper and most efficient manner
of installation and maintenance of said waterlines, proper control of
watershed areas and all other matters that may arise as a result of the
installation of city water within the Town of Branford.
§ 105-6. Submission of budget and annual report.
Said Commission shall annually present a budget and file an annual report
of its doings, which report shall be included in the Town's annual report.
Chapter 106
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
§ 106-1. Establishment and composition. [Amended 10-12-2005]
The Town of Branford hereby establishes a Sewer Commission to be
designated as the "Water Pollution Control Authority" for said Town to have
and to exercise all of the powers set forth in Chapter 33a of the 1953
Supplement to the General Statutes,19 said Sewer Commission shall be
§ 105-3 WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY § 106-1
106:73
composed of seven members, no more than four of whom shall be registered
members of the same political party, and two alternates, no more than
one of whom shall be registered members of the same political party, to
be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and to hold office from the date
of their appointment for terms of five years expiring on the 15th day of
October, subject to removal for misconduct by the Board of Selectmen. The
terms of the members shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than
any two members shall expire in any one year. The Board of Selectmen shall
have the power to appoint to the Commission a member to fill the unexpired
term of any member who resigns or who is unable to act or who is removed
from office.
§ 106-2. Officers and compensation.
Said Commission shall appoint from among its members a Chairman and
a Secretary and may employ such engineers, attorneys, brokers and
employees as it shall deem necessary. The Chairman and no member of the
Sewer Authority shall be paid, but the Sewer Authority shall have the power
to engage a qualified superintendent at a salary to be determined by itself
and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 106-3. When effective.
This chapter shall not become effective unless approved by the electors and
all persons qualified to vote in Town Meetings by vote by paper ballots at
the voting places established in the five districts of the Town, the approval
of said chapter to be placed upon the paper ballots under the following
heading "Shall the Town of Branford establish a Sewer Authority under the
provisions of Chapter 33a of the 1953 Supplement to the General Statutes?"
Chapter 109
WETLANDS COMMISSION
§ 109-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Act of the State of
Connecticut, No. 155 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended (hereinafter
the "Act"),20 there is hereby established in the Town of Branford the
Branford Inland Wetlands Commission (hereinafter the "Commission").
§ 109-2. Composition: terms of office and compensation. [Amended
6-14-1978; 9-9-1981; 11-13-1996; 6-10-1998]
The Commission shall consist of seven regular members and three
alternates. The 10 members shall be electors of the Town. All seven regular
19.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Section 7-246 et seq. of the Connecticut General
Statutes, Revision of 1958.
20.Editor's Note: See Section 22a-36 et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of
1958.
§ 106-1 BRANFORD CODE § 109-2
109:74
members and three alternate members shall be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen and shall serve for terms of three years; provided, however,
that in order to stagger the terms of membership, of the regular members
to be appointed or reappointed for terms commencing June 1, 1998, three
members shall be appointed to terms of three years; two members shall
be appointed to terms of two years; two members shall be appointed to
terms of one year; and, of the alternate members to be appointed or
reappointed for terms commencing June 1, 1998, one alternate member
shall be appointed to a term of one year; one alternate member shall be
appointed to a term of two years; and one alternate member shall be
appointed to a term of three years. Appointments shall become effective and
terms shall commence on June 1. Members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of official duties.
§ 109-3. Removal of members.
The Board of Selectmen shall not remove a member of the Commission
except for good cause and, upon request of such member, only after public
hearing. Failure to attend four consecutive meetings of the Commission
shall constitute good cause for removal.
§ 109-4. Vacancies. [Amended 11-13-1996]
Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission which may result from
the death, resignation or removal of a member or from any other cause shall
be filled for the unexpired term of such member by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 109-5. Promulgation of regulations.
A. The Commission shall promulgate as promptly as possible but in any
event on or before June 30, 1974, such regulations as are necessary to:
(1) Provide for the manner in which the boundaries of the inland wetland
areas in the Town of Branford shall be established and amended or
changed; and
(2) Protect the inland wetlands and watercourses within the territorial
limits of the Town.
B. Said regulations shall be in conformity with the Act and with said
regulations promulgated pursuant to the Act by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut. The Commission
shall have all of the powers and be subject to all of the duties as may be
conferred or imposed by a municipality upon its duly authorized inland
wetlands agency pursuant to the Act, including all incidental powers
necessary to enforce rules and regulations and to carry out the purposes
of the Act.
§ 109-6. Reassessment of property.
Whenever the Commission shall establish an inland wetland area or
watercourse as provided by the Act and this chapter, a notice of such
establishment shall be furnished to the Tax Assessor of the Town, who shall,
§ 109-2 WETLANDS COMMISSION § 109-6
109:75
within 90 days of receipt of such notice, revalue or reassess the property
concerned to reflect the impact, if any, of such action upon its value, in the
light of the guidelines set forth in Section 3 of Public Act No. 155, 1972, as
amended in Public Act No. 571, 1973, and shall notify the owner or owners
of such property as to the result of such revaluation or reassessment. Such
revaluation or reassessment shall become effective on the first day of the
next succeeding assessment year for said municipality.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 111
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 111-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Adult-Oriented Establishment
Ordinance for the Town of Branford."
§ 111-2. Policy statement.
A. This chapter is intended to protect and preserve the health, safety,
general welfare and property values in the Town of Branford. The
purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain uses which, because of
their nature, are recognized as having potentially serious objectionable
operation characteristics, particularly when concentrated under certain
circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect upon surrounding
areas. These uses are referred to herein as "adult-oriented
establishments" (AOE's). AOE's generate secondary effects which are
detrimental to the quality and character of residential neighborhoods,
including criminal activity. Therefore, special regulation of AOE's is
necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the
blighting or downgrading of Branford's neighborhoods. Supervision from
the Town's public safety agencies is needed to protect and preserve the
health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well
as the health, safety and welfare of the Town's citizens.
B. Studies performed and statistics derived therefrom in a substantial
number of cities and towns in the United States indicate that many
AOE's, especially those with closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms,
have been used by patrons for the purpose of engaging in sexual acts.
Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such
establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons of such
establishments within such booths, cubicles and rooms. The sexual acts
can result in bodily fluids deposited on the interior walls and floors,
to the detriment of the health and safety of any other persons who
may come into contact with such deposits. The reasonable regulation
and supervision of such AOE's tend to discourage such sexual acts and
prostitution and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of the
patrons of such establishments.
§ 109-6 BRANFORD CODE § 111-2
111:76
C. It is not the intention of the Representative Town Meeting, in enacting
this chapter, to deny to any person rights to speech or equal protection
of the law under the United States and/or Connecticut Constitution.
§ 111-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases herein shall have
the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context:
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any amusement machine that
is regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by
patrons therein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes or magazines
and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below, and in conjunction
therewith has facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, as
defined below, and including adult-oriented films, movies or live
entertainment, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion
pictures, live performance, display or dance of any, which has, as a
significant or substantial portion of such performance, any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by a principle emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT (AOE) — Includes, without limitation,
adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture
theaters and further means any premises to which the public, patrons or
members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as
to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate
from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adultoriented
motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when such
adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for profit,
direct or indirect.
§ 111-2 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 111-3
111:77
EMPLOYEES — Any and all persons, including independent contractors,
who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of
an AOE.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an AOE
as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted
for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an
employee or an independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the East Shore Health District authorized
and designated by the Director of Health, or the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, or an employee of the Branford Building Department or a member of
the Branford Police Department, or the Fire Marshal of any fire districts, or
an agent of any or all of such persons who is designated to inspect premises
regulated under this chapter, and to take the required actions authorized
by this chapter in case of violations being found on such premises, and to
require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on said premises.
MINOR — Refers to a person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting or maintaining an AOE.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — As used in this chapter, is not intended to include
any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publications or
films, nor does it include any art or photography publications that devotes at
least 25% of its lineage to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects
of art or photography. Nor does this definition apply to any news periodical
which reports or describes current events and which, from time to time,
publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons in connection with the
dissemination of the news. Nor does this definition apply to publications
or films which describe and report different cultures and which, from time
to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or seminude
persons when describing cultures in which nudity or seminudity is
indigenous to the population.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic region.
(2) Buttocks.
(3) Breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
A.
Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely
covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
§ 111-3 BRANFORD CODE § 111-3
111:78
§ 111-4. Operating requirements.
A. No operator or employee of an AOE shall allow or permit any minor
entry into such establishment.
B. Every AOE doing business in the Town on and after April 8, 1998, shall
be well lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such a manner
that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls,
wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from
the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles,
rooms or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be clearly
visible from the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such
booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by
doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls
within AOE's for whatever purpose, but especially for the purpose of
providing for the secluded viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures or
other types of adult-oriented entertainment.
C. On or after April 8, 1998, the operator of each AOE shall be responsible
for and shall provide that any room or other area used for the purpose
of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of live adult
entertainment shall be well lighted and readily accessible at all times
and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises
shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity
to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor
level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron
is present in the premises.
D. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of this
chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if the act or
omission is the result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the
employee's conduct.
E. An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while
on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether
the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
F. All AOE's shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by the
Branford Police Department, inspectors employed by the Town or such
other persons as the RTM or Selectmen may designate.
G. No AOE shall be permitted on a site that is less than 500 feet from an
area zoned residential.
H. No AOE shall be permitted on a site that is less than 1,000 feet from an
existing AOE.
I. No AOE shall be permitted on a site that is less than 500 feet from
any public, private or parochial school, day-care center, library, park,
playground or other recreational facility, whether commercial or
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or breasts.
C.
§ 111-3 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 111-4
111:79
nonprofit. Nor shall any such business be located within 1,000 feet of the
property line of any church, convent, monastery, synagogue or similar
place of worship, or cemetery.
§ 111-5. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which is found to have
violated this chapter shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $100 for
each such violation.
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and
any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered
a separate offense for each hour of violation.
Chapter 112
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
§ 112-1. Distribution to homes restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute advertising material at
a home within the Town other than at the home of the person soliciting
the same by placing such material at the home or on the property of the
person owning or occupying the home, unless the person distributing such
advertising material obtains the written consent of the person occupying
the home. The foregoing provision shall not apply to the distribution of
advertising material through the mail or to the distribution of advertising
material by any charitable organization and/or nonprofit organization.
§ 112-2. Penalties for offenses.
A fine of not more than $100 may be levied for a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 114
ALARM DEVICES
§ 114-1. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage security alarm users and
alarm system monitoring companies to maintain reliable and properly
used alarm systems in order to reduce unnecessary Police and Fire
Department responses to false alarms.
B. Numerous false alarms hinder the efficiency of public safety personnel
and constitute a danger to the general public in the streets during
responses to false alarms. Uniform standards of control and regulations
for the installation, use and maintenance of alarm devices will assist in
the safety of all.
C. This chapter intends to promote the responsible use of alarm devices
and to decrease the number of false alarms and related nuisances in the
Town of Branford.
§ 111-4 BRANFORD CODE § 114-2
112:80
§ 114-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
ALARM DEVICE —
ALARM USER — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other form
of association that owns or leases a security alarm system or on whose
premises a security alarm system is maintained for the protection of the
premises. This term does not apply to municipal facilities and
establishments.
AUTOMATIC DIAL ALARM — A security alarm system with a device that
automatically dials, mechanically or electronically, the Central Dispatch
Center emergency assistance telephone lines without human activation.
CENTRAL DISPATCH CENTER — Any designated location at which the
Town of Branford receives an emergency alarm signal.
CENTRAL STATION — An office to which remote alarm devices transmit
signals where the operators monitor those signals and relay information to
the Central Dispatch Center or Police or Fire Departments.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Town of Branford or the
Chief's designee.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, firm or corporation in the business of
supplying and installing alarm devices or servicing the same.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm device to which the Police or
Fire Department responds and which the activation is not caused by breakin,
a fire or other emergency. "False alarm" does not include the activation
of an alarm device by violent weather conditions or other extraordinary
circumstances beyond the control of the alarm user.
§ 114-3. Administrator.
This chapter, including all registration requirements, shall be administered
by the First Selectman or his designee, who shall be known as the
"administrator."
Any device which, when activated by a criminal act, fire or other
emergency calling for Police or Fire Department response:
(1) Transmits a signal to the Central Dispatch Center;
Transmits a signal to a person who relays information to the
Central Dispatch Center; or
(2)
Produces an audible or visible signal to which the Central Dispatch
Center is expected to respond.
(3)
A.
Excluded from this definition and the scope of this chapter are devices
which are designated to alert or signal only persons within the premises
in which the device is installed.
B.
§ 114-2 ALARM DEVICES § 114-4
114:81
§ 114-4. Notification and Appeals Board.
The administrator shall notify the alarm user of any false alarm charge
by mail. Within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the alarm user may
file with the administrator information to show that the alarm was not
a false alarm within the meaning of this chapter. Such information may
include documentation from the alarm user's telecommunications and/or
alarm provider that the activation of the alarm device was caused by
malfunctioning equipment.
§ 114-5. Registration.
Each alarm user shall register such alarm device within 60 days of
installation. The form for registration will be available at the office of the
Town Clerk and at police and fire headquarters. After December 31, 1999,
an alarm user who has not registered his or her alarm device may be
assessed a fine of $25. Such fine will be assessed if the Fire or Police
Department responds to a false alarm from an unregistered alarm device.
The fine will double if not paid within 90 days of assessment.
§ 114-6. Automatic dial alarms prohibited.
No automatic dial alarm may be installed after September 1, 1997. No
automatic alarm device in use on such date may remain in use after October
1, 1999.
§ 114-7. Exterior audible devices.
Unless otherwise required by law, no alarm device which produces an
exterior audible signal shall be installed unless its operation is
automatically restricted to a maximum of 10 minutes. Within 60 days of
enactment of this chapter, preexisting alarms which produce an exterior
audible sound shall be retrofitted so that they are automatically deactivated
after no more than 10 minutes.
§ 114-8. Reporting of false alarms.
A. The Police Department and Fire Department shall report false alarms to
the administrator, based on the written report of the investigator.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the central station to notify the alarm user
whenever the central station reports an alarm activation to the Police or
Fire Department.
§ 114-9. Charges for false alarms.
When the administrator determines that the Police or Fire Department has
responded to a false alarm, the administrator shall assess a charge on the
responsible alarm user according to the following schedule:
A. For the first three false alarms within the Town's fiscal year, provided
that the alarm device has been properly registered as defined in this
chapter: no charge.
§ 114-4 BRANFORD CODE § 114-9
114:82
B. For the fourth and each subsequent false alarm within the same fiscal
year: $50 per occurrence.
C. Registration fee: see § 114-5, Registration.
Chapter 115
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 114-9 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 114-9
115:83

ARTICLE I
Nightclub Permits
[Adopted 6-9-1982]
§ 115-1. After-hours sale prohibited.
The sale or dispensing or consumption or the presence in glasses or other
receptacles suitable to permit the consumption of liquor by any individual
of alcoholic liquor in places operating under nightclub permits is not
permissible during the hour immediately following the closing time
established under Section 30-91 of the Connecticut General Statutes for the
other permits listed in Section 30-21a of the Connecticut General Statutes21
and on the days allowed under such other permits.
§ 115-2. Penalties for offenses.
A sale of alcoholic liquor in violation of this article shall be an unauthorized
sale prohibited by Section 30-74 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any
person violating this article shall be subject to penalties provided in Section
30-113 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
21.Editor's Note: Section 30-21a of the Connecticut General Statutes, was repealed 1985, P.A.
85-380.
§ 115-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 115-2
115:85

ARTICLE II
Public Consumption
[Adopted 9-8-1982]
§ 115-3. Possession or consumption in public prohibited.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage or have in his or her
possession or control an open container containing any alcoholic beverage
while he or she is within the bounds of any Town-owned park, green, beach,
dock, recreation area, highway or sidewalk or while he or she is upon any
quasi-public property, which for purposes of this article shall mean any
outdoor area adjacent to a place of business, which area is customarily open
to and used by the public.
§ 115-4. Authorized exceptions.
The Board of Selectmen may, upon application, authorize the possession
and consumption of alcoholic beverages on Town-owned property or quasipublic
property under such conditions as it shall deem appropriate for the
protection of the public.
§ 115-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who shall
aid or abet in the violation of any of said provisions shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $50 for each offense.
§ 115-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 115-5
115:87

ARTICLE III
Possession by Minors
[Adopted 6-9-2004]
§ 115-6. Purpose.
The Town of Branford seeks to protect, preserve and promote the health,
safety, welfare and quality of life of all its residents by regulating the
possession of alcoholic beverages by minors on both public and private
property.
§ 115-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Shall have the same meaning as the same term
defined in Title 30, Section 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended from time to time.
HOST — To organize a gathering of two or more persons, or to allow
the premises under one's control to be used with one's knowledge, for
a gathering of two or more persons for personal, social or business
interaction.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 21 years old.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, limited-liability company, municipality, agency,
or political or administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of
any kind.
§ 115-8. Possession of alcoholic liquor restricted.
No minor shall knowingly be in possession of containers of alcoholic liquors,
whether open or unopened, within the Town of Branford, except when
accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, legal guardian or
spouse who has attained the age of 21 years. This restriction shall apply to
both public and private property.
§ 115-9. Hosting events or gatherings restricted.
No person shall host an event or gathering at which that person knows that
alcoholic liquor will be consumed by or dispensed to any minor unless such
minor is accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian
or spouse who is of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages in the State
of Connecticut. This prohibition shall apply to any event or gathering within
the Town of Branford, whether conducted on public or private property.
§ 115-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 115-10
115:89
§ 115-10. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 115-8 and 115-9 of this article shall not apply to the
following:
A. A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor on the order of a practicing
physician or any person who sells, ships, delivers or gives any alcoholic
liquors to a minor on the order of a practicing physician.
B. A person over the age of 18 who is an employee or permit holder under
Section 30-90a of the Connecticut General Statutes and who possesses
alcoholic liquor in the course of such person's employment or business
or in the course of a sale, shipment or delivery of alcoholic liquor made
to a person over age 18 who is an employee or permit holder under
Section 30-90a of the Connecticut General Statutes and where such sale,
shipment or delivery is made in the course of such person's employment
or business.
§ 115-11. Violations and penalties.
A. For the first violation, any person cited under § 115-8 of this article shall
be subject to a fine of $100 or required to complete a substance abuse
awareness and prevention program, which cost shall not exceed $100.
For each subsequent violation, any person cited under § 115-8 of this
article shall be subject to a fine of $100.
B. For the first violation, any person cited under § 115-9 of this article shall
be subject to a fine of $100 or required to complete a substance abuse
awareness and prevention program, which cost shall not exceed $100.
For each subsequent violation, any person cited under § 115-9 of this
article shall be subject to a fine of $100.
§ 115-10 BRANFORD CODE § 115-11
115:90
Chapter 118
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 190,
Art. I.
§ 115-11 ANIMALS § 115-11
118:91

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 2-8-1984; amended in its entirety 3-9-2005]
§ 118-1. Licensing of dogs six months or older by new owners; fees.
Any person, upon becoming the owner or keeper of any dog of the age of
six months or older, shall cause such dog to be licensed within 30 days
thereof, until the 30th day of the ensuing June, in the manner and subject
to the terms and conditions provided in C.O.S. § 22-338. If the new owner
has written proof of purchase or transfer and the license is obtained within
30 days, he shall not be required to pay any penalties as provided by said
section for failure to secure a license for a dog over six months of age.
Any person becoming the owner of a licensed dog shall present the license
and tag of such dog to the Branford Town Clerk and, for a fee of $1, the
Town Clerk shall issue, in lieu thereof, a new license and tag, which shall be
recorded in the name of the new owner.
§ 118-1.1. Dogs roaming at large restricted.
No owner or keeper of any dog shall allow such dog to roam at large upon
the land of another and not under control of the owner or keeper or the
agent of the owner or keeper, nor allow such dog to roam at large on
any portion of any public highway and not attended or under control of
such owner or keeper or his agent, provided nothing in this section shall
be construed to limit or prohibit the use of hunting dogs during the open
hunting or training season. The unauthorized presence of any dog on the
land of any person other than the owner or keeper of such dog or on any
portion of a public highway when such dog is not attended by or under the
control of such owner or keeper shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of the provisions of this section. Violation of any provision of this section
shall be an infraction.
§ 118-1.2. Nuisances prohibited.
No person shall own or harbor a dog or dogs which is or are a nuisance by
reason of vicious disposition or excessive barking or other disturbance, or,
by such barking or other disturbance, is or are a source of annoyance to any
sick person residing in the immediate vicinity. Violation of any provision of
this section shall be an infraction.
§ 118-1.3. Redeeming impounded dog.
Any dog captured or impounded under the provisions of this article shall be
redeemed by the owner or keeper thereof; or the agent of such owner or
keeper, upon proper identification, and presentation to the municipal animal
control officer of a license and tag for such dog, and upon the payment by
such owner or keeper or his agent of the redemption fee established by the
Town of Branford, which shall not exceed $15, and the cost of advertising
incurred under the provisions of C.O.G. § 22-332; provided no dog seized
§ 118-1 ANIMALS § 118-1.3
118:93
for doing damage under the provisions of C.G.S. § 22-355 shall be released,
except upon written order of the Municipal Animal Control Officer. When
the owner or keeper of any such impounded dog fails to redeem such dog
within 24 hours after receiving notification to do so, or, where the owner
was unknown, within 24 hours after notification was effected by means of
publication in a newspaper, such owner or keeper shall pay, in addition to
such redemption fee and the cost of advertising, the amount determined
by the Municipal Animal Control Officer to be the full cost of detention
and care of such impounded dog. In addition, any owner or keeper of any
such impounded dog who fails to redeem such dog within one hundred and
twenty hours after receiving notification to do so shall have committed an
infraction.
§ 118-2. Presence on beaches.
No dog, leashed or unleashed, shall be allowed on public or associationowned
beaches in the Town, unless such dog is assisting the handicapped.
The dog assisting said handicapped person must be leashed or on proper
restraints.
§ 118-3. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article will result in a fine of $50 for the first offense; a
second offense will result in a fine of $75; third and subsequent offenses will
result in a fine of $100. All penalties shall be paid to the Town of Branford
for deposit in a fund established to benefit the "Daniel Cosgrove Animal
Shelter."
§ 118-1.3 BRANFORD CODE § 118-3
118:94
ARTICLE II
Piggeries
[Adopted 10-10-198422]
§ 118-4. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or maintain a piggery within
the Town of Branford unless the owner or keeper thereof shall have made
application for and obtained a permit from the Board of Selectmen and
Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Branford.
§ 118-5. Hearing.
Before said Board of Selectmen and Zoning Enforcement Officer issue said
permit, they shall hold a public hearing within the Town, within 10 days
after receipt of application for such permit, notice of which hearing shall be
published in a newspaper having a circulation within the Town.
§ 118-6. Approval of location.
Before issuing said permit, said Board of Selectmen and Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall certify in their opinion that the proposed or
existing location of said piggery will not be detrimental to public health and
welfare or constitute a public nuisance.
§ 118-7. Expiration and renewal of permit.
Each such permit shall expire on the first day of August following its
issue and may be renewed annually thereafter upon the submission of a
new application therefor in accordance with § 118-4 hereof. The Board of
Selectmen and Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Branford are
authorized to issue said renewal permits upon such terms and conditions as
they deem necessary to safeguard the public health and welfare.
§ 118-8. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AND — Construed to mean "and" or "or," or both, as the context may
require.
FEEDING TROUGH or FEEDING PLATFORM — Includes an area in the pen,
but distinct and separate from the living area.
GARBAGE — Not only waste or refuse food materials collected for the
purpose of feeding pigs but also any and all substances or materials used
in the feeding of pigs, including grain, corn, mash and any other materials,
feeds or mixtures of any nature.
22.Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted this date combined two prior ordinances adopted
12-16-1941 and 2-19-1958, as amended, into the ordinance appearing in this article.
§ 118-4 ANIMALS § 118-8
118:95
PEN — Includes any pigpen, yard, enclosure, place, building, structure,
lean-to or other space used or maintained for the housing, keeping and/or
feeding of any one or more pigs.
PERSON — Includes any natural person or persons or firm, partnership,
corporation, legal or voluntary association.
PIG — Includes all kinds, varieties and ages of pigs, swine and hogs, as
these terms are commonly used.
§ 118-9. Feeding areas.
Each and every pen shall be equipped with adequate troughs or feeding
platforms so constructed that they can be thoroughly cleaned daily and any
remnants of garbage removed daily. A feeding platform shall be constructed
of cement so as to adequately contain fluids.
§ 118-10. Cleaning of pens.
Each and every pen, including the troughs or feeding platforms, shall be
thoroughly cleaned daily and any remnants of garbage removed, according
to a schedule submitted to and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 118-11. Storage of garbage.
No garbage, meaning hereby waste or refuse food materials, shall be stored
for a period exceeding 48 hours after its collection and during such time
shall be kept in covered, watertight metal receptacles.
§ 118-12. Disposal of garbage.
A. All garbage and remnants thereof shall be disposed of:
(1) At once after it is cleaned from any pen; and
(2) At the latest, within 48 hours after its collection.
B. Such disposal shall be either by removal from the Town of Branford,
or by burying the same in such a way that it is adequately covered
with earth, or by following any other method, acceptable to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer which is adequate and sufficient to prevent the
breeding of flies, the attraction of rats, mice and vermin, and to prevent
odors or smoke from annoying or damaging persons or property located
not less than 300 feet from any pen.
§ 118-13. Spreading of garbage on surface of land.
No garbage shall be allowed to stand or be spread or piled, prior to disposal,
on the surface of any land except for the period of time provided above.
§ 118-14. Property maintenance.
The owner, lessee or person in control of any premises or pen used for
maintaining or keeping one or more pigs, shall keep such premises free
from accumulation of garbage, rubbish, rags, tin cans, paper, empty barrels,
§ 118-8 BRANFORD CODE § 118-14
118:96
boxes or any material which, because of its character, condition or improper
storage, may invite the breeding or collection of flies, mosquitos or rodents.
§ 118-15. Location of pens.
No pen shall be built or maintained on marshy ground or land subject to
overflow nor within 300 feet of any inhabited or public meeting house or
boundary of any school property, except that inhabited house as here used
shall not apply to or mean the dwelling house of the owner, lessee or person
in control of the particular pen.
§ 118-16. Ratproofing.
Any building or structure used or maintained for the housing of pigs shall
be effectively ratproofed through the use of the services of a bonded
exterminator, with the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 118-17. Enforcement.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Branford is hereby charged
with the enforcement hereof, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer or his
duly appointed agent shall, in case of violation hereof, have full power to
notify the violator of said violation and the time within which said violation
must be remedied, and if the particular condition is not remedied within
said time, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forthwith report the same
to the prosecuting attorney for proper action. Repeated violations of this
article shall be reported directly to the prosecuting attorney for proper
action.
§ 118-18. Daily schedule of operations.
Each operator shall be required to establish his intent of complying with
this article daily by furnishing the Zoning Enforcement Officer with his daily
schedule of operation.
§ 118-19. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation who keeps,
maintains or feeds fewer than five pigs or swine.
§ 118-20. Cooking of garbage prior to feeding.
If garbage is cooked preparatory to feeding, and it is strongly recommended
that this procedure be followed, the pen and apparatus used shall be so
maintained and operated as to be clean and cause no obnoxious odors or
smoke to persons or property located more than 300 feet away.
§ 118-21. Penalties for offenses.
Each day that a violation of any provision hereof shall be in existence after
the notice referred to in § 118-17 above shall be construed and considered
§ 118-14 ANIMALS § 118-21
118:97
a distinct and separate violation. Each violation hereof shall be subject to a
fine of not exceeding $25.
§ 118-22. Territory excluded.
Sections 118-4 through 118-7 hereof shall not apply to the territory included
in the limits of the Pine Orchard Association so long as said Pine Orchard
Association shall have an ordinance of the same effect and purport.
§ 118-21 BRANFORD CODE § 118-22
118:98
ARTICLE III
Branford Town Green
[Adopted 5-14-1996]
§ 118-23. Regulations established.
There is hereby established a prohibition of animals, reptiles, birds and
amphibians of any kind on the Branford Green at any time when more than
100 individuals are gathered outside on any part of the Green.
§ 118-24. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to bring any animal, reptile, amphibian, bird or
vertebrate creature on the Branford Green.
§ 118-25. Exemptions.
Animals that are part of the entertainment or attractions approved by the
Town's Board of Selectmen, assist the physically challenged or assist in law
enforcement are exempt from this prohibition.
§ 118-26. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to ejection
from the Town Green. Police or other authorized officers may issue a
citation for violation of this article. Persons receiving said citations shall be
deemed to have committed an infraction and shall be fined not more than
$90.
§ 118-23 ANIMALS § 118-26
118:99
Chapter 122
BAZAARS AND RAFFLES
§ 122-1. State law adopted.
The Town of Branford shall adopt the provisions of Public Act 409, as
amended, of the 1955 Session of the General Assembly, said act also being
Sections 291d to 307d, inclusive of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
Revision of 1949, as amended,23 relative to the allowing of bazaars and
raffles within said Town.
Chapter 126
BOATS AND BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, greens and recreation areas — See Ch.
190.
23.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Section 7-171 et seq. of the Connecticut General
Statutes, Revision of 1958.
§ 118-26 BRANFORD CODE § 122-1
122:100
ARTICLE I
Restrictions on Speed
[Adopted 5-12-198724]
§ 126-1. Speed limits. [Amended 11-8-2000]
No vessel wholly or partly propelled by power, including but not limited
to any vessel commonly known as a "jet ski," shall be operated upon the
territorial waters of the Town of Branford set forth in Subsections A, B, C
and D at a rate of speed greater than that specified below:
A. Stony Creek: six statute miles per hour in the established channel from
the reef extension of Linden Point northward to include the Town Dock,
public boat launch area, bathing beach and dredged turn basin.
B. Branford Harbor: A “slow-no-wake zone” shall exist in the Inner Harbor
area as defined by all waters north of the line from Indian Neck Point to
Lovers Island. [Amended 11-8-2006]
C. A "slow-no-wake zone" shall exist on all tidal marshes, marsh channels
and estuaries within the Town of Branford. [Amended 11-8-2006]
D. All shores: six statute miles per hour within 100 yards of any shore.
§ 126-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a fine in an amount not to exceed $100.
24.Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted this date also provided that it shall take effect
4-1-1988.
§ 126-1 BOATS AND BOATING § 126-2
126:101

ARTICLE II
Tie-ups; Loading and Unloading
[Adopted 11-9-1988]
§ 126-3. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to adopt by majority vote such rules
and regulations as it shall determine from time to time regarding the
establishment of time limits for temporary tie-ups and for loading and
unloading of boats at all Town-owned docks, piers, floats or other docking
facilities.
§ 126-4. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Town of Branford is hereby empowered to
enforce such rules and regulations.
§ 126-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any rule or regulation established by the Board
of Selectmen under the provisions of this article shall be fined no more than
$100 for each offense.
§ 126-3 BOATS AND BOATING § 126-5
126:103

ARTICLE III
Commercial Passenger Vessels
[Adopted 1-13-1993]
§ 126-6. Permit required; exception.
A. All commercial passenger vessels carrying seven or more passengers
for hire whose point of passenger embarkation is the Town Dock in the
Village of Stony Creek shall be required to operate under the terms of a
commercial passenger vessel permit approved by a majority vote of the
Board of Selectmen of said Town, hereinafter referred to as a "permit."
B. Any vessel strictly engaged in service as a marine taxi is exempt from
regulation by this article.
§ 126-7. Duration; fee; contents.
A. Any such permit shall be for a duration not to exceed three years in
length. In determining the amount of the permit fee, the Selectmen are
authorized to set an amount which is less than the fair market value for
the facilities used, if the Selectmen determine that the activity of the
permittee has other economic benefits to the Town which justify a less
than fair market value. The cost of regular maintenance of the facilities
should be considered in determining the fee.
B. The permit shall contain such provisions as the Board of Selectmen
deem appropriate and consistent with the best interests of the Town of
Branford, the area of operation and the facilities affected. The particular
vessel to be used as well as times and locations of operation shall be
specifically described in the permit. The Selectmen shall not issue a
permit to a vessel having an overall length in excess of 44 feet nor
a capacity in excess of 50 passengers. Due to their preexistence to
the effective date of this article, the three previously named vessels,
Volsunga, Sea Mist and Sea Venture, shall be permitted at their 1992
length and level of activity. Any increase in their capacity and/or mode of
operation beyond that level shall be considered a new vessel.
§ 126-8. Criteria for approval; hearing; renewal; transfer.
A. In determining whether to grant a new vessel permit to any commercial
passenger vessel other than the existing Volsunga, Sea Mist and Sea
Venture, the Board of Selectmen shall consider but not be limited to the
following:
(1) The number of permits currently outstanding.
(2) The size of the vessel.
(3) The number of passengers which the vessel will carry and its
proposed frequency of passenger embarkation.
(4) The availability of parking and the impact of traffic on congestion in
the streets.
(5) The availability of and need for support facilities, such as public rest
rooms.
(6) Congestion and public safety at the Town Dock.
(7) The impact on public safety, welfare and property values in the
village.
§ 126-6 BOATS AND BOATING § 126-8
126:105
B. A public hearing shall be held prior to the approval of any new permit
application.
C. In renewal of permits, existing operators in good standing should be
afforded preferred status over new applicants.
D. In the event of a sale, transfer of ownership or other discontinuance
of a permitted business, the permit shall not be transferrable, and fee
refunds will only be made for complete years of unused permits, upon
application to the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen may
require of any permittee or applicant for a permit the provision of such
information, under oath, as the Board shall determine, with regard to
ownership and the like, for the enforcement of this section.
§ 126-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
APPLICATION — A written request for permit containing but not limited to:
COMMERCIAL PASSENGER VESSEL — Vessels which carry passengers for
hire, including tour boats.
LENGTH OVERALL (LOA) — From the extreme forward and to the extreme
after end of the vessel (also called "length outside the rig").
MARINE TAXI — A commercial passenger vessel engaged in the service of
transporting passengers from one point to another.
SALE OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP — The transfer by any person or
combination of persons of 50% or more of any unincorporated business
or partnership or 50% or more of the stock of any incorporated business
during the existence of any permitted business or the renewal thereof.
§ 126-10. Interpretation.
In case a question arises as to the interpretation of this article, the decision
of the Board of Selectmen shall be final.
§ 126-11. Penalties for offenses; construal of provisions.
A. Any person who shall operate a commercial passenger vessel other
than a marine taxi carrying seven or more passengers which uses the
Town Dock in the Village of Stony Creek as a point of embarkation for
passengers without the permit required by this article shall be deemed
A. Vessel description (length, name and passenger capacity).
B. Proposed times and hours of operation.
C. Ownership and type of ownership.
D. Controlling interest if ownership is other than sole proprietorship.
E. If renewal, any change in control of ownership since last application.
§ 126-8 BRANFORD CODE § 126-11
126:106
to have committed an infraction with each departure and be subject to a
fine of not more than $90 for each offense.
B. This article should not be construed to prohibit the landing of
commercial passenger vessels at the Town Dock in the Village of Stony
Creek if the point of embarkation for its passengers is some place other
than the Village of Stony Creek.
§ 126-11 BOATS AND BOATING § 126-11
126:107
Chapter 128
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
§ 126-11 BRANFORD CODE § 126-11
126:108
ARTICLE I
Permit Fees
[Adopted 4-12-199525 ]
§ 128-1. New construction and alterations. [Amended 8-11-2004;
7-30-2008]
For new construction and alterations, the minimum fee of $18 shall cover
work costing up to $1,000. For work in excess of $1,000, there shall be
an additional fee of $12 for each additional $1,000 of cost or fraction
thereof. Upon application, a scanning and microfilming processing fee will
be assessed per page of plans received by the department. Such fee will be
established annually and posted for public view.
§ 128-2. Other separate permits. [Amended 8-11-2004; 7-30-2008]
For other separate permits, the fee for each of such permits shall be based
on the estimated cost of the specific work done as follows: a minimum fee
of $18 for all work costing up to $1,000. An additional fee for work in
excess of $1,000 shall be $12 for each additional $1,000 of cost or fraction
thereof. Upon application, a scanning and microfilming processing fee will
be assessed per page of plans received by the department. Such fee will be
established annually and posted for public view.
§ 128-3. Town-owned buildings. [Amended 12-10-2014]
Subject to the § 128-4B, permits for construction or alterations of buildings
owned by the Town of Branford shall be exempt from fees.
§ 128-4. Waiver of fees. [Amended 7-12-2006; 12-10-2014]
A. Building permit fees and separate permit fees may be waived for owneroccupied
homes of not more than three living units, where at least one
of the record owners is aged 62 or over, the homeowner is a party to the
building permit application, and where the permit is to replace roofing,
siding, storm windows, replacement windows that do not require any
structural change, water heaters, or heating systems.
B. Any fees waived pursuant to this section shall not include, and applicants
shall be obligated to pay, any and all fees imposed by the State of
Connecticut and local scanning and/or film processing fees.
§ 128-5. Fee schedule. [Added 7-12-2006; amended 12-10-2014]
A. The Building Official may establish a fee schedule for building permits
that includes a separate fee for permit applications received after work
has commenced and/or has been completed.
B. A reinspection fee of $25 will be assessed in the event any field
inspection cannot be performed or is not ready to be performed as a
result of owner or contractor negligence.
25.Editor's Note: This article superseded former Article I, Permit Fees, adopted 5-12-1987.
§ 128-1 BOATS AND BOATING § 128-5
126:109
C. All processing fees imposed shall be collected and paid to the Town
of Branford prior to a final inspection being conducted by the Building
Official, and a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall
not be issued unless such fees have been paid to the Town.
§ 128-5 BRANFORD CODE § 128-5
126:110
Chapter 129
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 128. Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 130.
§ 129-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to impose a waiting period of not more
than 90 days before granting a permit for the demolition of any building
or structure which is 500 square feet or larger and 75 years old or older
in order to explore alternatives to demolition. Connecticut General Statutes
Section 29-406 authorizes municipalities to approve a waiting period before
granting any permit for the demolition of any building, structure or part
thereof. The health, safety and welfare of the public will be served by
imposing such a waiting period in order that buildings or structures with
historical and social significance may be saved from demolition.
§ 129-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following term(s) shall have the meanings
indicated below:
DEMOLITION — Any activity directed to disassembling, dismantling,
dismembering or razing the exterior of any structure or building.
Demolition shall not be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or
repair of any exterior architectural feature which does not involve a change
in the appearance or design thereof, nor to prevent the alteration of any
such feature which is required by public safety because of a condition which
is unsafe or dangerous due to deterioration.
§ 129-3. Procedure.
A. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall engage in the
demolition of any building, structure, or any part thereof, without first
obtaining a permit from the Building Department.
B. If the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is 500 square
feet in size or larger and less than 75 years old, certification of the age of
the building or structure shall be obtained from the Assessor's records,
Town Historian (or a duly authorized representative of the Branford
Historical Society if the Town Historian is not available), or both, with
the final determination of the building's or structure's age to be made by
the Building Official. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant:
(1) Complies with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes
Section 29-406 as it may be amended from time to time.
(2) Supplies the Building Department with a current certificate of
registration for a Class A or Class B demolition license.
§ 128-5 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 129-3
129:111
(3) Supplies the Building Department with a current certificate of
insurance evidencing liability coverage in an amount not less than
the amounts set forth in Connecticut General Statutes Section
29-406, listing the Town of Branford as the certificate holder.
(4) Supplies proof that real estate taxes have been paid.
(5) Supplies authorized utility clearance letters of service disconnect
from electricity, gas, water, sewer/septic, telephone and cable.
(6) Supplies "Call before you dig" numbers, which must be received
within 30 days prior to permit issuance.
(7) Notifies all adjoining property owners by registered or certified mail,
stating the intent of the demolition, and provides certified mail
return receipts (green cards) to the Building Department.
(8) Supplies the Building Department with a certificate from a licensed
exterminator certifying that the building or structure to be
demolished is free from rodent infestation.
(9) Supplies evidence from state-licensed abatement contractors
concerning the existence or nonexistence of asbestos and lead paint
and, if necessary, provides an abatement plan for same.
C. If the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is 500 square
feet in size or larger and 75 years old or older, the applicant shall comply
with the requirements of § 129-3B(1) through (9), with the addition of:
(1) After a demolition permit application has been filed, and all fees have
been collected, the owner or applicant shall post, within 10 days,
a Building Department provided demolition notification sign, at the
demolition site. The sign must remain posted for no less than 90 days
or until the issuance of a demolition permit, whatever comes first,
and be visible and readable from the street line.
(2) The Building Department shall publish a legal notice of the
application for a demolition permit in a daily or weekly newspaper
having substantial circulation in the municipality. The notice shall be
published following the filing of the demolition permit application.
Such notice shall state the following: that an application has been
filed for a demolition permit; the date of the filing of such
application; the location of the property; the name of the owner of
the property; and, unless written objection, stating the nature of the
objection, is filed with the Building Official within 30 days of the
publication of this legal notice, the permit may be issued after the
expiration of such thirty-day period.
(3) Within 10 days of the filing of a demolition permit application,
provide by certified mail, return receipt required, a letter stating
the date and the intent of the demolition application filed, to the
Center Revitalization Review Board, the Economic Development
Commission and the Branford Historical Society. In addition, notices
shall be given to any other individual, firm, corporation, organization
or other entity, which files with the Building Official a written request
for such notice pursuant to Section 1-21 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.26 Such registration must be renewed annually each January
1 following the initial registration. Within such period, notice shall be
§ 129-3 BRANFORD CODE § 129-3
129:112
provided in like manner to the Connecticut Commission on Culture
and Tourism.
(4) Observe a thirty-day waiting period from the date of public
notification, which shall be the date of publication as set forth in
§ 129-3C(2) above. If written objection stating the nature of the
objection to the issuance of the demolition permit is filed by at least
10 property owners of the Town of Branford, or by a duly authorized
representative of any organization that has as its members no less
than 10 owners of real property located within the Town of Branford,
the Building Official shall delay the issuance of the demolition permit
for a period of 90 days from the date of said application. If no
objection has been stated, the demolition permit may be issued.
(5) All required documentation and approvals set forth in this chapter
must be received within a ninety-calendar-day period from the date
of said application.
(6) Any application pending beyond a ninety-calendar-day period will be
considered null and void.
§ 129-4. Fees and costs for demolition permits.
A. The fee is based on the fair market value of the demolition work. The
applicant for the demolition work shall pay a permit fee based on the
following at the time the application is filed:
Cost of Work Permit Fee
$0 to $1,000 $18
Each additional $1,000 $12 for each $1,000 or fraction
thereof
B. A processing fee will be collected for the publication of legal notice and
distribution of demolition sign to be posted.
C. No permit shall be issued until all required fees and costs have been paid.
§ 129-5. Intention.
This chapter is intended to supplement and not to limit any requirements
now or hereafter imposed by the Connecticut General Statutes and
regulations adopted thereunder on any applicant for or recipient of a
demolition permit or any authority now or hereafter granted to the Building
Official by, including the authority of the Building Official to order a building
demolished pursuant to, the Connecticut State Building Code.
§ 129-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any persons failing to abide by the provisions of this chapter or Connecticut
General Statutes Sections 29-401 through 29-415 shall be fined $1,000 or
imprisoned not more than six months, or both, pursuant to Connecticut
General Statutes Section 29-254a. All fines imposed shall be collected and
made payable to the Town of Branford.
26.Editor's Note: See now Section 1-225 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 129-3 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 129-6
129:113
Chapter 130
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 130-1. Intent.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an effective and
easily recognizable system of the exact location of various building units in
the Town of Branford to ensure the rapid location of any building unit by
emergency vehicles.
§ 130-2. Numbers required; size and placement.
The owner of each building, condominium unit or trailer, which trailer is
permanently located or usable for residential purposes, shall affix thereto a
number, designating the street number of the building, condominium unit or
trailer. Such number shall be no less than three inches in height, shall be in
a color contrasting to the area to which it is affixed, shall be visible from the
street to which such number relates and shall be located on the top, bottom
or side of the main entrance of the building facing said street. In case of
a building, condominium unit or trailer more than 50 feet from said street,
the owner shall, in addition to the number on the building or trailer, display
a number meeting the specifications set forth herein on a mailbox, fence
or post located at the property line reasonably adjacent to said street, the
side of the driveway or sidewalk in such a manner as to make said number
visible from the street. If the number is placed upon a mailbox adjacent to
the street, the number shall be placed on each side of the box in a location
visible from the street.
§ 130-3. Numbering of apartment buildings.
The owner of each condominium complex, apartment complex or similar
multibuilding complex shall place upon the outside of each building, in a
location and format approved by the Fire Department, the number and
name of such building.
§ 130-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding $100.
Chapter 139
DRAINLAYERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer connections — See Ch. 204.
§ 129-6 BRANFORD CODE § 130-4
130:114
§ 139-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall make any connection with the public
sewers, or lay any drain to be connected with said sewers, or open any
street or public way for the purpose of laying or repairing any sewer or
drain in connection with said sewers, within the Town of Branford except a
duly licensed drainlayer, as hereinafter provided.
§ 139-2. License application.
Application for a license as a drainlayer shall be made to the Town Engineer
upon a form prescribed by him. No such license shall be issued until
the applicant shall have been examined by the Town Engineer and the
Board of Selectmen. This examination shall be written or oral and of a
character which they shall require to determine whether said applicant is
a suitable and competent person to receive such license. Upon examination
the Town Engineer and Board of Selectmen shall certify in writing either
that said applicant is suitable and competent to receive a license or that
said applicant is not suitable and competent, in which case they shall
state the reasons therefor. Upon approval and upon compliance with the
requirements hereinafter set forth, the Town Engineer shall forthwith issue
to such applicant a license.
§ 139-3. License fee, expiration and renewal.
The fee for a drainlayer's license shall be $10. All such licenses shall
expire one year after date of issue, unless sooner revoked. The fee for
each renewal shall be $5, which shall be due and payable on or before the
anniversary date of issue.
§ 139-4. Bond required.
Before any such drainlayer's license shall be issued as herein provided, the
applicant shall file with the Town Engineer a license bond in the sum of
$1,000 and shall show evidence of renewal of bond with each subsequent
renewal of license.
§ 139-5. Restrictions on licensee. [Amended 1-8-1963]
A. No licensed drainlayer shall make any opening in any public street until
he shall have applied for and secured from the Town Engineer or his
authorized agent a permit for doing such work, in accordance with the
provisions of any ordinance then in effect relating to street openings in
the Town of Branford.
B. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than a licensed drainlayer or his
duly authorized agent to solicit deposits or contracts or commitments to
connect with the public sewers.
§ 130-4 DRAINLAYERS § 139-6
139:115
§ 139-6. Sewer connection permits.
No licensed drainlayer shall connect any drain or sewer upon or from any
premises in the Town of Branford or use or permit any sewer or drain to
be used without having first obtained a permit for making such connections
from the Town Engineer or his authorized agent, in accordance with the
provisions of any ordinance then in effect relating to the sewer system in
the Town of Branford and providing rules and regulations for connections
therewith.27
§ 139-7. Violations.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Town Engineer or his authorized agents,
any licensed drainlayer has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or
any rules, regulations and specifications which may be adopted hereunder,
he may revoke the license of such drainlayer, and the Town of Branford
may proceed to call said drainlayer's bond. No person, firm or corporation
who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or whose license shall
have been revoked as herein provided and shall have refused or neglected
to make good to the satisfaction of the Town of Branford any defective or
imperfect work or shall have refused or neglected to pay any fees, fines
or penalties imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall receive a
renewal of such license until such default shall have been fully remedied
and satisfied.
§ 139-8. Work done by property owners.
Nothing herein provided shall be interpreted to prevent an owner from
doing any necessary excavating on his own property without a license.
§ 139-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $100 for each
offense. Every 24 hours of continuation of such violation may constitute a
separate offense.
§ 139-10. Master plumbers exempt. [Added 1-14-1964]
Any master plumber duly licensed under the provisions of Branford
ordinances shall have all the privileges and rights of a drainlayer under this
chapter and shall not be required to obtain a drainlayer's license or to file a
bond as aforementioned, so long as he shall be and remain a duly licensed
master plumber.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Sewers.
§ 139-6 BRANFORD CODE § 139-10
139:116
Chapter 143
(RESERVED)
Chapter 154
FIRES, OUTDOOR
§ 154-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE — For purposes of this chapter, the term "fire" shall mean:
NONPROCESSED WOOD — Nonprocessed wood is considered to be any
untreated, natural wood up to and including rough cut lumber.
NUISANCE — A nuisance is considered to be the unreasonable,
unwarranted, or unlawful use of one's property in a manner that
substantially interferes with the use or enjoyment of another individual's
real property, without an actual trespass or physical invasion to the land.
PROCESSED WOOD — Processed wood is considered to be any wood
that has been milled and/or planed and includes recycled wood, glued
wood, treated wood, pallets, crates, and/or wood scraps from these types of
materials.
§ 154-2. Restrictions on residential and commercial fires.
A. Fires shall be so managed that fires do not exceed three feet above the
fireplace/fire pit, and persons are able to stand within four feet of the
fire.
B. All fires must be kindled in a commercially or privately manufactured
outdoor recreational fire appliance such as a fireplace, fire pit, and fire
pit table or fire pit ring or a hand dug fire pit, which shall be at last one
foot below grade, no more than three feet in diameter and the outside
edge of which shall be ringed with brick or rock.
The burning of woodland, grassland or swampland or the burning of
leaves and/or other forest debris;
A.
The burning as a means of disposal of any type of structure, marine and
aircraft, vehicles and the burning of debris from any of the foregoing;
B.
The burning, as a means of disposal, of papers, rubbish, garbage and
all types of combustibles; and/or
C.
Campfires, bonfires, fire pits, chimineas and other similar devices, as
defined by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection.
D.
§ 139-10 (RESERVED) § 154-2
143:117
C. Fires are permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight. All
fires must be completely extinguished by midnight and shall not be
maintained in any way that causes a nuisance as defined herein.
D. Fires shall be attended at all times by at least one responsible person
age 18 or older.
E. Kindling of a fire of any type will not be permitted on days when the
wind velocity exceeds 10 miles per hour or if the forest fire danger is
high, very high or extreme (http://www.ct.gov/ keyword-fire danger) or if
a smog alert has been issued by the CT DEEP.
F. Adequate fire suppression equipment, such as shovels, fire extinguishers
or a garden hose shall be accessible at all times the fire is burning.
G. Only clean, dry, nonprocessed wood may be burned (i.e., sticks, twigs
and the like), the diameter of which is not greater than three inches at
the widest point. Material that may be burned shall not include leaves,
grass, trash, processed, or painted wood, rubber, plastic, textiles, leather
or petroleum-based materials and shall not contain any combustible or
flammable liquids. No wood pallets, construction debris, painted wood,
stained/treated wood, or garbage can be burned.
§ 154-3. Location of fire.
Fires shall be no closer than 20 feet from any property line, vehicle,
building, structure, shed, garage, tree, shrub, bush, fence or any other
combustible material. Recreational fire appliances shall not be located on
wooden decks.
§ 154-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, or firm or firms, who violate any provision of this
chapter, as enacted, or who shall fail to comply with any notice or order
by the Fire Marshal of the Town of Branford Fire Department based on the
provisions hereof, may be subject to arrest and prosecution by the proper
authorities and may be fined not more than $250 for each violation.
§ 154-5. Municipal liability.
The Town of Branford, the Branford Fire Department and the officers,
agents and employees of each shall not be held responsible for any damage
caused by or arising out of any fire as defined in this chapter.
Chapter 157
FIRE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Inspector — See Ch. 15.
Building construction — See Ch. 128.
Outdoor fires — See Ch. 154.
Oil- and fuel-burning equipment — See Ch.
187.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 223.
§ 154-2 BRANFORD CODE § 154-5
157:118
ARTICLE I
Fire Zones
[Adopted 10-8-1975]
§ 157-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE ZONE — A designated, unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to
permit free passage of fire and other emergency equipment from a public
highway to all necessary areas or portions of any private or public property
as hereinafter set forth.
§ 157-2. Establishment.
Whenever the Fire Marshal shall determine that the reasonable safety
of persons occupying or using any premises, public or private, having a
capacity of at least 15 persons, requires the establishment of a fire zone for
orderly access of fire and other emergency equipment, he shall establish
such fire zone by written order and cause to be made public, announcement
of such fire zone establishment. He shall cause a copy of such order to be
delivered to the owner or owners, or agents thereof, of any private land on
which such fire zone is established.
§ 157-3. Filing of order; appeals.
Whenever the Fire Marshal establishes a fire zone, he shall file one copy
of his order with the Town Clerk and one copy with the Board of Police
Commissioners. Any person aggrieved by such order may file, with the
Clerk of the Board of Fire Commissioners, within 15 days after the date
of such order, written notice of appeal, setting forth therein reasons of
aggrievement. After hearing, the Board of Fire Commissioners may affirm,
modify or rescind such order.
§ 157-4. Posting of signs.
Upon establishment of a fire zone, the Board of Police Commissioners shall
cause to be erected or installed adequate signs, markings and other devices
to delineate said fire zone. Signs, markings and other devices erected or
installed on privately owned premises shall be at the cost of the owner and
shall be of such design as approved by the Board of Police Commissioners.
§ 157-5. Parking prohibited.
No person shall park, or permit to stand, a motor vehicle in a fire zone
which has been established in accordance with this chapter, except when
actually picking up or discharging passengers. Any person violating this
section shall be fined not more than $100. The registered owner of a motor
vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle.
§ 157-1 FIRE SAFETY § 157-6
157:119
§ 157-6. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
Any motor vehicle found standing in a fire zone which has been established
in accordance with this chapter may be towed, upon the direction of a police
officer, to any public or private parking facility, and all expense of such
towing and any subsequent storage shall be borne by the registered owner
of such vehicle.
§ 157-7. Notice of violation. [Amended 10-10-1984]
Whenever a vehicle is found standing in violation of § 157-5, a police officer
shall serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle, or place upon such
vehicle, a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at the
Police Department prior to a time specified in said notice. If any person
receiving said notice shall appear as directed and shall pay an amount
as specified in said notice, not exceeding $15, such payment shall bar a
prosecution for violation of § 157-5.
§ 157-6 BRANFORD CODE § 157-7
157:120
ARTICLE II
Key Access Boxes
[Adopted 2-9-2005]
§ 157-8. Intent.
The intent of this article is to require the installation of a secured key
access box on all commercial, industrial and residential buildings, with the
exception of detached one- and two-family dwellings.
§ 157-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to allow the Branford Fire Department access
into a building in the event of an emergency.
§ 157-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SECURE KEY ACCESS BOX — A high-security lock box, which is mounted
on the exterior of a building. This box contains keys, access cards and/or
combinations to allow access to a building in the event of an emergency.
Access to the contents of this box is limited to Branford Fire Department
representatives as authorized by the Fire Chief/Fire Marshal.
§ 157-11. Requirements.
The secure key access box shall be a type approved by the Fire Chief/Fire
Marshal or his/her designee.
§ 157-12. Location.
The secure key access box shall be located as approved by the Fire Chief/
Fire Marshal or his/her designee.
§ 157-13. Contents of box.
The secure key access box shall contain keys, access cards and/or
combinations that will allow for access to all areas of said building including
but not limited to common areas, stairwells, basements, attics, utility
rooms, storage rooms, outbuildings, offices, exterior storage areas and fire
alarm panels.
§ 157-14. Installation/replacement of existing and/or additional
locks.
The owner/occupant of said building shall immediately notify the Fire Chief/
Fire Marshal and provide new keys, access cards and/or combinations any
time a lock is re-keyed, installed or changed or any time items contained
§ 157-8 FIRE SAFETY § 157-14
157:121
in the secure key access box no longer grant access to areas within said
building.
§ 157-15. Effective date.
This article shall be effective on March 3, 2005. Any newly constructed
or recently renovated building, required to have a secure key access box
that is requesting a certificate of occupancy after this date, shall comply
with this article. All existing commercial, industrial and residential, with
the exception of detached one- and two-family dwellings must comply with
article within three years of its adoption.
§ 157-14 BRANFORD CODE § 157-15
157:122
ARTICLE III
Private Fire Hydrants
[Adopted 2-9-2005]
§ 157-16. Intent.
The intent of this article is to mandate that all fire hydrants not owned by
the South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority be maintained and
tested in accordance with NFPA 25 (1995 Edition) and NFPA 291 (1995
Edition), Chapters 1 and 2, at the expense of the hydrant owner(s).
§ 157-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure that private fire hydrants located
within the Town of Branford will perform to National Fire Protection
Association standards in the event of an emergency.
§ 157-18. Definitions.
As used in article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT — Any fire hydrant located within the Town of
Branford which is not maintained under the maintenance contract between
the Town of Branford and the South Central Connecticut Regional Water
Authority or is not owned by the South Central Connecticut Regional Water
Authority.
§ 157-19. Color requirements.
All hydrants located within the Town of Branford shall be a single color
and shall be painted, with Sherwin William's Rust Tough, rust-preventive
enamel, the color equipment yellow, or its equivalent, on a biannual basis or
more frequently as needed.
§ 157-20. Testing and maintenance.
Each hydrant shall be inspected annually, at the owner's expense, by the
South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority or by a third-party
testing company in compliance with NFPA 25 and NFPA 291, Chapters
1 and 2, with a copy of the inspection report sent to the Branford Fire
Department to the attention of the Fire Marshal, within 30 days of said
inspection.
§ 157-21. Documentation of testing and maintenance.
The owner of each private fire hydrant shall submit to the office of the
Fire Marshal, prior to June 30 of each year, documentation showing that all
hydrants comply or have been made to comply with NFPA 25 (1995 edition)
and NFPA 291 (1995 edition), Chapters 1 and 2.
§ 157-16 FIRE SAFETY § 157-22
157:123
§ 157-22. Charges for noncompliance.
A fine of $1,000 per hydrant will be assessed for private hydrants not in
compliance 90 days after the June 30 deadline. In calendar year 2006 and
thereafter, the fine for noncompliance will be assessable 30 days after the
June 30 deadline annually at the owner's expense.
§ 157-23. Effective date.
This article shall be effective on March 3, 2005. Any newly installed private
hydrants shall comply with NFPA 25 (1995 edition) and NFPA 291 (1995
edition), Chapters 1 and 2, prior to the issuance of a certification of
occupancy for the property they protect.
§ 157-22 BRANFORD CODE § 157-23
157:124
Chapter 161
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood and Erosion Control Board — See Ch.
50.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 228.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 161-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has, in Section 7-148(c)(7) of
the General Statutes, delegated the responsibility to local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Representative Town Meeting
of Branford, Connecticut does ordain as follows.
§ 161-2. Findings of fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of Branford are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstruction in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas caused by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed
or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
§ 161-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage.
§ 157-23 FIRE SAFETY § 161-3
157:125
E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.
§ 161-4. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To protect human life and health.
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas.
G. To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area.
§ 161-5. Word usage; definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable applications.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING) — Any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is
connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any
walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is
separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new
construction.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Town Engineer's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths
from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and
where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
§ 161-3 BRANFORD CODE § 161-5
157:126
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation of the crest of the
base flood or one-hundred-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea
level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent
points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for
any occupancy or storage.
COASTAL AE ZONE — The portion of the Coastal High Hazard Area
with wave heights between 1.5 feet and 3.0 feet during the base flood
and seaward of the line labeled the "Limit of Moderate Wave Action"
(LiMWA) on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).[Added 4-10-2019]
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal High Hazard Areas are
designated as Zones VE and Coastal AE on a Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM).[Amended 4-10-2019]
COST — As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other
improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written
contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to,
the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements,
utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building
equipment and fixtures, including heating and air-conditioning and
utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation;
repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same
time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items
to be excluded include cost of plans and specifications, survey costs,
permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply
wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems and
detached structures such as garages, sheds and gazebos.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings
or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial
improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings
or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or
drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or
extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public
or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
§ 161-5 FIRE SAFETY § 161-5
157:127
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear
walls or breakaway walls.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before December 14, 1977, the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The
federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles and
the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures, which reduce or
eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitation facilities or structures with their contents.[Added
4-10-2019]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation.[Amended 4-10-2019]
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), e.g., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal water.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
(2)
§ 161-5 BRANFORD CODE § 161-5
157:128
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor
of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY — A use or facility
that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried
out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities,
port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term
does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage,
manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HIGH-TIDE LINE —
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A line or mark left upon tide flats, beaches or along shore objects
that indicates the intersection of land with the water's surface at
the maximum heights reached by a rising tide. The mark may be
determined by:
(a) A line of oil or scum along shore objects;
A more or less continuous deposit of fine shell or debris on the
foreshore or berm;
(b)
Physical markings or characteristics, vegetation lines, tidal
gauge; or
(c)
By any other suitable means delineating the general height
reached by a rising tide.
(d)
(1)
The term includes spring high tides and other high tides that occur
with periodic frequency but does not include storm surges in which
there is a departure from the normal or predicted reach of the tide
due to the piling up of water against a coast by strong winds such as
those accompanying a hurricane or other intense storm.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
§ 161-5 FIRE SAFETY § 161-5
157:129
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA) — The landward limit of
the 1.5 foot breaking wave within a Coastal AE Zone. These areas are
seaward of the line labeled "Limit of Moderate Wave Action" (LiMWA) on
a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).[Added 4-10-2019]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable structures placed on
a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved
property.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel or
contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE — The market value of the structure shall be
determined by the appraised value of the structure prior to the start
of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the
value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. If an appraisal is
not available then the depreciated value of the structure only from the
assessors field card will be utilized.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in
1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after December 14, 1977, the effective date of this
chapter (not the revision date), and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by either:
An approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 161-5 BRANFORD CODE § 161-5
157:130
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 14, 1977, the
effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by this
community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE —
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations
(BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with
the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include,
but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A, AE, and
the Coastal High Hazard Areas shown as Zones VE and Coastal AE on a
FIRM. The SFHA is also called the Area of Special Flood Hazard.[Added
4-10-2019]
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
97-348),28 includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The "actual start" means the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home)
on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation
A vehicle which is:
(a) Built on a single chassis.
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections.
(b)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck.
(c)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
(d)
(1)
Recreational vehicles and similar transportable structures placed
on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer shall be considered
manufactured homes for the purpose of this chapter.
(2)
§ 161-5 FIRE SAFETY § 161-5
157:131
or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, a manufactured home, or gas or liquid storage tank.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also
means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or
improvements to a structure, taking place during a five-year period
beginning on January 1, 2013, in which the cumulative cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be:
The market value of the structure prior to the start of the initial
repair or improvement; or
(a)
In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the
damage occurring.
(b)
(1)
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement
of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified
by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions.
(2)
28.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 161-5 BRANFORD CODE § 161-5
157:132
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management ordinance.
A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where
specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
§ 161-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Branford.
§ 161-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 4-10-2019]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New
Haven County, Connecticut, dated May 16, 2017, and accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated May 16, 2017 (Panels - 09009C0454J,
09009C0458J, 09009C0459J, 09009C0461J, 09009C0463K, 09009C0466K,
09009C0467K), JUly 8, 2013 (Panels - 09009C0464J, 09009C0468J,
09009C0469J, 09009C0488J, 09009C0576J, 09009C0577J, 09009C0581J,
09009C0582J, 09009C0601J), and December 17, 2010 (Panels -
09009C0462H. 09009C0486H), and other supporting data applicable to the
Town of Branford, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Since mapping is legally
adopted by reference into this chapter it must take precedence when more
restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained
from FEMA. The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the
FIRM as Zones A, AE, Coastal AE and VE, including areas designated as a
floodway on a FIRM. Zones VE and Coastal AE are also identified as Coastal
High-Hazard Areas. Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing
the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on a Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be
verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location.
§ 161-8. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities.
§ 161-5 FIRE SAFETY § 161-9
157:133
§ 161-9. Compliance required. [Amended 4-10-2019]
A structure or development already in compliance with this chapter shall
not be made noncompliant by any alteration, modification, repair,
reconstruction or improvement and must also comply with other applicable
local, state, and federal regulations. No structure or land shall hereafter be
located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
§ 161-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
§ 161-11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
§ 161-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town
of Branford or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 161-13. Designation of administrator.
The Town Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 161-14. Development permit procedures. [Amended 4-10-2019]
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Town Engineer,
on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and
may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans, in duplicate, drawn
to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area
in question, limit and extent of the 100-year floodplain, the limit of moderate
wave action (LiMWA) boundary line, existing or proposed structures, fill,
§ 161-9 BRANFORD CODE § 161-14
157:134
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
A. Application stage.
(1) The following application information is required:
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures [§§ 161-18A(1) and
161-19B].
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed [§ 161-18A(2)(b)].
(c) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(d) A statement as to whether or not the proposed alterations to
an existing structure meet the criteria of the "substantial
improvement definition" (§ 161-5B).
(e) A statement as to whether there will be dry access to the
structure during the one-hundred-year storm event.
(2) Where applicable, the following certifications by a registered
engineer or architect are required and must be provided to the Town
Engineer. The design and methods of construction must be certified
to be in accordance with accepted standards of practice and with the
provisions of §§ 161-18 and 161-19.
(a) Nonresidential floodproofing must meet the provisions of
§ 161-18A(2)(b).
(b) Enclosed areas below the base flood elevations. If the minimum
design criteria in § 161- 18A through C are not used, then the
design and construction methods must be certified as explained
in § 161-18B.
(c) No increase in floodway heights may be allowed. Any
development in a floodway must meet the provisions of
§ 161-18C.
(d) Breakaway walls. If the design criteria stated in § 161-19H are
not utilized, then the design and construction methods must be
certified as explained in § 161-19H(1) and H(2).
(e) Structural anchorings must meet the provisions of § 161-19C and
D.
B. Construction stage. Upon completion of the applicable portion of
construction, the applicant shall provide verification to the Town
Engineer of the following as is applicable:
(1) Lowest floor elevation. The elevation to be verified for:
(a) A structure in a numbered A Zone is the top of the lowest floor,
including basement [§ 161-18A(1)].
(b) A structure in the V Zone or Coastal AE Zone is the lowest point
of the lowest structural member, excluding pilings or columns
(§ 161-19B).
(c) A structure which has been floodproofed is the elevation to which
the floodproofing is effective [§ 161-18A(2)].
C. Deficiencies detected by the review of the above listed shall be corrected
by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work
being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey, or elevation
§ 161-14 FIRE SAFETY § 161-14
157:135
certificate, or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
§ 161-15. Powers and duties of administrator.
The duties of the Town Engineer, or his/her designee, shall include, but not
be limited to:
A. Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
B. Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements
of this chapter have been satisfied.
C. Advise the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be
required and, if specific federal or state permit requirements are known,
require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on
file with the development permit, possibly including but not limited to
Coastal Area Management Permit, Water Diversion, Dam Safety, Corps
of Engineers 404.
D. Notify the Regional Planning Agency and the affected municipality at
least 35 days prior to the public hearing if any change of regulation
or use of a flood zone will affect an area within 500 feet of another
municipality.
E. Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental
Protection, Water Resources Unit, prior to any alterations or relocation
of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. [Amended 4-10-2019]
F. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
G. Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with § 161-18A(1).
H. Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in
accordance with § 161-18A(2).
I. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Town
Engineer shall obtain certification from a registered professional
engineer or architect, in accordance with § 161-18A(2).
J. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of
the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to
be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions),
the Town Engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section.
K. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided
in accordance with § 161-7, then the Town Engineer shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the
provisions of §§ 161-16 through 161-19.
L. All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in the office of the Town Engineer.
§ 161-14 BRANFORD CODE § 161-15
157:136
M. In coastal hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a registered
professional engineer or architect that the structure is designed to be
securely anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to
withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash, in accordance with
§ 161- 19C and D.
N. In coastal high-hazard areas, the Town Engineer shall review plans for
adequacy of breakaway walls in accordance with § 161-19.
O. Upon completion of the permitted development and prior to issuance of
a certificate of occupancy (CO), necessary as-built surveys (prepared by
a Connecticut licensed professional as per Connecticut state statutes)
and engineering and architectural certifications shall be provided to the
Town Engineer demonstrating compliance with the approved plans and
standards set forth in this section. [Added 4-10-2019]
§ 161-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
A. New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
B. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage and conform to the provisions
of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Material
Requirements. This includes, but is not limited to, flooring, interior and
exterior walls, wall coverings and other materials installed below the
base flood elevation plus 1.0 foot. [Amended 4-10-2019]
C. New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
D. The bottom of all electrical, heating, plumbing, ventilation and airconditioning
equipment, appliances, fixtures and components. HVAC
duct work and duct systems, and any other utility service equipment,
facilities, machinery, or connections servicing a structure shall be
elevated 1.0 foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). Systems,
fixtures, equipment and components shall not be mounted on or
penetrate through breakaway walls intended to fail under flood loads.
Connections or other equipment that must be located below the BFE
plus 1.0 foot elevation are permitted only when no other elevation
alternative is available and provided they are designed and installed to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses,
including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of the base
flood event. Electrical wiring systems that must be located below the
BFE plus 1.0 foot shall conform to the standards for wet locations.
[Amended 4-10-2019]
E. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
F. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the system into floodwaters.
G. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
§ 161-15 FIRE SAFETY § 161-16
157:137
H. Manufactured homes.
(1) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall
be elevated so that the bottom of the frame is located 1.0 foot
above the base flood elevation. This includes, but is not limited to,
manufactured homes located outside a manufactured home park or
subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in
an existing manufactured home park in which a manufactured home
has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood. [Amended
4-10-2019]
(2) A manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation
which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is
securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement
and hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures. Anchoring may
include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors.
(3) A manufactured home shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage.
(a) Adequate access and drainage should be provided.
(b) Elevation construction standards include piling foundations
placed no more than 10 feet apart, and reinforcement is
provided for piers more than six feet above ground level.
I. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE shall either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system,
is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.); or
(3) Meet all the general standards of § 161-16 and the elevation and
anchoring requirements of § 161-16H in particular.
J. In any portion of a watercourse which is altered or relocated, the floodcarrying
capacity shall be maintained.
K. A structure already in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall not be made noncompliant by any alteration, repair, reconstruction
or improvement to the structure.
L. Compensatory storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain,
except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced.
Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial
improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure shall
be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain.
Storage shall be provided on site, unless easements have been gained
from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same
hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage;
it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the
theoretical volume of floodwater at each elevation, up to and including
the one-hundred-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the
proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted
hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body.
§ 161-16 BRANFORD CODE § 161-16
157:138
Compensatory storage can be provided off site if approved by the
municipality. [Amended 4-10-2019]
M. Equal conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are
tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new
construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in
footprint of the structure are prohibited unless the applicant provides
certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with
supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not
result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation).
Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain,
including work to provide compensatory storage, shall not be
constructed in such a way as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood
velocity.
N. Storage tanks. Aboveground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which
are located outside or inside of a structure must either be elevated
above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely
anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement,
have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw
fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of floodwater. In VE
and Coastal AE zones, aboveground storage tanks which are located
outside or inside of a structure must be elevated 1.0 foot above the
base flood elevation (BFE). Where elevated on platforms, the platforms
shall be cantilevered from or knee braced to the building or shall be
supported on elevated foundations that conform to the standards for
the particular flood zone as described in § 161-18. In all flood zones,
underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement under conditions of the base flood. [Amended
4-10-2019]
O. Portion of structure in flood zone. If any portion of a structure lies within
the special flood hazard area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered
to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction
requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached
additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to
the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive
flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the
more restrictive zone.
P. Structures in two flood zones. If a structure lies within two or more flood
zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply
to the entire structure (i.e., V Zone is more restrictive than A Zone;
structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any
attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure
attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a
more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the
requirements of the more restrictive zone.)
Q. No structures entirely or partially over water. New construction,
substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained
§ 161-16 FIRE SAFETY § 161-16
157:139
substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or
partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility.
§ 161-17. Standards for stream without established base flood
elevations and/or floodway.
A. The Town Engineer shall require base flood elevation (BFE) data be
provided with any application for new construction, substantial
improvement, repair to structures which have sustained substantial
damage or other development in Zone A without a FEMA-published
BFE (unnumbered A Zone). A registered professional engineer must
determine the BFE in accordance with accepted hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering practices and document the technical methods
used. Studies, analyses and computations shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow thorough review and approval. The Town Engineer shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including
data developed pursuant to § 161-15K and § 161-20D of this chapter, as
criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in Zone A or V on the community's FIRM meet the
standards in §§ 161-18, 161-19 and 161-20. [Amended 4-10-2019]
B. In A and AE Zones where base flood elevations have been determined,
but before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial
improvement or other development (including fill) shall be permitted
which will increase base flood elevations more than one foot at any point
along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered
cumulatively with the proposed development.
C. The Town Engineer may request or accept floodway data of an applicant
for watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data is
provided by an applicant or from any other source, the Town of Branford
shall adopt a regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be based on only
the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the
base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot at any point along the watercourse.
D. Where no base flood elevation (BFE) or floodway data is available, the
Town Engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial
improvements or other development in any area of potential,
demonstrable or historical flooding within the community meet the
standards in § 161-18.
§ 161-18. Specific standards.
A. In all areas of special flood hazard A and AE, where base flood elevation
data has been provided, as set forth in § 161-7 or § 161-17, the following
provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least to the base flood elevation plus
one foot.
§ 161-16 BRANFORD CODE § 161-18
157:140
(2) Nonresidential construction.
(a) New construction or substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure located in
Zones A and AE shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated at least to the level of the base flood elevation plus one
foot; or
(b) Nonresidential structures located in all A and AE Zones may be
floodproofed to the base flood elevation plus one foot in lieu
of being elevated, provided that, together with all attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, the areas of the structure below
the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop
structural design specifications and plans for the construction
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 161-14A(2)(a).
B. Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation plus
one foot shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed
to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
(1) Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria: [Amended 4-10-2019]
(a) Provide a minimum of two openings on more than one wall
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. If the structure
has more than one enclosed area, openings must be installed in
the exterior walls of each enclosed area so that floodwaters can
enter directly from the outside;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
the higher of either the final interior grade or floor elevation,
or the finished exterior grade adjacent to the outside of the
foundation wall. At least one entire side of the structure's fully
enclosed area must be at or above grade. Fill placed around the
foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside the
enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside
elevation on at least one side of the building. The foundation
slab of a residential structure, including the slab of a crawlspace,
must be set equal to the outside finished grade on at least one
side of the building; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
§ 161-18 FIRE SAFETY § 161-18
157:141
flow of floodwaters in both directions. Openings shall not be less
than three inches in any direction in the plane of the wall.
(2) Electrical, plumbing and other utility connections are prohibited
below the base flood elevation.
(3) Use of the enclosed area shall be limited to parking of vehicles or
limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with
the premises or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
C. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 161-7 are areas designated as floodways on the community's Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply: [Amended 4-10-2019]
(1) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments, shall be prohibited unless
certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Buildings and structures meeting the standard above and located in
whole or in part in the floodway shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with ASCE 24.
(3) Fences in the floodway must be aligned parallel with the flow and be
of an open design.
§ 161-19. Coastal high-hazard areas. [Amended 4-10-2019]
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 161-7 are
areas designated as coastal high-hazard areas (Zone VE and Coastal AE).
These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave wash, erosion
scour, and high wind; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
A. All new construction or substantial improvement shall be located
landward of the reach of the Connecticut Coastal Jurisdiction Line as
defined in C.G.S. § 22a-359, as amended by Public Act 12-101.
B. All new construction or substantial improvement shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal member (excluding
pilings or columns) is located no lower than the base flood elevation
level plus one foot, with all space below the lowest supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water.
C. All new construction or substantial improvement shall be securely
anchored on pilings or columns.
D. All pilings and columns and the attached structures shall be anchored
to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effect of
wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components.
The anchoring and support system shall be designed with wind and
water loading values which equal or exceed the one-hundred-year mean
recurrence interval (one-percent-annual-chance floods and winds).
E. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or
develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction
and shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for
§ 161-18 BRANFORD CODE § 161-19
157:142
construction are in accordance with acceptable standards and are in
compliance with the provisions contained in Subsections B through D of
this section.
F. There shall be no fill used as structural support.
G. There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would increase
potential flood damage.
H. Prior to construction, plans for any structures that will have breakaway
walls, lattice work or screening must be submitted to the Town Engineer
for approval. Nonsupporting breakaway wall, lattice work or mesh
screening shall be allowed below the base flood elevation, provided that
it is not part of the structural support of the building and is designed
as to break away, under abnormal high tides or wave action, without
damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is to be
used, and provided that the following design specifications are met:
[Amended 4-10-2019]
(1) Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall not be less than 10
nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
(2) If more than 20 pounds per square foot, a registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the design wall collapse
would result from a water load less than that which would occur
during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of the building
and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects of wind
and water loads active simultaneously on all building components
during the base flood event. Maximum wind and water loading
values to be used in this determination shall each have one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (onehundred-
year mean recurrence interval).
I. If breakaway walls, lattice work or screening are utilized, the resulting
enclosed space shall not be designed to be used for human habitation,
but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building
access or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection
with the premises. Areas enclosed by breakaway walls shall contain
hydraulic flood vents per the requirements of § 161-18B. [Amended
4-10-2019]
J. The bottom of all electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility
equipment that service the structure must be elevated 1.0 foot above
the BFE and cannot be located below the structure. Any service
equipment that must be located below the BFE must be floodproofed
to prevent water from entering during conditions of flooding. Electrical,
mechanical and plumbing system components are not to be mounted on
or penetrate through walls designed to breakaway under flood loads.
[Amended 4-10-2019]
K. To protect the building envelope, an exterior door shall be installed at
the top of the stairs that provides access to the lowest (habitable) floor
of the structure. [Amended 4-10-2019]
L. The base of a chimney or fireplace shall not extend below the BFE plus
one foot. When vertical support is required, a chimney or fireplace shall
be vertically supported on pile or column foundations embedded at least
§ 161-19 FIRE SAFETY § 161-19
157:143
as deep as the rest of the structure foundation or deeper where needed
to support the chimney against water and wind loads. The chimney
and fireplace system shall be designed to minimize transfer of water
and wind loads to the structure or structure foundation. [Amended
4-10-2019]
M. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure
shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with
breakaway walls, lattice work or screening as provided for in § 161-19H
through I. [Amended 4-10-2019]
N. Manufactured (mobile) homes placed, substantially damaged, or
substantially improved within VE and Coastal AE Zones, on sites outside
of a manufactured home park or subdivision, inside a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision in which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as a result of a flood, must meet the standards of § 161-19A
through M. [Amended 4-10-2019]
O. Manufactured (mobile) homes placed or substantially improved within
VE and Coastal AE Zones on other sites within an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision must meet the following standards:
[Amended 4-10-2019]
(1) The lowest floor of the manufactured home must be elevated to or
above the base flood elevation; or
(2) The manufactured home chassis must be supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
P. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within VE and Coastal AE Zones
must meet the following standards: [Added 4-10-2019]
(1) Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system,
is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached additions.); or
(3) Meet the permitting requirements of § 161-16 and the coastal highhazard
area standards of § 161-19A through J.
§ 161-20. Subdivisions.
In all special flood hazard areas, the following requirements shall apply:
A. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
B. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such
as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
C. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. In Zones A and AE, base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including
§ 161-19 BRANFORD CODE § 161-20
157:144
manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which are five acres or 50
lots, whichever occurs first.
§ 161-21. Appeals.
A. The Flood and Erosion Control Board as established by the Town of
Branford shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.29
B. The Flood and Erosion Control Board shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Town Engineer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
C. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Flood and Erosion Control
Board or any person owning land which abuts or is within a radius of 100
feet of the land in question may appeal within 15 days after such decision
to the State Superior Court of New Haven, as provided in Section 8-8 of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 161-22. Variances.
A. Specific situation variances.
(1) Buildings on an historic register. Variances may be issued for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the
remainder of this section, except for § 161-22B(3)(a) through B(3)(d)
and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical
character.
(2) Preexisting, small lot location. Variances may be issued by a
community for new construction and substantial improvements to
be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the
base flood level, in conformance with § 161-22B(3)(a) through
B(3)(d).
(3) Functional dependent uses. Variances may be issued for new
construction and substantial improvement and other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided
that the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage, create no additional threat to public safety
and meet the requirements of § 161-22B(3)(a) through B(3)(d).
(4) Floodway prohibition. Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
B. Considerations for granting of variances.
(1) In passing upon such applications, the Flood and Erosion Control
Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Flood and Erosion Control Board.
§ 161-20 FIRE SAFETY § 161-22
157:145
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community.
(e) The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of
a functionally dependent facility.
(f) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(2) Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of
this chapter, the Flood and Erosion Control Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(3) Conditions for variances.
(a) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as not
to destroy the historic character and design of the building.
(b) Variances shall only be issued upon:
[1] A showing of good and sufficient cause;
[2] A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; and
[3] A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety
or extraordinary public expense; create nuisance; cause
fraud on or victimization of the public; or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
(c) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built
and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate
§ 161-22 BRANFORD CODE § 161-22
157:146
with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation, up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage.
(d) The Town Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
§ 161-23. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute
a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
more than $250 per day if proven done willfully and $100 per day if not, or
imprisoned for not more than 10 days for each day of violation, or both, and,
in addition, shall pay all costs and reasonable legal fees involved in the case.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Branford from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Chapter 164
GAS AND OIL EXPLORATION
§ 161-22 FIRE SAFETY § 161-23
157:147

ARTICLE I
Storage, Disposal or Use of Hydraulic Fracturing Waste Prohibited
[Adopted 12-14-2016]
§ 164-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION — The physical act of placing or spreading natural gas
waste or oil waste on any road or real property located within the Town of
Branford.
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING — The fracturing of underground rock
formations, including shale and nonshale formations, by man-made fluiddriven
techniques for the purpose of stimulating oil, natural gas, or other
subsurface hydrocarbon production.
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical
activities related to the exploration for or extraction of natural gas,
including, but not limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic
fracturing.
NATURAL GAS WASTE —
OIL EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES — All geologic or geophysical activities
related to the exploration for or extraction of oil, including, but not limited
to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
OIL WASTE —
Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a result
of natural gas extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,
chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or
other contaminants;
A.
Leachate from solid wastes associated with natural gas extraction
activities;
B.
Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with the
underground storage of natural gas;
C.
Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with
liquefied petroleum gas well storage operations; and
D.
Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment, processing,
or modification of any of the above wastes.
E.
Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a
result of oil extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine,
chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or
other contaminants;
A.
B. Leachate from solid wastes associated with oil extraction activities; and
§ 164-1 FIRE SAFETY § 164-1
157:149
TOWN — The Town of Branford.
§ 164-2. Prohibitions.
A. The application of natural gas waste or oil waste, whether or not such
waste has received beneficial use determination or other approval for
use by DEEP (Department of Energy and Environmental Protection) or
any other regulatory body, on any road or real property located within
the Town, for any purpose, is prohibited.
B. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any wastewater
treatment facility within or operated by the Town is prohibited.
C. The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any solid waste
management facility within or operated by the Town is prohibited.
D. The storage, disposal, sale, acquisition, handling, treatment and/or
processing of waste from natural gas or oil extraction is prohibited
within the Town.
§ 164-3. Provision for language to be included in bids and contracts
related to the construction or maintenance of publicly owned and/or
maintained roads or real property within the Town.
A. All bids and contracts related to the purchase or acquisition of materials
to be used to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or
maintained road or real property within the Town shall include a
provision stating that no materials containing natural gas or oil waste
shall be provided to the Town.
B. All bids and contracts related to the retention of services to construct
or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property
within the Town shall include a provision stating that no materials
containing natural gas or oil waste shall be utilized in providing such a
service.
C. The following statement, which shall be a sworn statement under penalty
of perjury, shall be included in all bids related to the purchase or
acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly
owned and/or maintained road or real property within the Town and all
bids related to the retention of services to construct or maintain any
publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within the Town:
"We __________ hereby submit a bid for materials, equipment and/or labor
for the Town of Branford. The bid is for bid documents titled __________.
We hereby certify under penalty of perjury that no natural gas waste or
oil waste will be used by the undersigned bidder or any contractor, subcontractor,
agent or vendor agent in connection with the bid; nor will the
undersigned bidder or any sub-contractor, agent or vendor agent thereof
apply any natural gas waste or oil waste to any road or real property with
the Town of Branford as a result of the submittal of this bid if selected."
Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment, processing,
or modification of any of the above wastes.
C.
§ 164-1 BRANFORD CODE § 164-4
157:150
§ 164-4. Penalties for offenses.
This article shall apply to any and all actions occurring on or after the
effective date of this article. The Town is empowered to issue cease-anddesist
orders in case of any violation of the prohibitions and provision
stated above in §§ 164-2 and 164-3. It is further empowered to require
remediation of any damage done to any land, road, building, aquifer, well,
watercourse, air quality or other asset, be it public or private, within the
Town of Branford. Any person who violates this article shall be liable for a
civil penalty of not less than $1,000, nor more than $10,000 for each day of
the violation [per C.G.S. § 22a-250(h), prohibiting littering or dumping].
§ 164-5. Enforcement officials.
Any designee authorized by the Board of Selectmen of Branford may pursue
penalties against any person who commits violations of this article. The
involvement of any Branford officials will not require testing of waste
products to determine chemical contents, as this work will be done via
contacting CT DEEP or other third-party analytical laboratories as is
current practice of the Town of Branford for other exposures to potentially
hazardous chemical situations.
§ 164-6. Transportation.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to ban the transportation of any
product or by-product described herein on any roadway or real property
within the Town of Branford.
§ 164-7. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
article or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair, effect or invalidate the remainder thereof,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or part of this article, on in its application to the
person, individual, corporation, firm, partnership, entity or circumstance
directly involved in the controversy in which such order or judgment shall
be rendered. In addition, any section of this article that is preempted by
future State of Connecticut regulations will be declared null and void. To
further this end, the provisions of this article of the Branford Town Code are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 164-4 FIRE SAFETY § 164-7
157:151
Chapter 165
(RESERVED)
Chapter 169
HOUSING, AFFORDABLE
§ 169-1. Authority to enter into contracts.
The Board of Selectmen may, after approval of future projects by the
Representative Town Meeting and by a majority vote of the Board, enter
into contracts for the Town with nonprofit owners and developers of
affordable housing, including Carrie P. Chandler Housing Corporation and
BRIC, for the abatement, in whole or in part, of the real property taxes that
otherwise would be levied against such affordable housing developments.
Approval of the Representative Town Meeting is hereby given for BRIC and
Carrie P. Chandler Housing Corporation developments at Ivy and Meadow
Streets.
§ 169-2. Contract provisions.
A. Said contracts shall provide that the moneys equal to the amount of such
abatement shall be used primarily to provide necessary related facilities
or services in such housing but may also be used to help maintain the
rents at affordable levels.
B. Said contracts shall provide that the real property taxes levied against
such affordable housing developments be abated in whole or in part
effective on the dates specified in said contracts, and provided further
that:
(1) Said housing is actually built with financial subsidies from state or
federal housing programs.
(2) Said housing is used solely for persons or families of low or moderate
income, as defined by regulations issued by the State of Connecticut,
including DOH, or the Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD).
(3) Said eligibility determinations and income assessments shall be
handled and approved as required by DOH or HUD.
(4) The term of such abatements may continue for a period not to
exceed 20 consecutive fiscal years, except that longer periods may
be agreed upon if extended opportunities for reimbursement by the
state or by the United States were made available pursuant to law.
§ 169-3. Taxes.
Notwithstanding this approval of a tax abatement, the real property taxes
otherwise levied against any such affordable housing developments shall
continue to be calculated on an annual basis so as to inform the developer
or owner, the Town and DOH or HUD of the specific amount saved each
year.
§ 164-7 BRANFORD CODE § 169-4
165:152
§ 169-4. Applicability of tax abatement.
Such tax abatements shall be applicable to all successors and assigns of the
developers or owners, provided that all conditions of this chapter are met,
that the successor or assignee is a nonprofit corporation recognized under
the Internal Revenue Code or is a governmental entity and that notice of
any change in ownership of the premises is filed with the Town Clerk.
§ 169-5. Failure to construct or maintain.
The failure of a developer or owner or any of its successors or assigns
to construct the rental units or to maintain the premises in accordance
with the terms of this chapter or the standards of the Building or Housing
Codes of the Town of Branford shall constitute reason not to commence,
temporarily to cease or to obtain reimbursement from the developer or
owner for this tax abatement. Any such temporary cessation or
reimbursement shall be calculated on a partial basis, with the tax
abatement or reimbursement adjusted in proportion to the unit or units so
out of compliance with said codes.
§ 169-6. Contracts for financial assistance.
The Town of Branford may, by a majority vote of its Board of Selectmen,
enter into contracts with the state or with the United States for financial
assistance in the form of reimbursement for all or any part of the tax
abatement granted to an owner of low- and moderate-income housing in
accordance with this chapter, but the entering into of such a contract for
financial assistance shall not be a condition for the granting of any tax
abatement.
Chapter 176
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 112.
Parks, greens and recreation areas — See Ch.
190.
Solid waste — See Ch. 213.
§ 176-1. Title.
The Code of the Town of Branford is hereby amended by repealing Chapter
17630 and adding a new Chapter 176 to be entitled the "Branford Anti-Litter
Ordinance."
30.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 176, Littering, was adopted 10-11-1972.
§ 169-4 LITTERING § 176-2
176:153
§ 176-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any discarded, used or consumed substance or waste material,
whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or other material
or synthetic material or combination thereof, including but not limited to
any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or
can, unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or
any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn
or garden wastes, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper
containers or other packaging or construction material which has not been
deposited in a litter receptacle.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A receptacle suitable for the depositing of litter.
PARK — Park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Town, owned or used by the Town and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule,
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area that is used or is held out for use by the public
whether owned or operated by public or private interests.
TOWN — The Town of Branford.
§ 176-3. Litter in public places; use of public receptacles.
No person shall deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place within the Town except in public receptacles or in an authorized
private receptacle for collection; provided, however, that said public
receptacles shall not be used by persons owning or occupying property
in the vicinity of said public receptacles for the deposit of domestic or
commercial litter arising from the conduct of activities on such property.
§ 176-4. Sweeping litter into streets.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
§ 176-5. Sidewalks maintenance.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of
their premises free of litter.
§ 176-2 BRANFORD CODE § 176-6
176:154
§ 176-6. Merchants to keep sidewalks free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Town any
accumulation of litter, and all persons owning or occupying places of
business within the Town shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises
free of litter.
§ 176-7. Litter from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Town or upon private
property. The operator of said vehicle shall be deemed, prima facie, to have
committed such offense.
§ 176-8. Debris and litter from trucks.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Town
unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded as to prevent load, contents or
litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public
place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the
Town, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley
or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter
of any kind, excluding any public road construction.
§ 176-9. Parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Town except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
§ 176-10. Bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the territorial
waters of the Town of Branford.
§ 176-11. Occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Town, except that the owner or person in control of private
property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such
a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any
private property.
§ 176-6 LITTERING § 176-12
176:155
§ 176-12. Duty to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or persons in control of any private premises or public place
shall use reasonable efforts to maintain the premises free of litter; provided,
however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private
receptacles for collection.
§ 176-13. Littering on vacant property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Town whether owned by such person or not.
§ 176-14. Throwing or distributing handbills.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, utility pole or other public place
within the Town.
§ 176-15. Handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without
charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 176-16. Litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the Town
any litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 176-17. Removal of animal wastes; exception.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, walking or in control
of any dog or other animal to allow or permit such animal to defecate
upon any private property owned by another person or a public place
unless such person shall remove all feces so deposited by such animal.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to horses or a guide dog
accompanying any blind person.
§ 176-18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-13-1999]
A. Any person who shall violate provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
to have committed an infraction and be subject to a fine of $35.
B. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be fined as such.
§ 176-19. Enforcement. [Amended 10-13-1999]
A. The First Selectman may appoint and authorize any police officer or
other person to issue a citation to any person who commits a violation of
Chapter 176.
B. A complaint form will be available in the Town Clerk's office for citizens
who wish to make reports of littering.
§ 176-12 BRANFORD CODE § 176-20
176:156
§ 176-20. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 176-21. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall
for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by decree or
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decree or decision
shall not affect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining
portion of this chapter.
§ 176-22. Hearing procedure for citations. [Added 10-13-1999]
A. Within 12 months from the expiration of the final period for the
uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees, the Town of
Branford shall send notice to the person cited. Such notice shall inform
the person cited:
(1) Of the allegations against him and the amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees due;
(2) That he may contest his liability before a citation hearing officer by
delivering in person or by mail written notice within 10 days of the
date thereof;
(3) That if he does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and
judgment shall be entered against him; and
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
B. If the person who is sent notice pursuant to Subsection A wishes to admit
liability for any alleged violation, he may, without requesting a hearing,
pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to in
person or by mail to an official designated by the Town of Branford.
Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal,
to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the
payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for
a hearing within 10 days of the date of the first notice provided for
in Subsection A shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the
designated Branford official shall certify such person's failure to respond
to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and
assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable
ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in Subsection D.
C. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of the
notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant, upon good cause
shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement
or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of
violation issued by the issuing official or policeman shall be filed and
retained by the Town of Branford and shall be deemed to be a business
record and evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the
issuing official or policeman shall be required at the hearing if such
person so requests. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appear
§ 176-20 LITTERING § 176-22
176:157
at the hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. A designated
Branford official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence
on behalf of the Town of Branford. If such person fails to appear, the
hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against him upon
a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes or
ordinances. The hearing officer may accept from such person copies
of police reports, investigatory and citation reports, and other official
documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance
of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the
hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he
deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of
evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given
under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his
decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the person is
not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination, in
writing, accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the
violation, he shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs
or fees against such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of
the Town of Branford.
D. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer
shall send by first-class mail a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the
clerk of the Superior Court for the geographical area in which the Town
of Branford is located, together with an entry fee of $8. The certified
copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment.
Within such twelve-month period, assessments against the same person
may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall
enter judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment and court
costs of $8, against such person in favor of the Town of Branford.
Notwithstanding any provision of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall
have the effect of a civil money judgment, and a levy of execution on such
judgment may issue without further notice to such person.
E. A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by
filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an
amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Section
52-259,31 in the Superior Court for the geographical area in which the
municipality is located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in
accordance with the rules of the Judges of the Superior Court.
Chapter 187
OIL AND FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT
31.Editor's Note: Refers to Connecticut General Statutes, Section 52-259.
§ 176-22 BRANFORD CODE § 187-1
187:158
§ 187-1. Scope.
These regulations shall apply to:
A. All installations of oil burners in stoves or ranges or similar devices for
domestic heating purposes, hereinafter called "range oil burners."
B. All installations of fuel oil heating apparatus designed or installed for use
in conjunction with steam hot water, warm air or other type of heating
system located in any cellar, basement or other room designed or used
as a furnace room, for the purpose of furnishing heat for any building,
hereinafter called "fuel oil heating apparatus."
C. The handling and storage of fuels designed or used for combustion in
stoves, ranges or fuel oil heating apparatus.
D. Cover kerosene oil burner domestic hot-water heaters.
§ 187-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE MARSHAL — Includes the Fire Marshal and his assistants or deputies
assigned to fire prevention work.
LICENSE — The written permission of the said Fire Marshal authorizing a
person to install and service oil burners in stoves and ranges in conformity
herewith or authorizing a person to transport and deliver range and fuel oil
for use therewith.
PERMIT — Written authorization by the Fire Marshal for a given installation
of a fuel oil heating apparatus.
PERSON — Includes individuals, firms and corporations.
§ 187-3. Licenses and permits required.
A. No person shall engage in the business of installing or servicing or shall
install or cause to be installed any stove or range oil-heating apparatus,
or any fuel oil heating apparatus and no person shall deliver oil suitable
for fuel in such apparatus unless he shall have obtained a license as
herein set forth or, in the case of delivery, shall have obtained such a
license from another municipality in the State of Connecticut. The fee
for each such license shall be $5, which shall be paid for the use of the
Town at the time of making application. All licenses issued under the
provisions of these regulations shall expire upon the last day of April
in each year, except that the Fire Marshal may, at his discretion, issue
temporary licenses for a period not exceeding 30 days. Subject to the
remedies herein provided, the Fire Marshal shall have the power to
revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to these regulations.
B. No person shall install or replace or cause to be installed a fuel oil
heating apparatus or range oil burner in any building without first
obtaining a written permit therefor from the Fire Marshal. The fee for
each such permit shall be $2 in the case of fuel oil heating apparatus and
$0.50 in the case of range oil burners, which shall be paid for the use of
the Town at the time of making application.
§ 187-1 OIL AND FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 187-3
187:159
C. No motor vehicle shall be used for the transportation or delivery of
crude or refined petroleum, benzoline, gasoline or other inflammable
or explosive oils without first having obtained a sticker of approval
in accordance with Section 813b of the 1951 Supplement to the
Connecticut General Statutes. The fee for each such inspection by the
Fire Marshal shall be $2, which shall be paid for the use of the Town at
the time when said sticker of approval is issued.
§ 187-4. Application for license or permit.
Applications for licenses or permits hereunder shall be made in writing to
the Fire Marshal at the office of the Town Clerk in the Town Hall in the Town
of Branford, in such form and detail as the Fire Marshal shall require and, if
approved by said Fire Marshal, shall be so endorsed and filed with the Town
Clerk. Before such license or permit may be granted, it will be necessary for
the applicant to establish his competence to perform the service for which
a license or permit is sought and the suitability of the equipment to be used
for the purpose.
§ 187-5. Prohibited oils or fuels.
The use of benzine, alcohol, gasoline or oils of a lower flash point than 110°
F. in connection with the operation of range oil burners or fuel oil heating
apparatus is prohibited.
§ 187-6. Attachment of oil containers to burners.
Oil containers shall be so attached to range or stove oil burners as to
preclude the possibility of preignition.
§ 187-7. Location of storage containers.
A. The number and location of oil or fuel storage tanks in any one building
shall be determined by the Fire Marshal. Tanks or drums for the storage
and keeping of a quantity of range oil in excess of three gallons within
the confines of any building or other closed structure shall not be
installed above the lowest floor of the building or in any hallway or
any stairway or porch. In all cases where it is necessary to keep range
oil and the same cannot be stored in compliance with the foregoing
requirements, it shall be stored out of doors or in a separate building
subject to the approval of the Fire Marshal.
B. The oil containers of all range oil burners installed in stoves and ranges,
whether of glass or metal construction, shall not be installed nearer
to any stove or other heating apparatus than 16 inches, and, if said
container is of metal, it shall be of heavy tin plate and to the approval of
the Fire Marshal, except that this provision shall not apply to oil-burning
apparatus where such apparatus has an oil container so attached to said
oil-burning apparatus that the oil contained in such container will not
preignite and cause fire.
§ 187-8. Fuel oil tank requirements.
§ 187-3 BRANFORD CODE § 187-8
187:160
A. Oil for use in connection with fuel oil heating apparatus, to be stored above
ground, shall be kept or stored in tight tanks, constructed of galvanized
steel, basic open-hearth steel or wrought iron of a minimum gauge United
States Standard, as follows:
Capacity
(gallons) Thickness
Less than 60 16-gauge
60 to 200 14-gauge
201 to 350 12-gauge
351 to 4,000 7-gauge
B. Oil storage tanks of less than 7-gauge in thickness, regardless of capacity,
shall not be used for the underground storage of fuel oils.
C. Tanks containing oil for said purpose shall be located as follows:
(1) Oil supply tanks larger than 10 gallons capacity shall not be located in
buildings above the ground floor, cellar or basement.
(2) Unenclosed storage tanks or auxiliary tanks shall not be located within
seven feet, horizontally, of any fire or flame.
(3) Oil supply tanks located inside buildings shall not exceed 275 gallons'
individual capacity or 550 gallons' aggregate capacity in any one
building, unless installed in an enclosure or casing as follows: the walls
of the enclosure shall be constructed of reinforced concrete at least six
inches thick or of brick or other approved masonry at least eight inches
thick and shall be bonded to the floor. The space between the tank and
the enclosure shall be completely filled with sand or well-tamped earth.
Instead of an enclosure as above described, the tank may be encased in
reinforced concrete not less than six inches in thickness applied directly
to the tank so as to completely eliminate any air space. The number and
location of oil storage tanks, above 550 gallons' capacity, to be installed
in any one building shall be determined by the Fire Marshal.
§ 187-9. Filler and vent pipes.
All tanks for said purpose shall have a filler pipe of not less than two inches
of inside diameter extending from the tank to a point outside the building
for filling and kept properly capped when not in use. They shall also have
a vent pipe from a tank, located inside the building, to the outside air
terminating with a gooseneck or approved vent cap six feet or more from
grade level, the opening of which shall be covered with No. 30 mesh brass
wire. Inside storage and underground storage tanks, up to and including
550 gallons' capacity, shall have a vent pipe of not less than 1 1/4 inches of
inside diameter. Tanks of 560 to 1,000 gallons' capacity shall have a vent
pipe of not less than 1/2 inches of inside diameter, and tanks of greater
than 1,000 gallons' capacity shall have a vent pipe of the same size as the
filler pipe. All vent pipes that are connected to inside storage tanks must be
provided with an approved vent alarm device.
§ 187-8 OIL AND FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 187-10
187:161
§ 187-10. Shutoff valves.
All tanks for use in connection with fuel oil heating systems, if located in the
cellar, basement or on the first floor of any building, shall be provided with
fusible link shutoff valves placed in the fuel oil supply line, one as near the
tank as possible and one as near the fuel oil burner as possible. Said fuel oil
supply line shall be of not less than 3/8 inch outside diameter. Such fusible
link must be so attached to a shutoff valve as to automatically close the
shutoff valve at a temperature of 160° F. If such fuel oil tank is located in the
ground outside the building walls, there shall be placed in the fuel oil supply
line, from such fuel oil tank, the same type of automatically operated shutoff
valve as near the point of entrance in cellar or basement as practicable. Said
line shall be of not less than 1/2 inch outside diameter. In addition, there
shall be a similar automatically operated shutoff valve placed in the fuel oil
supply line as near the burner as possible.
§ 187-11. Tank supports.
All tanks installed in any building for use in connection with fuel oil heating
systems shall be substantially and rigidly installed on noncombustible
supports in such a manner as to ensure protection against mechanical
injury.
§ 187-12. Gauging devices.
Gauging devices or test wells, the breaking of which would permit the
escape of oil or vapor within the building, are prohibited.
§ 187-13. Systems under pressure.
Tanks for systems under pressure shall be designed for six times the
maximum pressure and be tested and proven tight at twice the maximum
working pressure, which pressure shall not exceed 50 pounds, and shall be
provided with a reliable pressure gauge and an automatic relief valve piped
to discharge outside of the building.
§ 187-14. Automatically operated oil burners.
A. Automatically operated oil burners used in connection with hot water,
steam or warm air shall be equipped with approved automatic devices to
shut down the burner in the event of undue pressure in a steam boiler or
overheating within a hot-water boiler or warm-air furnace.
B. Automatically operated oil burners used in connection with steam
heating systems shall be equipped with automatic devices for shutting
down the burner in the event of low water in the boiler. The device shall
require manual resetting and shall prevent operation until a safe water
level is resumed.
C. Limiting controls and low-water cutoffs intended to disconnect the
burner from the electric supply shall be connected into the burner supply
circuit on the supply side of all other burner controls and shall be of line
voltage type.
§ 187-10 BRANFORD CODE § 187-15
187:162
§ 187-15. Electrical wiring.
Electric wiring in connection with oil-burning equipment shall be installed
in rigid conduit or BX cable in a workmanlike manner and in accordance
with all local electric codes or the National Electric Code or by such
methods in such manner as may be prescribed from time to time by the Fire
Marshal.
§ 187-16. Ventilation.
Rooms in which oil burners are installed or located shall be provided with
adequate ventilation to assure continuous complete combustion of the oil.
A cross section of not less than 50 square inches of ventilation must be
provided for each gallon, per hour, of oil consumed.
§ 187-17. Installation.
A. Oil burners shall be securely installed in a workmanlike manner and
in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer by qualified
mechanics experienced in making such installations and must conform
to the requirements of Section 3682 of the General Statutes of the State
of Connecticut32 which requires a written certificate of approval from the
Commissioner of State Police and provides a penalty of a fine of not more
than $100 for the sale or installation of a burner not approved.
B. Acceptance tests shall be conducted where more than one burner is
installed in one combustion chamber to make sure that the automatic
devices for the prevention of abnormal discharge of oil, at the burner,
will function properly in the event of failure of one or more units to ignite
on starting or in the event of flame extinguishment of one or more units
during operation.
§ 187-18. Care and operation instructions.
Complete instructions for the care and operation of the oil-burning
equipment shall be conspicuously posted near the burner and maintained in
a readable condition.
§ 187-19. Connection with chimneys.
A. No fuel oil heating apparatus shall be connected with any chimney
unless said chimney is so constructed as to maintain a strong natural
draught, constant at all times.
B. The smoke pipe shall not pass through any combustible partition unless
protected in an approved manner. The clear distance between a smoke
pipe or metal breeching and combustible material or construction,
including plaster on combustible base, shall not be less than 18 inches,
provided that the clearance may be reduced to nine inches when the
smoke pipe or breeching is protected with not less than one inch of
asbestos or equivalent protection or such combustible material or
32.Editor's note: For current provisions, see Section 29-316 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 187-15 OIL AND FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT § 187-19
187:163
construction is protected by sheet metal or equivalent covering placed
at least one inch from the surface to be protected and extending the full
length of the smoke pipe and not less than 12 inches beyond it on all
sides.
§ 187-20. Gas pilot restrictions.
The use of acetylene or any other gas possessing a wider range of
explosibility in admixture with air than coal gas, water gas or oil gas is
prohibited for use in the gas pilot of a fuel oil heating system.
§ 187-21. Appeals.
Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the action of the Fire Marshal
relative to the issuance, revocation or suspension of a license, permit or
approval as herein provided may appeal from such action to the Board of
Fire Commissioners. Said Board shall assign a hearing upon such appeal
and give the appellant due notice of the time and place thereof. The decision
of the majority of said Board shall be controlling upon the Fire Marshal.
§ 187-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall willfully violate any provision of this regulation or fail
to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply within 10 days
with any order or regulation made thereunder shall forfeit a penalty of not
more than $25 for each such offense.
§ 187-23. Amendments.
A. These regulations may be amended from time to time by the Board of
Fire Commissioners.
B. Upon a petition signed by 20 electors of the Town of Branford asking for
changes in the code, the Board of Fire Commissioners shall call a public
hearing for the purpose of hearing and acting on such proposed changes.
Chapter 189
NOISE
§ 189-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Town of Branford Noise Control
Ordinance."
§ 189-2. Purpose.
It is recognized that people have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize
their health or safety or welfare or degrade the quality of life. This chapter
is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare and
§ 187-19 BRANFORD CODE § 189-2
189:164
quality of life for the citizens of Branford through reduction, control and
prevention of noise.
§ 189-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter.
AMBIENT NOISE OR BACKGROUND NOISE — Noise of a measurable
intensity which exists at a point as a result of a combination of many distant
sources individually indistinguishable.
BOARD OF SELECTMEN — The Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Branford or a duly authorized officer subject to their orders.
COMMERCIAL ZONE — Center Business BC District, Restricted Business
BR District, Local Business BL District and Commerce Park CP District as
defined in Chapter II of the zoning regulations of the Town of Branford33
and all uses associated therewith either permitted as a right or as a special
use.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or of public
or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Any equipment or device operated by fuel
or electric power used in construction or demolition work.
DAYTIME HOURS — The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, and the hours 9:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. on Sundays.
DECIBEL — A logarithmic unit of measure used in measuring magnitudes
of sound. The symbol of dB.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT — Not limited to power saws, drills,
grinders, lawn and garden tools and other domestic power equipment
intended for use in residential areas by a homeowner.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle authorized by the Town of
Branford to have sound warning devices, such as sirens and bells, which can
lawfully be used when responding to an emergency.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following an emergency or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure to imminent danger.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Zoning.
§ 189-2 NOISE § 189-3
189:165
IMPULSE NOISE — Sound of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
INDUSTRIAL ZONE — General Industrial District No. 1 and General
Industrial District No. 2 as defined and set forth in Chapter II of the zoning
regulations of the Town of Branford34 and all uses associated therewith,
either permitted as a right or as a special use.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Per Section 14-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
MUFFLER — A device for abating sounds such as escaping gases.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
Sunday evening through Saturday morning, except that "night" shall mean
the hours between 10:00 p.m. Saturday and 9:00 a.m. Sunday.
NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards set forth
in § 189-5B of this chapter.
NOISE LEVEL — The sound pressure level as measured with a sound level
meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A)
or dBA.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency or political or
administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including
all appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards and
real properties without buildings or improvements owned or controlled by
a person. The emitter's premises includes contiguous publicly dedicated
street and highway rights-of-way, all road rights-of-way and waters of the
state.
PROPERTY LINE — That real or imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled
by any person from contiguous real property owned or controlled by
another person and separates real property from the public right-of-way.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley, park, waterway, railroad or similar place which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
NONREGISTERED RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any internal combustion
engine powered vehicle which is being used for recreational purposes.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Those residential districts set forth in Chapter II
of the zoning regulations of the Town of Branford35 and all uses associated
therewith either permitted as a right or as a special use.
SOUND — A transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media
in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure or position
of the particles in the medium and which, in air, evoke physiological
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Zoning.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Zoning.
§ 189-3 BRANFORD CODE § 189-3
189:166
sensations, including but not limited to an auditory response when
impinging on the ear.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument used to take sound-level
measurements and which should conform, as a minimum, to the operational
specifications of the American National Standards Institute for Sound Level
Meters S1. 4--1971 (Type S2A).
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10
of the ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of 20
micronewtons per square meter (20 x 106 Newtons/meter), and is expressed
in decibels (dB).
§ 189-4. Sound-measuring procedure.
For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this chapter, the
following guidelines shall be applicable:
A. All personnel conducting sound measurements shall be trained in the
current techniques and principles of sound-measuring equipment and
instrumentation.
B. Instruments used to determine sound-level measurements shall conform
to the sound level meters as defined by this chapter.
C. The general steps listed below shall be followed when preparing to take
sound-level measurements.
(1) The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the
preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed.
(2) The sound-level meter shall be calibrated before and after each set
of measurements.
(3) When measurements are taken out of doors, a wind screen shall
be placed over the microphone of the sound level meter as per the
manufacturer's instructions.
(4) The sound-level meter shall be placed at an angle to the sound
source as specified by the manufacturer's instructions and at least
four feet above the ground. It shall be so placed as not to be
interfered with by individuals conducting the measurements.
(5) Measurements shall be taken at the point that is located about
one foot beyond the boundary of the emitter's premises within the
receptor's premises. The emitter's premises includes his/her
individual unit of land or group of contiguous parcels under the same
ownership as indicated by public land records.
§ 189-5. Noise levels; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any noise
beyond the boundaries of his/her premises in excess of the noise levels
established in these regulations.
B. Noise level standards.
(1) No person in a residential zone shall emit noise beyond the boundaries of his/
her premises exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to adjacent
residential, commercial and industrial zones:
§ 189-3 NOISE § 189-5
189:167
Receptor's Zone
Emitter's Zone Industrial Commercial Residential/Day Residential/Night
Residential 62 dBA 55 dBA 55 dBA 45 dBA
(2) No person in a commercial zone shall emit noise beyond the boundary of his/
her premises exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to adjacent
residential, commercial or industrial zones:
Receptor's Zone
Emitter's Zone Industrial Commercial Residential/Day Residential/Night
Commercial 62 dBA 62 dBA 55 dBA 45 dBA
(3) No person in an industrial zone shall emit noise beyond the boundary of his/
her premises exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to adjacent
residential, commercial or industrial zones:
Receptor's Zone
Emitter's Zone Industrial Commercial Residential/Day Residential/Night
Industrial 70 dBA 66 dBA 61 dBA 51 dBA
C. High background noise levels and impulse noise.
(1) In those individual cases where the background noise levels caused by
sources not subject to these regulations exceed the standards contained
herein, a source shall be considered to cause excessive noise if the noise
emitted by such source exceeds the background noise levels by five dBA,
provided that no source subject to the provisions of this chapter shall emit
noise in excess of 80 dBA at any time and provided that this section does
not decrease the permissible levels of other sections of this chapter.
(2) No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of 80
dB peak sound pressure level during the nighttime to any residential noise
zone.
(3) No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of
100 dB peak sound pressure level at any time to any zone.
D. Exclusions. These levels shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to:
(1) Natural phenomena.
(2) Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church.
(3) Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any other
alarm systems used in an emergency situation; provided, however, that
burglar alarms not terminating within 30 minutes after being activated shall
be unlawful.
(4) Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration or other state or federal safety regulations.
(5) Farming equipment or farming activity.
E. Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from these regulations subject to
special conditions as spelled out:
(1) Noise generated by any construction equipment which is operated during
daytime hours, provided that the operation of construction equipment
§ 189-5 BRANFORD CODE § 189-5
189:168
during nighttime hours shall not exceed the maximum noise levels as
specified in § 189-5B.
(2) Noise created as a result of or relating to an emergency.
(3) Noise from domestic power equipment such as but not limited to power
saws, sanders, grinders, lawn and garden tools or similar devices operated
during daytime hours.
(4) Noise from snow removal equipment.
(5) Noise from demolition work conducted during daytime hours, provided that
when considered emergency work, demolition shall be exempted at all times
from the noise levels set in this regulation.
(6) Noise created by any aircraft flight operations which are specifically
preempted by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(7) Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by law and
for which a license or permit has been granted by the Town, including but
not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts and firework displays.
(8) Noise created by blasting other than that conducted in connection with
construction activities shall be exempted, provided that the blasting is
conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. local time at specified hours
previously announced to the local public or provided that a permit for such
blasting obtained from local authorities.
(9) Noise created by refuse and solid waste collection, provided that the activity
is conducted during daytime hours.
§ 189-6. Prohibited noise activities.
The following activities are prohibited:
A. Vehicle horns. No person shall at any time sound any horn or other
audible signal device of a motor vehicle unless it is necessary as a
warning to prevent or avoid a traffic accident.
B. Truck idling. No person shall operate an engine or any standing motor
vehicle with a weight in excess of 10,000 pounds manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight (GVW) for a period in excess of 10 minutes when such
vehicle is parked on a residential premises or on a Town road next to a
residential premises.
C. Exhaust discharge. No person shall discharge into the ambient air the
blow-down of any steam vent or the exhaust of any stationary internal
combustion engine or air-compressor equipment, unless such discharge
be through a muffler as defined in § 189-3 of this chapter or through an
apparatus providing equal noise reduction.
§ 189-7. Motor vehicle noise.
A. All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the Town of Branford
shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels set forth in
the regulations authorized in Section 14-80a of the Connecticut State
Statutes.
B. No sound-amplifying devices on or within motor vehicles shall emit noise
in excess of the noise levels as specified in § 189-5B.
§ 189-5 NOISE § 189-8
189:169
§ 189-8. Recreational vehicle noise.
No person shall create or cause to be created any unreasonably loud or
disturbing noise due to the operation of a recreational vehicle. A noise shall
be deemed to be unreasonably loud and a violation of this chapter when the
noise so generated exceeds the noise level standards set forth in § 189-5B.
§ 189-9. Inspections.
A. For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, the Board of Selectmen or their designated representative is
hereby authorized to make inspections of all noise sources and to take
measurements and make tests whenever necessary to determine the
quantity and character of noise. In the event that any person refuses
or restricts entry and free access to any part of a premises or refuses
inspection, testing or noise measurement of any activity, device, facility
or process where inspection is sought, the Board of Selectmen or their
designated representative may seek from the appropriate court a
warrant without interference, restriction or obstruction, at a reasonable
time, for the purpose of inspecting, testing or measuring noise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow or permit the
Board of Selectmen or their designated representative free access to
any premises when the Board of Selectmen or their designated
representative is acting in compliance with a warrant for inspection and
order issued by the appropriate court.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of any
warrant or court order requiring inspection, testing or measurement of
noise sources.
D. No person shall hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent in any way,
interfere or attempt to interfere with any authorized person while in the
performance of his/her duties under this chapter.
§ 189-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
in an amount not to exceed $50. Each 30 minutes such violation reoccurs
after the initial violation or any subsequent violation shall constitute a new
violation.
§ 189-11. Variances.
A. Any person living or doing business in Branford may apply to the Board
of Selectmen for a variance from one or more of the provisions of the
chapter which are more stringent than the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection regulations for the control of noise, provided
that the applicant supplied all of the following information to the Board
of Selectmen at least 20 days prior to the start of said activity.
(1) The location and nature of the activity.
(2) The time period and hours of operation of said activity.
(3) The nature and intensity of the noise that will be generated.
(4) Any other information required by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 189-8 BRANFORD CODE § 189-11
189:170
B. No variance from these regulations shall be used unless it has been
demonstrated that:
(1) The proposed activity will not violate any provisions of the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
(2) The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will not
constitute a danger to the public health.
(3) Compliance with the regulations constitutes an unreasonable
hardship on the applicant.
C. The application for variance shall be reviewed and either approved or
rejected at least five days prior to the proposed start of said activity. The
approval or rejection shall be in writing and shall state the condition of
approval, if any, or the reasons for rejection.
D. Failure to rule on the application in the designated time shall constitute
approval of the variance.
§ 189-12. Contracts.
Any written agreement, purchase order or contract whereby the Town of
Branford is committed to an expenditure of funds in return for work, labor,
services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination thereof shall
not be entered into unless such agreement, purchase order or instrument
contains provisions that any equipment or activities which are subject to
the provisions of this chapter will be operated, constructed, conducted or
manufactured without violating the provisions of this chapter.
§ 189-13. Conflicting provisions.
All provisions of the zoning regulations of the Town of Branford which are
more stringent that those set forth herein shall remain in force. If, for any
reason, any word, clause, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be
held to make the same unconstitutional, this chapter shall not hereby be
invalidated and the remainder of this chapter shall continue in effect. Any
provision herein which is in conflict with the Connecticut General Statutes
or the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut is hereby repealed,
it being understood that said Statutes and Code shall take precedence over
this chapter.
Chapter 190
PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
public — See Ch. 115.
§ 189-11 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 189-13
190:171

ARTICLE I
Branford Green
[Adopted by the Town Meeting 10-12-1931]
§ 190-1. Preservation and protection.
The Selectmen shall take such action as may be necessary in conjunction
with the Board of Police Commissioners to preserve and protect the Green.
§ 190-1 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 190-1
190:173

ARTICLE II
Young's Park
[Adopted by the Representative Town Meeting 3-10-1971]
§ 190-2. Area designated.
The aforementioned parcels of land, including Young's Pond and Mirror
Lake, as shown on a map to be filed in the Branford Town Clerk's office, is
hereby designated and shall be known as "Young's Park."
§ 190-3. Approved use.
Said park shall be preserved by the Town in its natural state, except
that Young's Pond and Young's Ball Field, as shown on said map, may be
improved for recreational uses and purposes.
§ 190-4. Young's Park Commission.
During the month of April 1971, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
a Commission to be known as the "Young's Park Commission," which
Commission shall be appointed in the following manner and shall have the
following manner and shall have the following powers and duties:
A. The Young's Park Commission shall consist of five members and, in
addition thereto, the Chief Executive Officer of the Town of Branford
shall be an ex officio member thereof.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall make appointments to the Commission in
the following manner:
(1) One member shall be the President of the Pine Orchard Association.
(2) Two members shall be residents within the geographical limits of the
Pine Orchard Association.
(3) Two members shall be residents of the Town of Branford, outside the
geographical limits of the Pine Orchard Association.
C. The terms of office of said members shall be as follows:
(1) The President of the Pine Orchard Association shall serve as a
member of the Commission so long as he is President of said
Association. Upon the election of a successor President of said
Association, he shall forthwith be and become a successor member
of this Commission.
(2) The four remaining members shall serve for terms of four years;
provided, however, that initially in April 1971, one member shall be
appointed for a term of one year from May 1, 1971; one for a term of
two years from May 1, 1971; one for a term of three years from May
1, 1971; one for a term of four years from May 1, 1971. Thereafter,
in the month of April of each succeeding year, a member shall be
appointed for a term of four years.
(3) In the event of a vacancy in the term of any member described
in Subsection C(2) hereof, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a
successor to serve for the balance of the term vacated.
(4) All terms of office described in Subsection C(2) hereof shall be
effective as of May 1 in any year.
§ 190-2 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 190-5
190:175
§ 190-5. Rules and regulations; penalties for offenses. [Amended
6-12-1974; 10-10-1984]
A. The following rules shall govern the use of Young's Park:
(1) (Reserved)36
(2) No person shall sleep upon the grass, benches or any other part of
the open ground of said park, and no person shall throw, leave or
deposit within said park any wastepaper, bottles, remains of food
or other litter or refuse, except in the proper receptacles provided
therefor; and no person shall pick any flowers or cut, break, dig up
or in any manner mutilate or injure any tree, shrub, plant, grass,
drive, railing, seat, fence, structure or other public property in said
park or cut, carve upon, mark or paste upon any tree, stone, fence,
wall, building, monument or other object contained or located in
said park, any bill, advertisement or inscription whatsoever, except
by direction or permission of the Commissioners.
(3) No person shall dig up or remove any sand, dirt, stones, rock or any
other thing whatsoever, make any excavations, quarry any stone or
lay or set off any blast, or cause or assist in doing any of said things,
within said park or upon the shores of any water adjacent thereto,
except by direction or permission of the Commissioners.
(4) No person shall disturb any bird, bird's nest or bird's eggs or any
squirrel or other animal within said park, except by permission of
the Commission.
(5) No person shall, except by permission of the Commissioners, sell,
offer or expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise within
said park; nor shall any person distribute any handbills or posters
therein or solicit subscriptions or contributions or play any games
of chance or have possession of any instrument of gaming or
commit any obscene or indecent acts within said park.
(6) No person shall erect in any part of said park or shore any building,
tent, cabin or other structure or camp or live in any part of said
park or light, kindle or use any fire, except in places specially
designated therefor by the Commission, without permission of said
Commission.
(7) No person shall carry or have any firearms in said park, and no
firearms, firecrackers, torpedoes or fireworks shall be discharged
in said park, except by permission of the Commissioners.
(8) No person shall swim or bathe in the waters in said park.
(9) No person shall commit any nuisance or deposit any refuse, filthy
matter in or upon any building in said park or within said park,
except in such places as may be designated by said Commissioners.
(10) No games shall be played in said park by any person, except in
such places as shall be especially designated therefor by the said
Commissioners.
(11) No person shall ride or drive any automobile, motorcycle,
motorbike or other driven vehicle in said park, except upon the
places which the Commissioners may from time to time specially
designate for parking purposes; and no person shall park any
vehicle or conveyance, motor or otherwise, on any road in said park
§ 190-5 BRANFORD CODE § 190-5
190:176
or in any part of said park after hours which said Commissioners
may set and post from time to time, and no person shall drive or
operate any vehicle within said park at such a rate of speed as
to be unreasonable under the conditions or so as to endanger the
property or those using or travelling within said park.
(12) No person shall occupy any part of said park after hours, which
said Commissioners may set and post from time to time, without
permission of said Commissioners.
B. Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of the foregoing
rules or who shall aid and abet in the violation of any of said provisions
shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
§ 190-6. Power to adopt rules.
Said Young's Park Commission is empowered to adopt such other and
further rules and regulations for the use of Young's Park as are consistent
with this article.
36.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1), restricting the use of the park to the residents of
the Town and their guests, was repealed 7-10-2002.
§ 190-5 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 190-6
190:177

ARTICLE III
Branford Park and Open Space Authority
[Adopted 5-11-1971]
§ 190-7. Creation.
There is hereby created the Branford Park and Open Space Authority.
§ 190-8. Composition. [Amended 10-16-1990]
Said Authority shall consist of seven members who shall be residents and
electors of the Town of Branford.
§ 190-9. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies. [Amended
10-16-1990]
A. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint members to the Branford Park and
Open Space Authority.
B. Term.
(1) The terms of office of said members shall be for three years;
provided, however, that initially, in October 1990, there are five
members whose terms expire as follows:
(a) Two on July 1, 1991.
(b) Two on July 1, 1992.
(c) One on July 1, 1993.
(2) In October 1990, two additional members shall be appointed as
follows: one member shall be appointed for a term expiring July 1,
1992, and one member shall be appointed for a term expiring July 1,
1993.
(3) Each year thereafter, appointments shall be made to fill all vacancies
arising from the expiration of a term of office for a period of three
years.
C. In the event of a vacancy in the term of any member, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint a successor to serve for the balance of the term
vacated.
§ 190-10. Restrictions on members.
Membership on said Authority should be broadly representative of the
Town's population, and appointments thereto should be consistent with the
furtherance of the spirit and intent of this article. Failure to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Authority, whether regular or special, shall be
considered a resignation, and the resigned member's place shall be filled
by the appointment of another resident elector of the Town, not himself.
Members of the Authority shall not serve in any other local, state or federal
office, paid or unpaid, elected or appointed, excepting that members of the
Authority may serve on subcommittees of the Authority itself.
§ 190-7 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 190-11
190:179
§ 190-11. Use rules and regulations; penalties for offenses.
[Amended 12-13-1972; 9-14-1977; 10-10-1984]
Said Authority shall have the power to regulate, manage, control and
maintain such areas as are designated open space and park areas by the
Board of Selectmen.
A. The following rules shall govern the use of such areas designated as
open space and park areas by the Board of Selectmen:
(1) Horseback riding will be permitted on major trails designated by
the Authority.
(2) Boats without motor or sail are allowed in the East Pond of the
Supply Pond area only. Boats or canoes must contain one or Coast-
Guard-approved life preserver per person. Boat launching is
restricted to the Stonegate area of the Supply Pond area to protect
the pond banks. Overnight boat storage on land or water is
prohibited.
(3) Boats are permitted in the West Pond of the Supply Pond area
only for educational purposes and only with the permission of the
Authority.
(4) Fishing is permitted in accordance with state statutes from pond
banks and/or boats. Fishing from boats is allowed only in the East
Pond of the Supply Pond area. Ice fishing is permitted only in those
areas designated by the Authority.
(5) Supervised educational study is permitted in conjunction with the
Education Subcommittee of the Authority and the Branford School
system.
(6) Swimming is prohibited.
(7) Parking is permitted according to local traffic regulations.
(8) Motorized vehicles, including but not limited to minibikes,
snowmobiles and motorcycles, and unauthorized motor vehicles are
prohibited.
(9) Camping is prohibited, except in those areas designated by the
Authority.
(10) Picnicking and ground fires are prohibited, except in those areas
designated by the Authority. Picnic tables may not be moved from
their established place.
(11) Hunting and trapping are prohibited. No person shall carry or
have in his possession firearms or weapons of any type, and no
firecrackers or fireworks shall be discharged in said area.
(12) The sale, offering, solicitation or advertising of any goods or
services is prohibited without the permission of the Authority.
(13) No person shall deface, remove, destroy or otherwise injure in any
manner any structure, building, tree, flower, shrub, fern or moss,
nor shall any bird or bird's nest be molested or disturbed at any
time without the permission of the Authority.
(14) Gambling is prohibited.
(15) Disorderly conduct, intoxication and obscene or indecent conduct
is prohibited; and all forms of activity creating hazards to human
safety are prohibited.
§ 190-11 BRANFORD CODE § 190-11
190:180
(16) Said areas shall be closed to the public from 10:00 p.m. to 5:00
a.m., except for campers with permits issued by the designated
authority.
(17) No unauthorized person shall erect or post any notice or sign.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the foregoing rules,
or who shall aid or abet in the violation of any of said rules, shall be fined
not more than $100 for each offense.
§ 190-12. Subcommittees.
The Authority may appoint subcommittees as necessary for the
administration of its responsibilities.
§ 190-13. Budget and report.
The Authority shall present a budget and file an annual report for all
its subcommittees and be responsible to the Board of Selectmen for the
performance of its duties.
§ 190-14. Limit on jurisdiction.
Said Authority shall not exercise jurisdiction or control over Parker
Memorial Park or Young's Park, as both of said parks are administered by
commissions appointed for that purpose.
§ 190-11 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 190-14
190:181

ARTICLE IV
Parker Memorial Park
[Adopted 10-10-198437]
§ 190-15. Property accepted and named.
A. The Town of Branford does hereby gratefully accept the splendid gift of
the late Dr. Frank J. Parker, consisting of what is known as the "Branford
Point House Property" and of the residue of his estate.
B. Said property shall be used as a public park and playground and shall be
known as the "Parker Memorial Park."
§ 190-16. Parker Memorial Park Commission created; membership
and terms.
The care, management and control of the Parker Memorial Park be and the
same hereby is placed under a Board of Park Commissioners to be known
as the "Parker Memorial Park Commission." Said Commission shall consist
of five members who shall be citizens and electors of the Town of Branford
and who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen on or before January
1, 1939, said Board of Selectmen shall appoint one member for a period
of five years from January 1, 1939; one member for a period of four years
from January 1, 1939; one member for a period of three years from January
1, 1939; one member for a period of two years from January 1, 1939; and
one member for a period of one year from January 1, 1939; and thereafter,
during the month of December in each year, it shall appoint one member
for a term of five years and until his successor shall be duly appointed. In
case any vacancy shall occur, said Selectmen shall have power to appoint a
member for the unexpired term.
§ 190-17. Powers and authority of Commission.
Except to the extent inconsistent herewith, said Park Commission shall
have the power and authority to make and enforce all reasonable rules and
regulations concerning the use of said Parker Memorial Park.38
§ 190-18. (Reserved)39
§ 190-19. Sleeping in park; littering and vandalism.
No person shall sleep upon the grass, benches or any other part of the
open ground of said park, and no person shall throw, leave or deposit within
said park any wastepaper, bottles, remains of food or other litter or refuse,
except in the proper receptacles provided therefor; and no person shall pick
any flowers or cut, break, dig up or in any manner mutilate or injure any
37.Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted this date combined three earlier ordinances adopted
9-14-1914, 6-18-1931 and 10-10-1938, as amended, into the ordinance appearing in this
article.
38.Editor's Note: See Also Art. V of this chapter.
39.Editor's Note: Former § 190-18, Use restricted, was repealed 7-10-2002.
§ 190-15 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 190-19
190:183
tree, shrub, plant, grass, drive, railing, seat, fence, structure or other public
property in said park or cut, carve upon, mark or paste upon any tree, stone,
fence, wall, building, monument or other object contained or located in said
park any bill, advertisement or inscription whatsoever except by direction
or permission of the Parker Memorial Park Commissioners.
§ 190-20. Digging or blasting.
No person shall dig up or remove any sand, dirt, stones, rock or any other
thing whatsoever, make any excavations, quarry any stone or lay or set off
any blast, or cause or assist in doing any of said things, within said park
or upon the shores of any water adjacent thereto, except by direction or
permission of the Parker Memorial Park Commissioners.
§ 190-21. Tampering with wildlife.
No person shall disturb any bird, bird's nest or bird's eggs or any squirrel
or other animal within said park, except by direction or permission of the
Parker Memorial Park Commissioners.
§ 190-22. Peddling or soliciting.
No person shall, except by the permission of the Board of Park
Commissioners, sell, offer or expose for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise within said park; nor shall any person distribute any handbills
or posters therein or solicit subscriptions or contributions or play any
games of chance or have possession of any instrument of gaming or commit
any obscene or indecent acts within said park.
§ 190-23. Structures and fires.
No person shall erect in any part of said park or shore any building, tent,
cabin or other structure or camp or live in any part of said park or light,
kindle or use any fire, except in places specifically designated therefor by
the Parker Memorial Park Commission, without permission of the Parker
Memorial Park Commissioners.
§ 190-24. Firearms or fireworks.
No person shall carry or have any firearms in said park, and no firearms,
firecrackers, torpedoes or fireworks shall be discharged in said park, except
by permission of the Board of Park Commissioners.
§ 190-25. Bathing.
No person shall bath in the nude in any of the waters adjacent to said park;
and no person shall dress or undress within said park or upon the shore
of any water adjacent thereto, except in such places as shall be specifically
designated therefor by the Board of Park Commissioners.
§ 190-19 BRANFORD CODE § 190-26
190:184
§ 190-26. Nuisances.
No person shall commit any nuisance or deposit any refuse or filthy matter
in or upon any building in said park or within said park except in such places
as may be designated by said Board of Park Commissioners.
§ 190-27. Games.
No games shall be played in said park by any person, except in such
places as shall be specifically designated therefor by the said Board of Park
Commissioners.
§ 190-28. Vehicle restrictions.
No person shall ride or drive any vehicle or conveyance, motor or otherwise,
in said park, except upon the regular roads of said park and places which
the Board of Park Commissioners may from time to time specially designate
for parking purposes; and no person shall park any vehicle or conveyance,
motor or otherwise, on any road in said park or in any part of said park
after hours which said Park Commissioners may set and post from time to
time, and no person shall drive or operate any vehicle within said park at
such a rate of speed as to be unreasonable under the conditions or so as to
endanger the property of those using or travelling within said park.
§ 190-29. Use after hours.
No person shall occupy any part of said park or beaches adjacent thereto
after hours which said Parker Memorial Park Commissioners may set and
post from time to time, without permission of said Parker Memorial Park
Commissioners.
§ 190-30. Penalties for offenses.
Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who
shall aid or abet in the violation of any of said provisions shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $50 for each offense.
§ 190-26 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 190-30
190:185

ARTICLE V
Branford Point
[Adopted 7-24-1984]
§ 190-31. Management and control.
The management of all property located at Branford Point, which is under
the care, custody and control of the Town of Branford, shall be managed by
and subject to the regulation of the Parker Memorial Park Commission.
§ 190-32. Regulations.
The regulations established by the ordinance of June 18, 1931, entitled
"Regulations Re: Use of Parker Memorial Park," as amended or as the same
may hereafter be amended,40 shall apply to said property.
40.Editor's Note: See Art. IV of this chapter.
§ 190-31 PARKS, GREENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 190-32
190:187
Chapter 193
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 193-1. License required.
No person shall vend, peddle or hawk any goods, wares or merchandise of
any kind or description at public or private sale, upon the streets, sidewalks,
street corners or from house to house within the Town of Branford, without
a license issued by the Selectmen of the Town of Branford, in such form as
said Selectmen shall deem best.
§ 193-2. License term and fee; expiration. [Amended 5-8-1984]
All such licenses shall be good and effective for the period of six months
from the date of issue, and the fee for such license shall be $125 for said
period or any fractional part thereof for the use of the Town of Branford,
except that all licenses so issued shall expire on January 1 or July 1
succeeding date of issue but with no prorated deduction for any period less
than six months.
§ 193-3. Possession and display of license.
Every person so granted a license shall, during the hours that he is actively
engaged in the business for which he is so licensed, have such license in his
possession and submit the same to examination upon demand of any proper
officers and shall secure from said Selectmen a badge, if said licensee
does not use a vehicle, a number plainly marked or engraved thereon, and,
during the hours that he is actually engaged in said business, shall wear
such badge in such a manner that it may be plainly seen. If such licensee
shall use a vehicle, he shall procure from the Selectmen two license number
plates bearing the number and year for which said license is granted and
shall, while actively engaged in the business for which he is so granted a
license, plainly display said number plates, one on each side of said vehicle.
Each vehicle used in such business shall require a separate license.
§ 193-4. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as affecting the sale by farmers
or gardeners vending the produce of their farms or gardens nor the sale,
distribution and delivery of ice, milk, cream, teas, coffee, spices and the
conditional sale of merchandise nor to the sale of any goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind or description by any person having an established
place of business within the Town of Branford nor to persons selling only at
wholesale to retail dealers.
§ 190-32 BRANFORD CODE § 193-5
193:188
§ 193-5. Prohibited areas. [Added 10-13-199341]
No such license holder shall vend, peddle or hawk any goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind or description at public or private sale upon Indian
Point Road, the gazebo at the Stony Creek Town beach, the Summer House
gazebo at the Stony Creek Town dock or upon the Town docks at Stony
Creek.
§ 193-6. Penalties for offenses.
Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not more than $50.
Chapter 196
PENALTIES AND CITATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands Commission — See Ch. 109.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 193-5, Penalties for offenses, as
§ 193-6.
§ 193-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 193-6
193:189

ARTICLE I
Citations for Zoning and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Violations
[Adopted 10-12-201142]
§ 196-1. Designation of Citation Officers.
A. Citations for violations of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations. Any police officer, the Wetlands Enforcement Officer of the
Town of Branford, or any other person authorized by the First Selectman
of the Town of Branford is hereby empowered to issue citations for
violations of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the
Town of Branford in accordance with this article.
B. Citations for violations of Zoning Regulations. Any person authorized by
the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Branford is hereby
empowered to issue citations for violations of the Zoning Regulations of
the Town of Branford in accordance with this article.
§ 196-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED MAIL — Any form of mail, whether by the United States Postal
Service or a private mail carrier, whereby the intended recipient is
requested to provide a signed receipt showing that he or she received the
mailing.
CITATION OFFICER — A person empowered to issue citations pursuant to
§ 196-1.
HAND DELIVERY — The direct delivery of a document to a recipient by
a Citation Officer, or any form of delivery to the last-known address of an
intended recipient by the United States Postal Service or by any private mail
carrier, whereby the carrier provides a written confirmation of delivery to
the Citation Officer.
WETLANDS REGULATIONS — The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations of the Town of Branford.
ZONING REGULATIONS — The Zoning Regulations of the Town of
Branford.
§ 196-3. Issuance of citations.
A. Initial notice required. Before any Citation Officer may issue a citation,
he or she must issue a written notice informing the recipient of the
nature of the violation. Any such initial notice may be served either by
hand delivery or by certified mail to the person named in such citation. If
the person to whom such notice has been sent by certified mail refuses
to accept such mail, the original or a certified copy of the original notice
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 196, Penalties and Citations,
which was comprised of Art. I, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Violations, adopted
12-8-2004, and Art. II, Citation Hearing Procedure, adopted 12-8-2004.
§ 196-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 196-3
193:191
may be sent by regular United States mail. The Citation Officer shall file
and retain an original or certified copy of the initial notice, as well as
any delivery confirmation or return receipt from certified mail, whether
or not the mail was accepted. The date of delivery of the initial notice
shall be deemed to be the earlier of: (1) the actual date of delivery, or
(2) five business days after the date of the original mailing, regardless of
whether such mailing was accepted.
B. Citation process. A Citation Officer may issue a citation to any person to
whom an initial notice has been delivered pursuant to § 196-3A if such
Citation Officer finds that the violation described in the initial notice
has not been fully abated by the end of the second day after the date
of delivery of such notice. Any such citation may be served either by
hand delivery or by certified mail to the person named in such citation.
If the person named in a citation sent by certified mail refuses to accept
such mail, the original or a certified copy of the original citation may
be sent by regular United States mail. The Citation Officer shall file and
retain an original or certified copy of the citation, as well as any delivery
confirmation or return receipt from certified mail, whether or not the
mail was accepted. The date of delivery of the citation shall be deemed
to be the earlier of: (1) the actual date of delivery, or (2) five business
days after the date of the original mailing, regardless of whether such
mailing was accepted.
§ 196-4. Penalties for offenses; fines.
A. Violations of Wetlands Regulations.
(1) The following fines may be assessed by citation for a violation of the
Wetlands Regulations:
(a) For conducting or allowing the conduct of any regulated activity
within any portion of an inland wetland or watercourse without
a permit or in violation of any permit, including deposition of
any material, removing of any material, discharging, polluting,
excavating, filling, draining, grading, clear-cutting, removal of
vegetation, planting invasive vegetation, or other activities
resulting in direct impacts, to any portion of an inland wetland
or watercourse: a fine of $1,000 for each offense.
(b) For conducting, permitting the conduct of, undertaking,
permitting the existence of, or allowing any regulated activity
outside of an inland wetland or watercourse without a permit
or in violation of any permit which causes, directly or indirectly,
pollution, draining/drying, erosion, filling, damage to native
vegetation, or other negative impacts to an inland wetland or
watercourse or any portion thereof: a fine of $1,000 for each
offense.
(c) For noncompliance with permit conditions and/or limitations or
with enforcement orders, where such noncompliance is not
described in Subsection A(1)(a) or (b) of this section: a fine of
$1,000 for each offense.
§ 196-3 BRANFORD CODE § 196-4
193:192
(d) For conducting any other regulated activity without the issuance
of a permit, where such activity is not described in Subsection
A(1)(a), (b) or (c) of this section: a fine of $500 for each offense.
(2) Each day on which a violation of the Wetlands Regulations continues
to exist shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
B. Violations of Zoning Regulations. A fine of $150 per day may be assessed
by citation for any violation of the Zoning Regulations for as long as such
violation continues to exist.
§ 196-5. Period for uncontested payment of fines.
Any person receiving a citation shall be allowed a period of 30 days from his
or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment of the fine
specified in the citation. Such fines shall be made payable to the Treasurer
of the Town of Branford. If such fine is not paid within the thirty-day period,
further actions may be taken pursuant to Section 7-152c of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 196-6. Appeals and hearings.
Any person who receives a citation may challenge his or her liability
therefor and request a hearing thereon in accordance with the provisions of
Section 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 196-7. Repeal of Chapter 225.
Chapter 225 of the Branford Code, entitled "Zoning Citations," is hereby
repealed.
§ 196-4 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 196-7
193:193
Chapter 204
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainlayers — See Ch. 139.
Penalties and citations — See Ch. 196.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 228.
§ 196-7 BRANFORD CODE § 196-7
204:194
ARTICLE I
Sewer Charges
[Adopted 3-9-1965]
§ 204-1. Charge for additional units upon property previously
assessed.
A charge of $625 shall be made for each additional unit created or erected
upon property previously assessed prior to the date of this article, which
charge shall be made for the privilege of connecting to or imposing an
additional burden upon any sewer line in the Town of Branford for any
structure situated upon premises against which an assessment could have
been levied, had such additional units existed at the time of construction of
such sewer line, but as to which the assessment levied did not include the
additional units because they did not exist at the time of assessment.
§ 204-2. Charge for additional units in new sewer districts.
A charge shall be made for each additional unit created or erected upon
property in any new sewer district established by the Sewer Authority after
the date of this article and subsequent to any sewer assessment levy, which
charge shall be the amount established by the Sewer Authority as the unit
assessment within said new sewer district, and said charge shall be made
for the privilege of connecting to or imposing an additional burden upon any
sewer line in the Town of Branford for any structure situated upon premises
against which an assessment could be levied if such additional units exist at
the time of construction of such sewer line, but as to which the assessment
to be levied does not include the additional units because they do not exist
at the time of assessment.
§ 204-2.1. Sewer access charge. [Added 8-21-1996]
All residential units which involve the installation of a new sewer trunk,
line, extended lateral or main by any entity other than the Branford Sewer
Authority ("Authority") in which the Authority assumes responsibilities for
maintenance will be charged for each residential unit a sewer access charge
of the district price or $6,000 whichever amount is greater. Unless the
access charge is the district price, in which case it will be payable under
terms set by the assessments in that district, the access charge shall be paid
over 15 years with level payments of principal and interest as it accrues on
the unpaid balance at an interest rate set by the Authority. Payments shall
accrue upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and be billed pro rata
from April 1. All entities effected by this sewer access charge may petition
the Authority for a suspension or deferral of the payments due hereunder.
§ 204-2.2. Commercial units. [Added 8-21-1996]
Section 204-2.1 is fully incorporated into this section, § 204-2.2, except that
all commercial units, as determined by the Town of Branford Assessor using
the commercial formula, shall have a sewer access charge as follows:
§ 204-1 SEWERS § 204-2.2
204:195
A. For each of the first 6.25 commercial units: $4,000.
B. Any and all additional commercial units: $2,000 per unit.
§ 204-2.3. Credits. [Added 8-21-1996]
The Branford Sewer Authority, upon due consideration, may allow
appropriate and reasonable credits against either the residential unit
access charge or the commercial unit access charge for easements provided
or infrastructure supplied by any entity which may benefit property owned
by others.
§ 204-3. Scope.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose any charge for
connection for structures upon property not embraced within a sewer
district nor to exempt such property from such an assessment in the event
that such property shall at any future time become subject to such an
assessment.
§ 204-4. Payment required prior to issuance of permit.
Any person desiring to erect, create, change any structure or connect to
any sewer line shall make application to the Town Engineer for permission
for such purpose. Upon receipt of such application, the Town Engineer shall
inspect the premises for which such application is made. If it shall appear
that said premises are subject to the charge provided in § 204-1 or 204-2 of
this article, the applicant shall be notified thereof, and the permit for such
purpose shall not be issued until the charge provided in § 204-1 or 204-2
has been paid to the Town of Branford.
§ 204-5. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any premises outside of a
sewer district as to which a sewer assessment has not as yet been levied,
nor shall the provisions of this article be deemed to affect the rules and
regulations from time to time in force and effect concerning the connection
of such premises to sewers, nor shall the provisions of this article apply
to less than one additional unit erected, created or changed upon affected
property.
§ 204-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the Town of Branford to make a
reasonable charge for each additional unit created or erected after a sewer
assessment has been levied in a sewer district and which additional units
create an additional burden upon the sewer system.
§ 204-2.2 BRANFORD CODE § 204-6
204:196
ARTICLE II
Private Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 3-9-1965]
§ 204-7. Use restricted.
No further septic systems, septic tanks, privies, cesspools and other
receptacles for sewage shall be constructed upon property located within
any sewer districts where sewage lines have been installed and are
available for structures erected or changed upon property located within
any sewer district.
§ 204-8. Connection to sewers required prior to issuance of
building permit.
Any person desiring to construct any structure or to change existing
structures, which affects the existing sewage system on any property within
a sewer district shall not be granted a building permit until proper provision
shall be made for connection to the available sewer lines within the
established sewer district.
§ 204-9. Applicability.
The provisions of the article shall not apply to any premises outside of a
sewer district, nor shall the provisions of this article apply if, within the
discretion of the Town Engineer, a sewer line is not available within a sewer
district, or if said structure cannot be connected to said sewer line because
of the peculiar location or physical situation of said structure.
§ 204-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the future construction of septic
systems, septic tanks, privies, cesspools and other receptacles for sewage
within sewer districts, when sewer lines are available for any structures
within a sewer district.
§ 204-7 SEWERS § 204-10
204:197

ARTICLE III
Sewer Assessments
[Adopted 5-11-1965]
§ 204-11. Connections to premises in default prohibited.
No property owner shall be permitted or allowed to connect any structure
within any sewer district if the sewer assessment on said property is in
default.
§ 204-12. Payment required prior to connection.
Any property owner desiring to connect any structure to a sewer line within
said district, which sewer assessment is in default, must pay said sewer
assessment in full prior to receiving the authorization from the Town of
Branford to proceed with said sewer connection.
§ 204-13. Payment required prior to issuance of permit.
If the sewer assessment on said property is in default, the Town Engineer
shall refuse to issue a sewer connection permit to permit a connection to
said sewer line until said sewer assessment has been paid in full by said
property owner.
§ 204-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the connection by property owners
to sewer lines within any sewer district if the sewer assessment levied on
said property is in default, and no permission shall be granted to connect
said sewer lines until said sewer assessment is paid in full.
§ 204-11 SEWERS § 204-14
204:199

ARTICLE IV
Sewer Use
[Adopted 10-9-1974]
§ 204-15. Authority and control agencies.
The construction, extension, maintenance and operation of the sewerage
system of the Town of Branford and connections therewith, up to the point
of entering private property, shall be under the control of and subject to
regulations by the Sewer Authority of the Town of Branford under the
authority of Chapter 103, Title 7, General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision
of 1958, as amended. Within any property, however, the sewerage system
shall be subject to regulations by the Board of Selectmen as set forth herein
and under any other applicable ordinance. The construction, maintenance
and use of private systems for sewage disposal, whether now existing
or hereafter proposed, shall be subject to regulation by other applicable
ordinance.
§ 204-16. Definitions.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Town of Branford Sewer Authority.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The duly appointed Building Inspector of
the Town of Branford or his authorized deputy or representative. All
drainage, plumbing, ventilation or sewer work, whether connected with
public or private sewers, shall be subject to the inspection and approval
of the Building Inspector.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other but shall
be free from odor and oil. It shall contain no pollution substances which
would produce BOD or suspended solids each in excess of 10 parts per
million by weight.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — The estimated amount of
sewage generated by a single residential unit, including allowances for
inflow and infiltration or any other flows which may enter the sewerage
system.[Added 2-27-2007]
§ 204-15 SEWERS § 204-16
204:201
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any point of discharge into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON, ENTERPRISE, ESTABLISHMENT or OWNER — Any
individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution. It is used to indicate the concentration of free
acid and free alkali.
ppm — Parts per million.[Added 2-27-2007]
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The waste from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and to
which storm-, surface, ground waters, cooling waters and industrial
wastes are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — The water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground-, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS or SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The water-carried wastes discharging from
the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, including apartment houses
and hotels, office buildings, factories or institutions.
(1)
NORMAL SEWAGE — Regarded as normal for the Town if analyses
show by weight a daily average of not more than 2,500 pounds of
suspended solids per million gallons of waste (300 parts per million),
not more than 2,000 pounds (240 parts per million) of BOD, and not
more than 417 pounds (50 parts per million) of either soluble matter
(grease or oil) each, per million gallons of daily flow.
(2)
§ 204-16 BRANFORD CODE § 204-16
204:202
SLUG — Any water or waste exceeding a concentration greater than five
times that of normal sewage and which is discharged continuously for a
period longer than 15 minutes.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A pipe or conduit
which carries storm- and surface waters and drainage, but excludes
sewage and industrial wastes. It may, however, carry cooling waters and
unpolluted waters.
SUPERINTENDENT — That employee of the Authority who shall be
designated from time to time by the Authority to have that title, or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable
by laboratory filtering.
TOWN — The Town of Branford.
TOWN ENGINEER — That person so designated and employed by the
Town and his authorized deputy or authorized agent.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities
provided.[Amended 10-12-1977]
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WPCA — The municipality's Water Pollution Control Authority, as
authorized by Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-246.[Added
2-27-2007]
B. The term "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 204-17. Use of public sewers required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within
the Town of Branford, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectional waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town
of Branford, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
C. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there
is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer
of the Town is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 30
§ 204-16 SEWERS § 204-17
204:203
days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public
sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or repair any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of
sewage if public sewers are available. [Added 2-10-1982]
§ 204-18. Building sewer permits.
A. The provisions of an ordinance concerning the excavation of streets and
highways, permits, bonds and regulations, enacted at a Town Meeting
held on May 20, 1958, as amended by the Branford Representative Town
Meeting in May 1962,43 and any future amendments thereof, shall be
applicable to applicants for permits under this article, and the provisions
hereof shall be followed as though they are a part thereof.
B. Before any sewerage work is commenced in or on any building or
property, when the same is to be connected with the public sewerage
system and before any opening is made in any public street, highway,
public ground or private way therefor, and before any addition,
alteration, maintenance or repair work is made to any connecting line
or connections with the public sewerage system, a permit for such work
shall first be obtained from the office of the Town Engineer. Application
for such permit shall be on a form provided by said office for which a fee
of $2 shall be paid when the permit is issued.
C. All work which is to be done under such permits shall be in accordance
with the provisions of this article, any regulations adopted hereunder
and any other applicable ordinances. Before any sewerage work is
commenced within the limits of any state highway, in addition to
obtaining such permit as may be necessary from the State of
Connecticut, no work shall be done without a permit hereunder issued
by the Town Engineer.
D. There shall be two user classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial services.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
E. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Town Engineer.
§ 204-19. Responsibility for costs of connection.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 204-20. Separate building sewers required.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. III.
§ 204-17 BRANFORD CODE § 204-20
204:204
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 204-21. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Town Engineer to meet
all requirements of this article.
§ 204-22. Building sewer specifications.
A. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, bedding
of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Town.
B. Building sewers must be constructed of extra-heavy cast-iron pipe or
other approved material as set forth in the Building Code, be a minimum
of four inches in inside diameter and be properly connected by one-inch
forty-five-degree bend with a four-inch minimum diameter Y-branch on a
public sewer. A larger size pipe may be required by the Town Engineer
if he deems it necessary. The use of pipe which is a composite of tar
and paper commonly known as “Orangeberg” pipe is prohibited for any
sewer use. [Amended 10-11-2006]
C. All house sewers, drains and horizontal soil and waste pipes shall be laid
as straight as possible, and any changes in directions shall be made with
proper, approved fittings, and all such pipes shall have a fall of not less
than 1/4 inch per foot for four-inch pipe and 1/8 inch per foot for sixinch
pipe and as much more as may be practicable in each case and as
approved by the Town Engineer. [Amended 10-11-2006]
D. No house sewer shall be covered until it has been examined and
approved by the Town Engineer.
E. All car washes, all service garages and all similar facilities, as
determined by the Sewer Commission (also known as the "Water
Pollution Control Authority") shall install oil, water, and grit separators
in the construction of any new building sewer. [Added 10-11-2006]
§ 204-23. Elevation of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer, in such manner as the Town Engineer
shall approve.
§ 204-20 SEWERS § 204-24
204:205
§ 204-24. Connection with downspouts and drains prohibited.
[Amended 10-11-2006]
No person shall make connection of roof downspout, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, floor drains, sump pumps or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which
in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 204-25. Connection specifications.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code and rules and
regulations or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Town
Engineer before installation.
§ 204-26. Inspection of connections.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Town Engineer
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and for connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Town Engineer or his representative.
§ 204-27. Safety precautions; restoration of surface.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
§ 204-28. Notification of change in discharge. [Added 10-12-1977;
amended 10-11-2006]
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged
into the system shall notify the Sewer Authority at least 45 days prior
to the proposed change or connection. Upon any and all changes in use
and ownership of a restaurant within the Town of Branford, grease trap
installation is mandatory. Such installation shall include a minimum onethousand-
gallon outdoor trap, wherever feasible.
§ 204-29. Discharge of certain types of water prohibited.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designed as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Town Engineer. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged on specific
§ 204-24 BRANFORD CODE § 204-29
204:206
written approval of the Town Engineer and the State Commissioner of
Environmental Protection to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any swimming pool
or hot tub water to any sanitary sewer without first obtaining a general
permit pursuant to Sections 22a-430 and 22a-430b of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, and any regulations promulgated
thereunder. [Added 10-11-2006]
§ 204-30. Prohibited waters and wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers or natural outlet:
A. Any gasoline, antifreeze, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas. [Amended 10-11-2006]
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters
of the sewage treatment plant. [Amended 2-10-1982; 10-11-2006]
(1) Material such as copper, zinc, chromium, silver and similar toxic substances
shall not be allowed in soluble form or in suspended solid form in concentration
higher than those achieved in appropriate pretreatment facilities approved by
the Town Engineer and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
(2) The limitations on sewage concentrations are as follows: [Added 2-10-1982]
Pollutant
Concentration
[parts per million (mg/l)]
Arsenic as As 0.05
Barium as Ba 5.0
Boron as B 5.0
Cyanides as CN (amendable) 0.1
Fluoride as F 20
Chromium (Total) 1.0
Chromium (Cr +6) 0.1
Magnesium as Mg 100
Manganese as Mn 5.0
Copper as Cu 1.0
Zinc as Zn 1.0
Cadmium 0.1
Lead 0.1
Tin 2.0
Silver 0.1
Mercury 0.01
§ 204-29 SEWERS § 204-30
204:207
Pollutant
Concentration
[parts per million (mg/l)]
Nickel 1.0
Iron as Fe 5.0
Note: All metals are to be measured as total metals.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works.
D. Solid and viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, paint, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and so forth, either whole or ground
by garbage grinders and water which is not properly extracted of oil and grit.
[Amended 10-11-2006]
§ 204-31. Discharge of harmful substances prohibited.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the
Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment
process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
B. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant
and other pertinent factors.
C. The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 120° F. (49° C.) except
by written approval of the Engineer. In such cases, the Engineer may require
installation, by the industry, of an approved temperature recorder in the
receiving sewer. Where wastes are discharged to concrete sewers, the maximum
permissible average temperature of the mixed sewage just downstream of the
point of waste discharge shall be determined by the following formula:
t = 177 - 94.2 (log BOD - 2 log V)
Where:
t = Temperature in Fahrenheit (°F.) of the mixed sewage just
downstream of the point of discharge.
log = Logarithm to base 10 of the variable indicated.
BOD = Five-day biochemical oxygen demand in parts per million of
the mixed sewage just downstream of the point of discharge.
§ 204-30 BRANFORD CODE § 204-31
204:208
V = Average flow velocity in the sewer, in feet per second, just
downstream of the point of discharge.
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils in excess of 50 milligrams
per liter for emulsified material and 15 milligrams per liter for freefloating
material or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° and 150° F. (0° and 65° C.).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation
of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower or greater shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated
plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar
objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement to such a degree that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the treatment works exceeds the limits which may be established by
the Superintendent for such materials.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established
by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable
state and/or federal regulations.
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(9) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not limited to
fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as
but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions).
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs, as
defined herein.
(10) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment
or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters.
§ 204-32. Rejection or pretreatment of certain wastes.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in § 204-33 of this article and which, in
the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which
§ 204-31 SEWERS § 204-32
204:209
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may: [Amended 10-11-2006]
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered under the provisions of §§ 204-37 and
204-41C. Any payment so collected under this subsection shall be
deposited into a fund designated by the Superintendent and shall be
used solely for the benefit of the Town of Branford sewer system.
B. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Town Engineer and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(1) Plans, specifications, expected performance data and any other
pertinent information relating to holding tanks or to pretreatment
facilities shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and
submitted for the approval of the Superintendent, and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said
approvals are obtained in writing. The Superintendent shall approve
the holding tanks or pretreatment facilities, provided that the same
shall indicate that an effluent conforming to the provisions of this
article will be produced. If, after the installation of the facilities has
been completed and operation begun, the facilities do not produce
the expected performance, the Superintendent shall have the right to
order the owner to cease operation until such time that modifications
are made to enable the facilities to perform properly.
(2) Prior to the discharge or permission for the discharge into the Town
of Branford sewers, the applicant industry must obtain written
approval from the State of Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection, in the form of a permit, allowing the
proposed discharge and must, if required by the Department of
Environmental Protection or the Town of Branford, install suitable
pretreatment facilities and operate and maintain such facilities in
a manner which will ensure a continuous and satisfactory effluent.
[Added 10-12-1977]
C. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense.
The Commissioner of Environmental Protection may require that plans
showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted for review and
approval prior to construction of the facilities. [Added 2-10-1982]
(1) Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the Superintendent and the Commissioner a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
§ 204-32 BRANFORD CODE § 204-32
204:210
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the water pollution control facilities, fish kills,
aquatic plants or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
(2) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event
of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees
are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 204-33. Interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Town Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Town Engineer and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 204-34. Preliminary treatment facilities.
A. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his own expense and shall be subject
to periodic inspection by the Engineer and shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Engineer, provided that they produce an effluent
conforming to the provisions of this article.
B. The owner shall maintain operating records and shall submit to the
Engineer a monthly summary report of the character of the influent
and effluent as may be prescribed by the Engineer to show satisfactory
performance of the treatment facilities.
C. For the purposes of measurement, the acceptability of pretreated
industrial waste will be measured at the point which the industrial waste
leaves a pretreatment facility and before dilution with any other waste-,
stream or process water.
§ 204-35. Control manhole.
When required by the Town Engineer, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Town Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 204-32 SEWERS § 204-36
204:211
§ 204-36. Measurements, tests and analysis.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Waste Water, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered
to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point
at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twentyfour-
hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analysis are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of
all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
§ 204-37. Special arrangements for industries.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the Town, for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern, in accordance with § 204-41C.
§ 204-38. State permit required. [Added 10-12-1977; amended
2-10-1982]
Any new discharge from a single source of domestic wastewater in excess
of 5,000 gallons per day, or cooling waters or discharge of any quantity
from an industrial source, must be authorized by a permit from the State
of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, Director of Water
Compliance and Hazardous Substances.
§ 204-39. Powers and duties of inspectors.
A. The Superintendent, Town Engineer or other duly authorized employees
of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in Subsection A above, the Superintendent, Town Engineer or duly
authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Town employees, and
the Town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its
property by Town employees and against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
§ 204-36 BRANFORD CODE § 204-39
204:212
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions as required in § 161-35.
C. The Superintendent, Town Engineer and other duly authorized
employees of the Town, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
Town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 204-40. Sewer use charges.44 [Added 2-27-2007]
A. General.
(1) An ordinance establishing sewer use charges in the Town of Branford
for the purpose of providing funds for the operation and maintenance
expenses associated with the municipal wastewater collection,
conveyance and treatment facilities is hereby enacted.
(2) As provided for under Section 7-255 et seq. of the Connecticut
General Statutes, the Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA) is
empowered to establish and revise fair and reasonable charges for
the use of the municipal sewerage system. The owner of property
against which any such use charge is levied shall be liable for
the payment thereof. Tax-exempt property which uses the sewerage
system shall be subject to such charges under the same conditions
as are the owners of other property; provided, however, municipally
owned and Board of Education owned properties of the Town of
Branford shall be exempt from such charges as long as a general
fund contribution to the use charge of $600,000 is made annually.
(3) No charge for the use of the Town of Branford sewerage system
shall be established or revised until after a public hearing before the
WPCA, at which owners of property which use the sewerage system
shall have an opportunity to be heard concerning the proposed
charges. Notice of the time, date and place of such hearing shall be
published at least 10 days before the hearing in a newspaper having
a general circulation in the Town of Branford, and a copy of the
proposed charges shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk for
public inspection at least 10 days before the date of the hearing.
(4) Within five days of having established such charges, the WPCA shall
cause the same to be published in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the Town of Branford.
B. Calculation of charges.
(1) The total cost of the operation and maintenance of the sewerage
system, including replacement fund (OM&R cost), shall be recovered
from the users of the system. Each user's share of the OM&R cost of
the sewerage system shall be in proportion to the user's contribution
44.Editor's Note: Former § 204-40, Penalties for offenses, was repealed 12-13-2006. For
current provisions, see Art. V, Citation Procedure.
§ 204-39 SEWERS § 204-40
204:213
to the total wastewater loading of the sewerage system. The
contribution of the Town of Branford general fund in the amount of
$600,000 shall be a credit to the OM&R cost prior to determining
each user's share of the same. All users shall be charged on an
equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) basis; provided, however, all
consumers of water in excess of 25,000 gallons per day shall be
charged based on actual water usage. Surcharges shall be added to
the volume-based charges for wastewater discharges whose BOD or
suspended solids concentrations are in excess of the limits defined as
"normal sewage" in § 204-16 of this Article IV, Municipal Code of the
Town of Branford, or for discharges whose other constituents result
in an identifiable increase in wastewater conveyance, treatment or
disposal costs.
(2) All industrial users as defined in Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR), § 35.905.8, dated February 11, 1974, must pay
that portion of any federal grant amount made after March 1, 1973,
which is allocable to treatment of their wastes. A significant
industrial user, defined as one that will contribute greater than 10%
of the design flow or design pollutant loading of the treatment works,
shall submit a signed letter of intent to pay the Town of Branford
that portion of federal grant amounts allocable to the treatment of
its wastes and its intended period of use of the treatment works.
(3) The WPCA will review the sewer user charges annually and revise
the rates as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are
generated to recover all OM&R costs and that the rate structure
continues to distribute the cost of wastewater collection and
treatment among the users in proportion to their contribution.
C. Collection and payment.
(1) All sewer use charges shall be billed annually through the WPCA
and shall be paid in full within a period of 30 days after same is
declared due and payable unless otherwise stated on the billing
form; provided, however, elderly and disabled taxpayers who are
eligible for tax relief under the provisions of Section 12-129b and
12-170aa of the Connecticut General Statutes and elderly, disabled
and taxpayers under the age of 65 who are eligible for tax relief
under the provisions of §§ 220-15 through 220-22 of the Municipal
Code of the Town of Branford may pay the sewer use charges in four
equal installments on September 1, December 1, March 1 and June 1
of each year, and each installment shall be paid in full within a period
of 30 days from the date each installment is due.
(2) Any charge for the use of sewerage system, not paid within 30
days of the due date, shall thereupon be delinquent and shall bear
interest from the due date at the rate and in the manner provided
by the General Statutes for the delinquent property taxes. Each
addition of interest shall be collectible as a part of such connection
or use charge. Any such unpaid connection or use charge shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate against which such charge
was levied from the date it became delinquent. Each such lien may
be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the
§ 204-40 BRANFORD CODE § 204-40
204:214
General Statutes for continuing, recording and releasing property
tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens
and encumbrances except taxes and may be foreclosed in the same
manner as a lien for property taxes.
(3) All revenues collected under the provisions of this section shall be
kept separate from any other funds of the municipality and shall be
used solely for the purposes stated in Subsection A of this section,
and for no other purpose. Fiscal year-end balances shall be used
to defray the following year's costs, or shall be deposited in a
nonlapsing fund established for replacement of major mechanical
components which could reasonably be expected to require
replacement during the useful life of the treatment works. If, as a
result of a shortfall, funds have been transferred from other sources
into the sewerage funds account, those funds shall be repaid at the
beginning of the next fiscal year, and the sewer use charge shall be
increased to cover the transfer of these funds.
D. Appeals and adjustments. Any person aggrieved by any charge for the
use of the sewerage system may make written appeal to the WPCA
within 21 days after the date a copy of such charge is filed with the Town
Clerk pursuant to Section 7-255(a) of the Connecticut General Statutes
requesting a review of the user charge. Any person aggrieved by any
charge for the use of the sewerage system may appeal to the superior
court for the judicial district wherein the Town of Branford is located and
shall bring any such appeal to a return day of said court not less than
12 or more than 30 days after service thereof. The judgment of the court
shall be final.
E. Charges for septage. Charges for disposing of septage at the water
pollution control facility shall be set by the WPCA.
F. Ordinance in full force. This section shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage, approval, recording and publication as provided by
law.
§ 204-41. (Reserved)45
45.Editor's Note: Former § 204-41, User charges, and industrial cost recovery, as amended,
was repealed 2-27-2007. See now § 204-40.
§ 204-40 SEWERS § 204-41
204:215

ARTICLE V
Citation Procedure
[Adopted 12-13-2006]
§ 204-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — A natural person, a group of natural persons, a corporation, a
partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability company, or such other
entity or association which exists under law.
§ 204-43. Designation of citation officers.
Any police officer, the Superintendent or other person authorized by the
First Selectman of the Town of Branford (each a "citation officer") is hereby
empowered to issue citations in accordance with this article.
§ 204-44. Issuance of citations; additional penalties.
A. Any person, firm or corporation found to be violating any provisions
of Article IV of this chapter shall be served by the Superintendent
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The person, firm
or corporation found to be in violation shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. A citation officer may, upon a two-thirds vote of the Water Pollution
Control Authority, issue a citation to any person, firm or corporation
who shall continue any violation beyond the time period provided for in
Subsection A hereof. The fine for each such citation shall be $100. Each
day for which a violation exists shall be a separate offense.
C. Any such citation may be served either by hand delivery or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the person named in such citation. If
the person named in a citation sent by certified mail refuses to accept
such mail, the citation shall be sent by regular United States mail. The
Superintendent shall file and retain an original or certified copy of the
citation.
D. In addition to the foregoing, any person violating any of the provisions
of Article IV of this chapter shall become liable to the Town for any
expense, loss or damage suffered by the Town by reason of such
violation.
§ 204-45. Period for uncontested payment of fines.
The final period for uncontested payment of any fines, penalties, costs or
fees due under this article shall be 30 days after the date of mailing of the
citation.
§ 204-42 SEWERS § 204-46
204:217
§ 204-46. Deposit of fines.
Any fines, penalties, costs, or fees collected by the Town pursuant to this
article shall be deposited to the sewer use account of the Water Pollution
Control Authority.
§ 204-47. Hearing procedure.
The hearing procedures set forth in Chapter 196, Article II, §§ 196-8
through 196-15 of the Municipal Code of the Town of Branford entitled
"Citation Hearing Procedure" shall apply to citations issued pursuant to this
article.
§ 204-46 BRANFORD CODE § 204-47
204:218
Chapter 210
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 112.
Building numbering signs — See Ch. 130.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 204-47 SIGNS § 204-47
210:219

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 210-1. Purpose.
This Sign Ordinance is designed to provide needed control and regulations
to assure compatibility of signs with the environment in which they are
located, to enhance the attractiveness of the Town, to conserve property
values in all areas, to protect the public investment in streets and highways
and to promote the general welfare and prosperity of the people of the
Town.
§ 210-2. Title.
The Branford Representative Town Meeting, acting under authority duly
granted, hereby adopts and enacts this chapter as the sign regulations of
the Town of Branford.
§ 210-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this section:
ADVERTISING SIGN (BILLBOARD) — A sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, activity or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere than upon the lot where such sign is located.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business, profession,
commodity, service, activity or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
upon the lot where such sign is located.
NAMEPLATE — A sign which states the name or address, or both, of the
occupant of the lot where the sign is located.
SIGN — Any name, identification, description, illustration or device which is
affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or
land in view of the general public and which directs attention to a product,
place, activity, person, institution or business. A sign includes a string of
lights, cloth banners or similar device outlining or hung upon any part of a
building or lot, except holiday lights.
SIGN AREA — The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or copy area. It does
not include decorative trim nor any structural elements outside the limits
of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. For back-toback
or V-type signs, only one display face shall be measured in computing
total sign area where the sign faces are parallel or where the interior angle
formed by the faces is 90° or less.
§ 210-1 SIGNS § 210-3
210:221

ARTICLE II
Permits and Insurance
§ 210-4. Conformance required.
No business sign, advertising sign or any other sign shall be erected or
displayed, except as expressly permitted in these sign regulations and
except such state, county and Town signs and traffic signs as are installed
for public purposes.
§ 210-5. Permit required. [Amended 3-11-1992]
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter or relocate,
within the Town of Branford, any sign without first obtaining a permit.
§ 210-6. Compliance with zoning.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign or other form of
exterior advertising shall be erected or maintained unless the same
complies with the requirements established in this chapter for the zoning
district in which such sign is located.46
§ 210-7. Permit application.
Application for sign permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the
Building Officer, or his agent, and shall contain or have attached thereto the
following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The location of the building, structure or lot upon which the sign is to be
attached or erected.
C. The position of sign structure in relation to nearby buildings or
structures.
D. When requested, two blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and
specifications and method of construction and attachment to the
building or in the ground.
E. When requested, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the
structure is designed for dead load and to withstand wind pressure in
the amounts required by this chapter and all other laws and ordinances
of the Town.
F. The name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the
sign structure.
G. Evidence of written consent of the owner of the building, structure or
land to which or on which the structure is to be erected.
H. An insurance policy or bond as required and issued for said sign
erection.
I. Such other information as may be required to show full compliance with
these sign regulations.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Zoning.
§ 210-4 SIGNS § 210-8
210:223
§ 210-8. Issuance of permit: expiration.
It shall be the duty of the Building Officer or his agent, upon the filing of
an application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications,
and if it appears that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter, he shall then issue the permit. If the work
authorized under a sign permit has not commenced within six months after
date of issuance, said permit shall become null and void.
§ 210-9. (Reserved)47
§ 210-10. Bond or insurance required.
Every person, firm or corporation erecting signs in the Town shall, before
permits are granted to erect signs described in § 210-8 above, file with
the Building Officer or his agent a continuing bond in the penal sum of
$10,000, executed by the applicant and a surety company approved by the
Town Counsel and conditioned for the faithful observance of the provisions
of these sign regulations and which shall indemnify and save harmless the
Town of Branford from any and all damages, costs or expenses which said
Town may incur or suffer by reason of granting of said permit. Evidence of a
liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in this state, conforming to this section, shall be permitted in lieu
of a bond. Any person, firm or corporation engaged for profit in the business
of erecting and maintaining sign structures regulated by this chapter shall
comply with the provisions set forth herein.
47.Editor's Note: Former § 210-9, Permit fees, was repealed 3-11-1992.
§ 210-8 BRANFORD CODE § 210-10
210:224
ARTICLE III
Safety Requirements; Removal and Exemptions
§ 210-11. Notice of unsafe or unlawful signs. [Amended 3-11-1992]
If the Building Officer or his agent shall find that any sign or sign structure
regulated herein is unsafe or insecure or has been erected in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, he shall give written notice to the permittee
thereof. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to
comply with the standards herein set forth within 10 days after such notice,
such sign or sign structure may be removed or altered to comply by the
Building Officer or his agent, at the expense of the permittee or owner of the
property upon which it is located. The Building Officer shall refuse to issue
a permit to any permittee or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed.
A sign or sign structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property
may be removed by the Town summarily and without notice.
§ 210-12. Wind pressure and dead load requirements.
All signs and supports shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind
pressure and to receive dead loads as required in the Connecticut Building
Code and other applicable laws and ordinances.
§ 210-13. Attachment to buildings. [Amended 3-11-1992]
All signs attached to a building shall be thoroughly and rigidly secured
in a manner approved by the Building Officer and shall be maintained as
necessary to keep them secure, safe and free from danger.
§ 210-14. Painting required.
The owner of any sign as defined and regulated by this chapter shall be
required to have painted, at least once every three years, all parts and
supports of said sign, unless the same are galvanized or otherwise treated
to prevent rust.
§ 210-15. Removal of certain signs.
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide
business conducted, product sold or activity or campaign being conducted
shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the
beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon which such sign may
be found within 30 days of such cessation. Upon failure to comply within
the time specified, the Building Officer or his agent is hereby authorized
to order removal such sign within 30 days of a written notification, and
any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building,
structure or lot to which such sign is attached.
§ 210-11 SIGNS § 210-16
210:225
§ 210-16. Exemptions.
The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the
following signs; provided, however, that said signs shall be subject to the
provisions of § 210-11 hereof:
A. In all R Residence Districts, as designated by the regulations of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, one unlighted nameplate identifying
the owner or occupant of a building or dwelling unit, limited to two
square feet in area.
B. A sign erected by any fraternal, civic, religious or service club or
organization, merely announcing its presence in the Town and the time
and place of its regular meeting, provided that such sign does not exceed
nine square feet in area.
C. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when
cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible material.
D. Signs advertising agricultural products of a seasonal nature shall be
permitted in residential districts. Such signs shall not be erected within
10 feet of any street line and shall not exceed six square feet in area.
Such signs shall be removed as soon as the season for selling the
agricultural products is over.
§ 210-17. Maintenance of sign premises.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or lessee of every sign to
maintain the immediate premises occupied by the sign in a clean, sanitary
and healthful condition.
§ 210-16 BRANFORD CODE § 210-17
210:226
ARTICLE IV
Limitations
§ 210-18. Types and sizes of signs.
No sign shall be erected, except such types and sizes of signs as may be
permitted under the regulations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, as
the same may be amended from time to time.48
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Zoning.
§ 210-18 SIGNS § 210-18
210:227

ARTICLE V
Prohibitions and Restrictions
§ 210-19. Applicability.
The following prohibitions and general restrictions shall apply to signs in all
districts.
§ 210-20. Proximity to intersections.
No sign, whether illuminated or not, shall project into the line of vision of a
motorist of an official traffic signal at a street intersection within 150 feet
of such signal from a moving lane of traffic.
§ 210-21. Obstruction of entrances and exits; attachment to trees,
fences or poles.
No sign shall be attached to or obstruct any window, door, stairway or other
opening intended for ingress or egress or for needed light and ventilation;
nor shall any sign be attached to any tree, fence or utility pole.
§ 210-22. Unsecured signs.
Unsecured signs shall not be permitted.
§ 210-23. Proximity to Interstate 95. [Amended 3-11-1992]
Where a lot abuts the right-of-way of Interstate 95, no advertising sign
structure visible from the main traveled way of said Interstate shall be
permitted to be erected within 500 feet of any other such sign structure
along the same side of the Interstate, provided that such spacing shall not
apply to sign structures which are separated in such a manner that only one
is visible from Interstate 95 at any time.
§ 210-19 SIGNS § 210-23
210:229

ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Signs
§ 210-24. Continuance, alteration and maintenance.
Signs existing on April 9, 1971, and which did not conform to the provisions
of the Sign Ordinance of March 10, 1971, shall remain nonconforming. No
nonconforming sign shall be altered by increasing the overall dimensions. If
damaged to the extent on 1/2 its fair market value, no nonconforming sign
shall be reconstructed, provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent
maintenance, repainting or posting of such signs.
§ 210-25. Elimination on property subsequently sold.
A nonconforming sign which exists on a property which is sold or otherwise
transferred must be eliminated or changed to conform to this chapter within
90 days of the date of sale or transference.
§ 210-24 SIGNS § 210-25
210:231

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 210-26. Enforcing official designated.
The Building Officer or his designated agent shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 210-27. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of these regulations shall
be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
§ 210-26 SIGNS § 210-27
210:233
Chapter 213
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Resource Recovery Authority — See Ch. 82.
Outdoor fires — See Ch. 154.
Littering — See Ch. 176.
§ 210-27 BRANFORD CODE § 210-27
213:234
ARTICLE I
General
§ 213-1. Validity.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall
for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decree or
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decree or decision
shall not affect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining
portion of this chapter.
§ 213-2. Relation to previous ordinances.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to invalidate any action taken
regarding any forfeiture or revocation prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 213-1 SOLID WASTE § 213-2
213:235

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 213-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
49BOARD OF SELECTMEN or BOARD — The Board of Selectmen of the
Town of Branford, Connecticut. When used in reference to the voting body,
it shall be taken to include the phrase "or a majority thereof."
BULKY WASTE — Incorporates the definition of said term as used in the
regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, as
the same may be amended from time to time.
CARDBOARD — Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials which have a minimum of contamination by food or other
material.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm or corporation
whose principal business activity is collecting, picking up and/or
transporting solid waste.
COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY or CIC — Defined as in Section 47-202
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as it shall be amended from time to
time.
COMPOST SITE — The Town's composting facility, area or areas as
designated by the Board of Selectmen.
CONSTABLE(S), SOLID WASTE — A person or persons appointed by the
First Selectman pursuant to the terms of this chapter to enforce the rules
and regulations set forth in this chapter and those adopted by the Board of
Selectmen from time to time.
DECLARANT — Defined as in Section 47-68a or 47-202 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as it shall be amended from time to time.
DRY-CELL BATTERY — Any device used for generating electric current
through a chemical reaction, including but not limited to nickel-cadmium
batteries, carbon batteries and alkaline batteries.
DWELLING — A building containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT or UNIT — A building or a part of a building designed for
occupancy, and so occupied, by one family. Accommodations occupied for
transient lodging in a hotel or motel shall not be considered to be a dwelling
unit.[Amended 6-11-2003]
GARBAGE — Animal, vegetable or other organic wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food.
49.Editor's Note: The definition of "Assessor's residential dwelling list," which immediately
preceded this definition, was repealed 6-11-2003.
§ 213-3 SOLID WASTE § 213-3
213:237
GLASS FOOD CONTAINER — Any glass bottle or jar of any size or shape
used to package food or beverage products suitable for human or animal
consumption.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Grass and other trimmings from the care of a lawn,
with a minimum of contamination by pesticides.
H.D.P.E. PLASTIC CONTAINER — Any high-density polyethylene bottle or
jar of any size or shape used to package food, household laundry products
or crankcase oil.
INCIDENTAL COMMERCIAL USER — Any person, firm or corporation,
other than a commercial solid waste hauler, depositing or dumping solid
waste in any Town solid waste facility only occasionally and incidental to a
business or trade, such as a building contractor, landscaper or gardener.
INTERMEDIATE PROCESSING CENTER or IPC — A facility which can
recycle an item or items and market or deliver for reuse the resulting
material product or products. Such facilities may be owned by public or
private entities or combinations thereof and may offer service on a state,
regional, municipal or submunicipal level.
LEAVES — The foliage of trees, bushes and other plants with a minimum of
contamination by rocks, sticks or branches and pesticides.
MAGAZINES — Catalogs, magazines or other similar printed matter.
METAL FOOD CONTAINER — Any aluminum, bimetal, steel, tin-plated steel
or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to package
food or beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. Clean
aluminum foil is also included in this category.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE or MSW — That portion of the solid waste
stream suitable for disposal, as determined by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut, on the MSW side of
the Town landfill.
NEWSPAPER — Any used or discarded newsprint which has a minimum of
contamination by food or other material. Newspapers shall be considered
to have a minimum of contamination if they have not been exposed to
substances rendering them unusable for recycling.
OFFICE PAPER — Any used or discarded high-grade white paper and manila
paper, including but not limited to paper utilized for file folders, tab cards,
writing, typing, printing, computer printing and photocopying, which is
suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination.
P.E.T. PLASTIC FOOD CONTAINER — Any polyethylene terephthalate
container of any size or shape used to package beverages.
PRIVATE HOME — A dwelling consisting of one, two, three or four dwelling
units. No CIC shall be considered a private home.[Amended 6-11-2003]
RECYCLABLES — Any items designated by this chapter or by the Solid
Waste Management Commission to be separated or diverted as defined
below under "recycle."
§ 213-3 BRANFORD CODE § 213-3
213:238
RECYCLE — To separate or divert an item or items from the solid waste
stream for the purposes of processing it, causing it to be processed or
storing it for later processing into a material product, including the
production of compost, in order to provide for disposition of the item or
items in a manner, other than incineration or landfilling, which will best
protect the environment. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the use of
waste oil as fuel in an oil burner or waste tires as fuel in an incinerator.
RECYCLING BOX — Any container designated as a recycling container by
the Solid Waste Management Commission.
RECYCLING CENTER — The Town's recycling facility, area or areas as
designated by the Board of Selectmen.
REFUSE — Garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENTIAL COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY or RCIC — Any CIC in
which the units are used for dwelling or recreational purposes, or both.
RCIC's shall not include apartments, cooperatives or commercial or other
forms of nonresidential ownership.
RCIC UNIT — A physical portion of an RCIC designated for separate
ownership or occupancy.
RUBBISH — That portion of municipal solid waste that is not garbage.
SCRAP METAL — Used or discarded items which consist predominantly
of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or
alloys thereof, including but not limited to white goods.
SCRAP TIRES — Discarded rubber or synthetic rubber tires used by or
manufactured for vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks,
buses and trailers.
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted or discarded materials, including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material. This is an all-encompassing term,
including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, recyclables, bulb waste and
other separately identified waste streams.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY, TOWN — The Town landfill, transfer station,
recycling center and compost site or any other facility designated by the
Board of Selectmen.
STORAGE BATTERIES — Batteries used in motor vehicles, airplanes, boats,
recreational vehicles, tractors and like applications or other lead-acid
batteries.
TOWN LANDFILL — The Town's solid waste disposal area situated off
Ark Road in Branford and any other areas designated by the Board of
Selectmen.
TRANSFER STATION — The Town's solid waste transfer facility, area or
areas as designated by the Board of Selectmen.
UNIT OWNERS' ASSOCIATION or ASSOCIATION OF UNIT OWNERS —
Any association of RCIC unit owners acting as a group in accordance with
their RCIC documents.
§ 213-3 SOLID WASTE § 213-3
213:239
WASTE OIL — Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines.
YARD WASTE — Organic waste from yard care, including but not limited
to branches, brush, hedge trimmings and dead plants. Yard waste does not
include grass clippings or leaves.
§ 213-3 BRANFORD CODE § 213-3
213:240
ARTICLE III
Solid Waste Management Commission
§ 213-4. Membership; compensation. [Amended 2-20-1992]
The Solid Waste Management Commission (hereinafter "Commission") shall
consist of seven members who shall be residents and electors of the Town
of Branford appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Members shall serve
without compensation.
§ 213-5. Appointment of members; terms; election of officers.
[Amended 2-20-1992]
Each member shall serve for a term of five years. In the event that a vacancy
occurs in the term of any member, the Board of Selectmen shall fill said
vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term. The Commission shall elect
annually from its membership a Chairperson and such other officers as it
shall deem necessary.
§ 213-6. Powers and duties.
Said Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To consider, investigate, develop and thereafter update a twenty-year
solid waste management plan for submission to the State of Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection.
B. To monitor the operation and management of the Town landfill, transfer
station, compost site and recycling center.
C. To advise and assist the Board of Selectmen on all solid waste issues:
(1) To make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen for the
adoption of rules and regulations governing any practice in Articles
V through X and related practices concerning solid waste.
(2) To research, discuss or otherwise respond to proposed rules and
regulations initiated by the Board of Selectmen.
D. To develop and oversee a hazardous waste program; provided, however,
that no mandatory program shall be implemented except by ordinance.
E. To develop and oversee a recycling program; provided, however, that
no mandatory program shall be implemented except by ordinance. The
Commission shall, however, have the authority to recommend
temporary, mandatory pilot programs, not to exceed one year or
voluntary programs of any duration. Any such temporary mandatory
programs must be for a recyclable or for an item identified as an optional
recyclable per § 213-15A of this chapter, as it shall be amended from
time to time.
F. To employ such engineers, attorneys, consultants, inspectors and testing
laboratories as it shall deem necessary for its above duties and powers;
provided, however, that the Commission shall not be empowered to
employ any person, partnership, firm or corporation to provide
management of any Town solid waste facility.
G. Contracts:
§ 213-4 SOLID WASTE § 213-6
213:241
(1) To prepare or review and to make recommendations with regard
to the contract or contracts for collection of garbage, rubbish and
recyclables.
(2) To prepare or review and to make recommendations with regard to
such other contracts as may from time to time be needed concerning
solid waste matters.
(3) To assist in advertising contracts for bid in accordance with
Branford's Purchasing Ordinance,50 as it shall be amended from time
to time, to review all responses and to make its recommendations
regarding the awarding of such bid or bids to the Board of
Selectmen.
H. To make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen on the direction of
all solid waste generated within the Town of Branford to the appropriate
solid waste facility.
I. To recommend to the Board of Selectmen schedules of fees for the
disposal of different categories of solid waste at the Town solid waste
facilities or for the use of said facilities.
§ 213-7. Coordination with authorities and other agencies.
Said Commission shall work together with the Connecticut Resource
Recovery Authority, and such resource recovery authorities or other
agencies as have been or may be formed from time to time by one or more
municipalities, to determine proper and efficient manners of processing the
Town's solid waste.
§ 213-8. Presentation of budget; reports.
Said Commission shall annually present a budget and file an annual report
of its doings, which report shall be included in the Town's annual report.
The Commission can be called upon at any time by the Representative Town
Meeting to render a report on its activities.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Purchasing.
§ 213-6 BRANFORD CODE § 213-8
213:242
ARTICLE IV
Board of Selectmen
§ 213-9. Relation to Solid Waste Management Commission.
The Board of Selectmen shall weigh any recommendation of the Solid
Waste Management Commission before making any decision related to solid
waste management; however, the Board of Selectmen shall not be bound
by any such recommendation. The Board of Selectmen shall retain the
authority to act without such consultation or recommendation in cases of
an emergency nature or when time is otherwise of the essence. In such
emergency cases, the Board of Selectmen shall notify the Solid Waste
Management Commission as soon as possible, but not later than seven
calendar days after taking such action.
§ 213-10. Authority to direct solid waste.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the final authority to direct all solid
waste or any component part thereof generated within the Town of Branford
to the solid waste facility it shall designate.
§ 213-11. Powers and duties.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall adopt rules and regulations from time to
time governing any practice in Articles V through X and related practices
concerning solid waste, provided that such rules or regulations are not
inconsistent with this chapter.
B. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to enter into a contract or
contracts for Town garbage and rubbish and recyclables collection,
subject to an appropriation for said contract or contracts by the Board
of Finance and the Representative Town Meeting. Said contract or
contracts shall be awarded in accordance with Branford's Purchasing
Ordinance,51 as it shall be amended from time to time.
C. The Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid Waste
Management Commission, is authorized to adopt a schedule of fees for
the disposal of different categories of solid waste at the Town solid waste
facilities or for the use of said facilities.
(1) The Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid Waste
Management Commission, is authorized to charge a fee to private
residents, or a higher fee to incidental commercial users or
commercial solid waste haulers, if recyclables mixed with refuse are
dumped or deposited at any of the Town's solid waste facilities in
violation of this chapter.
(2) In the event that the Town shall have previously entered into or
shall hereafter enter into a contract with any person, partnership
or corporation to provide management of any of the Town solid
waste facilities, the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the
Solid Waste Management Commission, is authorized to permit the
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Purchasing.
§ 213-9 SOLID WASTE § 213-11
213:243
manager to charge and retain all or part of any fee which may be
established pursuant to the provisions of Subsection C.
D. The First Selectman shall appoint a constable or constables who shall
be responsible for enforcing the rules and regulations set forth in this
chapter and those adopted by the Board of Selectmen from time to time.
§ 213-11 BRANFORD CODE § 213-11
213:244
ARTICLE V
Collection and Transportation of Solid Waste
§ 213-12. Compliance with other regulations.
Transportation and handling of solid waste shall be carried out in
accordance with all federal and state laws and regulations, including but
not limited to the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, as it shall
be amended from time to time. No newspaper or other solid waste, clean
or otherwise, shall be set out, stored or transported in such a fashion as
to cause it to blow away, become a hazard to public travel or safety or
otherwise create a public nuisance.
§ 213-13. Duration of contract.
No contract or contracts for the purposes outlined in § 213-6G(1) shall be
for more than five years.
§ 213-14. Recycling mandated.
A. The following materials must be recycled as further set forth in this
chapter:
(1) Cardboard.
(2) Glass food containers.
(3) Leaves.
(4) Metal food containers.
(5) Newspaper.
(6) Office paper.
(7) Scrap metal.
(8) Storage batteries.
(9) Waste oil.
B. All recyclables as defined in § 213-14A above, with the exception of office
paper, shall be recycled by all private homes in the manner set forth
in this chapter. Private homes shall not mix any such recyclables with
refuse or mix refuse with any such recyclables.
(1) Glass food containers, metal food containers and newspaper from
private homes shall be placed in recycling boxes as specified below.
(2) Cardboard from private homes shall be bundled as further specified
in regulations and shall be put out with the recycling box. This
§ 213-14B(2) shall become effective upon the opening of the
permanent recycling center.
(3) Leaves from private homes may be picked up through a Town
contract on special leaf collection days.
(a) Such leaves placed for collection must be either:
[1] Placed in brown paper (kraft) bags which are not sealed by
tape, staples, twine or similar closures; or
[2] Placed loose in a permanent container such as a garbage
can. Such loose leaves must not be packed into said
container such that removal is difficult.
(b) Leaves in plastic bags will not be collected.
(c) Leaves may not be raked into the street or left piled at the curb.
§ 213-12 SOLID WASTE § 213-14
213:245
(4) Scrap metal, storage batteries and waste oil from private homes are
not collected by the Town at the curb.
C. All recyclables as defined in § 213-14A above, with the exception of office
paper, shall be recycled by all RCIC's in the manner set forth in this
chapter. RCIC's shall not mix any such recyclables with refuse or mix
refuse with any such recyclables.
(1) Glass food containers, metal food containers and newspaper from
RCIC's shall be placed in recycling boxes or bins as specified below.
RCIC's must provide for the collection of these recyclables from their
property.
(2) Cardboard from RCIC's shall be recycled in accordance with rules
set up by RCIC. This § 213-14C(2) shall become effective upon the
opening of the permanent recycling center.
(3) RCIC's need not provide special collections of leaves, scrap metal,
storage batteries or waste oil from RCIC residents, but RCIC's are
responsible for ensuring that these recyclables are not mixed with
other solid waste and that they are handled in an environmentally
acceptable manner.
D. All other properties shall recycle all recyclables as designated in
§ 213-14A, except residential properties, which need not recycle office
paper. No property shall mix any such recyclable with refuse or mix
refuse with any such recyclable. The Town will assist wherever possible
in establishing small generators' networks, providing a transfer location
for some materials and assisting in the overall education and publicity
effort concerning recycling.
(1) All residential properties other than RCIC's and private homes must
provide for the collection of glass food containers, metal food
containers and newspaper from said properties. These properties
include but are not limited to apartment buildings and mobile home
parks.
(a) Residents of said properties shall separate from other solid
waste all recyclables as designated in § 213-14A, except office
paper.
(b) The owners of such residential properties shall provide for the
collection of glass food containers, metal food containers and
newspaper at such property in a manner that is as convenient to
the residents as their system for refuse collection.
§ 213-15. Optional recyclables.
A. The following items are designated as "optional recyclables" subject to
voluntary recycling and mandatory pilot programs. Such items shall be
considered recyclables for the purposes of proper use of recycling boxes,
collection and transportation of recyclables and depositing or recyclable
material at the recycling center, when a program has been established
through regulations pursuant to this chapter to handle these materials,
and the materials are to be handled in accordance with said regulations.
(1) Bulky waste.
(2) Drycell batteries.
(3) Grass clippings.
§ 213-14 BRANFORD CODE § 213-15
213:246
(4) H.D.P.E. plastic containers.
(5) Magazines and other nonmagazine printed matter.
(6) P.E.T. plastic food containers.
(7) Scrap tires.
(8) Yard waste.
§ 213-16. Containers for private homes.
A. The Town shall provide one free recycling box to each private home.
(1) The owner or occupant of such private home shall label the recycling
box or cause said box to be labeled with the address where the box
shall be used. All boxes must be so labeled by the first time they are
set out at the curb for collection.
(2) Said box shall remain the property of the Town.
(3) The policy for replacement of boxes or the supplying or purchase
of additional boxes by residents shall be recommended by the Solid
Waste Management Commission to the Board of Selectmen.
B. All glass food containers, metal food containers and newspaper set out
for collection by private homes shall be placed in recycling boxes.
(1) Glass food-containers and metal food containers may be mixed
together in the recycling box.
(2) Newspaper must be bundled and set on top of other recyclables, if
any, in the recycling box. Newspaper may be bundled in brown paper
(kraft) grocery bags or tied with string or twine.
(3) No other solid waste, even if it is a designated recyclable per
§ 213-14A, shall be placed in said box unless it is under the
provisions of § 213-14B(2) or 213-15A. Recycling boxes used for
purposes other than recycling may be reclaimed by the Town.
C. All refuse set out for collection shall be bundled or placed in suitable
containers so as to conform to § 213-12 above.
D. No single container of refuse or recyclables shall weigh more than 50
pounds.
§ 213-17. Placement of containers by private homes.
A. All garbage and rubbish containers shall be placed for collection
purposes within 10 feet of the street or curbline.
B. All recycling boxes shall be placed for collection purposes within 10 feet
of the street or curbline.
§ 213-18. Containers for RCIC's.
A. All refuse set out for collection shall be bundled or placed in suitable
containers so as to conform to § 213-12 above.
B. Upon request by any association of unit owners, the Town shall provide
one free recycling box for each unit.
(1) Said boxes shall remain the property of the Town.
(2) The policy for replacement of boxes or the supplying or purchase of
additional boxes by unit owners or unit owners' associations shall be
recommended by the Solid Waste Management Commission to the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 213-15 SOLID WASTE § 213-18
213:247
C. Recyclables generated by RCIC's not collected under the Town contract
need not be placed at curbside in recycling boxes nor in any particular
type of dumpster mandated by the Town, but recyclables must be
separated from refuse.
(1) Associations of unit owners and their solid waste collectors are
encouraged to develop a collection/dropoff system whereby
residents themselves separate recyclables from refuse.
(2) To promote participation in recycling, the recycling collection/
dropoff system for RCIC's must be as convenient for their residents,
subject to space limitations, as their system for refuse collection.
§ 213-19. Additional services.
Additional collection services beyond those offered by the Town contract
may be rendered by the collector or collectors if requested by individuals
or associations within said collector's or collectors' collection area, and a
reasonable additional collection fee, subject to approval by the Board of
Selectmen, shall be charged by the collector to said individual or association
for the added service.
§ 213-20. Scavenging prohibited; penalty.
A. Upon the placement of recyclables at the curb in a recycling box, it
shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, partnership, firm or
corporation, other than the depositor or authorized agents of the Town
acting in the course of their employment, to collect or pick up or cause
to be collected or picked up such recyclables.
B. Each and every such collection or pickup in violation of § 213-20A,
213-21E, 213-22C, 213-23C or 213-24C from one or more locations shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
C. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating this section or
§ 213-21E, 213-22C, 213-23C or 213-24C shall be fined not more than
$100 for each offense.
D. In addition to any fine per § 213-20C, the offender, at the option of the
Board of Selectmen, may be required to make restitution to the Town of
Branford for the value of any materials illegally removed.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall abridge the right of any person,
partnership, firm or corporation to give or sell their recyclables,
including deposit beverage containers, to any person, partnership, firm,
corporation or recycling program lawfully operated for profit, nonprofit
or charitable purposes, provided that such materials shall not have
been set out on the curb or at any designated collection or pickup site
authorized by the Town or its designated agent.
§ 213-18 BRANFORD CODE § 213-20
213:248
ARTICLE VI
Town Landfill
§ 213-21. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the operation and
maintenance of the Town landfill:
A. The dumping or disposal in said landfill area of any materials from
a source outside of the Town of Branford, except bulky waste to the
extent authorized by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to Subsection B,
is prohibited.
B. The dumping or disposal of bulky waste shall be subject to such rules
and regulations as may be established by the Board of Selectmen from
time to time, after consultation with the Solid Waste Management
Commission.
C. The vertical height or elevation of the Town landfill shall not exceed a
limit of 95 feet above mean sea level.
D. Loads of refuse from sources subject to mandatory recycling shall be
substantially free from recyclables.
E. There shall be no scavenging at the Town landfill unless authorized
by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid Waste
Management Commission.
§ 213-21 SOLID WASTE § 213-21
213:249

ARTICLE VII
Transfer Station
§ 213-22. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the operation and
maintenance of the transfer station:
A. The dumping or disposal of said transfer station of any materials from a
source outside of the Town of Branford is prohibited without the express
recommendation of the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the
Solid Waste Management Commission.
B. Loads of refuse from sources subject to mandatory recycling shall be
substantially free from recyclables.
C. There shall be no scavenging at the transfer station unless authorized
by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid Waste
Management Commission.
D. The dumping or disposal of solid waste at the transfer station shall be
subject to such further rules and regulations as may be established by
the Board of Selectmen from time to time, after consultation with the
Solid Waste Management Commission.
§ 213-22 SOLID WASTE § 213-22
213:251

ARTICLE VIII
Recycling Center
§ 213-23. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the operation and
maintenance of the recycling center:
A. Only recyclables shall be deposited at the recycling center.
B. The dumping or disposal in said recycling center of any materials from a
source outside of the Town of Branford is prohibited, except to the extent
authorized by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid
Waste Management Commission.
C. There shall be no scavenging at the recycling center unless authorized
by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid Waste
Management Commission.
D. The dumping or disposal of recyclables at the recycling center shall be
subject to such further rules and regulations as may be established by
the Board of Selectmen from time to time, after consultation with the
Solid Waste Management Commission.
§ 213-23 SOLID WASTE § 213-23
213:253

ARTICLE IX
Compost Site
§ 213-24. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the operation and
maintenance of the compost site:
A. No material except leaves shall be deposited in windrows at the compost
site. Brown paper (kraft) bags be used to bundle said leaves.
(1) Wood chips, Christmas trees, yard waste and grass clippings may be
accepted at the compost site when deposited in conjunction with an
established program for such items.
(2) The dumping or disposal of any other solid waste, including plastic
bags, is prohibited.
B. The dumping or disposal in said compost site of any materials from a
source outside of the Town of Branford is prohibited, except to the extent
authorized by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid
Waste Management Commission.
C. There shall be no scavenging at the compost site unless authorized
by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid Waste
Management Commission.
D. The dumping or disposal of material at the compost site shall be subject
to such further rules and regulations as may be established by the Board
of Selectmen from time to time, after consultation with the Solid Waste
Management Commission.
§ 213-24 SOLID WASTE § 213-24
213:255

ARTICLE X
Permits, Bonds, Enforcement and Penalties
§ 213-25. Permit required for commercial solid waste haulers.
A. No commercial solid waste hauler shall deposit or dump any solid waste
at any Town solid waste facility or use said facility without first obtaining
a permit to do so. Separate permits for the different facilities are not
necessary.
B. Any commercial solid waste hauler who collects solid waste within the
Town but who does not have a permit pursuant to § 213-25A shall
register itself with the Town Clerk.
C. The Board of Selectmen may require of any permittee, applicant for
a permit, registrant or applicant for registration the provision of such
information, under oath, as the Board shall determine, from time to
time, may be reasonable to determine the information necessary for
the enforcement of this chapter. To the extent permitted by law, such
information shall not be disclosed, except to the extent necessary for the
determination, by appropriate municipal authorities, including the Solid
Waste Management Commission, as to compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 213-26. Bond required prior to issuance of permit for commercial
solid waste haulers.
A. The permit described in § 213-25A shall be obtained from the Town Clerk
and shall not be issued unless the applicant deposits with the Town
Treasurer a bond in the amount of $3,000, secured by cash, certified
check, corporate surety bond or passbook assigned to the Treasurer of
the Town of Branford, conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. A single bond shall be sufficient for the
use of the Town landfill, the transfer station, the compost site and the
recycling center.
B. Effective May, 1, 1991, all commercial solid waste haulers must have
a bond posted in the amount of $3,000 in order to use any of the
Town's solid waste facilities. Failure to have a bond in at least said
amount deposited shall result in a revocation of any existing permit, and
any bond standing in the name of the permittee shall be returned to
said permittee within 14 days of the revocation of the permit, provided
that the permittee is not then under investigation for or in violation of
§ 213-27 hereof.
§ 213-27. Revocation of permit of commercial solid waste haulers.
A. In accordance with the provisions of Subsection B below, the permit of
any commercial solid waste hauler shall be revoked and the bond of said
hauler forfeited to the Town for the violations listed below. In addition,
said commercial solid waste hauler shall be prohibited from dumping or
depositing any solid waste in any of the Town solid waste facilities until a
new permit is obtained and a new bond is deposited in accordance with
§§ 213-25 and 213-26, regardless of which facility was being used when
the provisions of this section were violated.
§ 213-25 SOLID WASTE § 213-27
213:257
(1) Dumping or depositing any solid waste originating from a source
outside of the limits of the Town of Branford, except bulky waste
or recyclables to the extent authorized by the Board Selectmen,
pursuant to §§ 213-21A and B, 213-22A, 213-23B and 213-24B, or
dumping out-of-town solid waste at a Branford solid waste facility
but alleging that it originated from within the Town of Branford and
paying such lesser fee.
(2) Depositing bulky waste, recyclables or refuse in other than the
authorized facility.
(3) Refusing to remove or cause to be removed bulky waste, recyclables
or refuse deposited at other than the authorized facility when
ordered to do so by the Board of Selectmen or its authorized agent.
B. Investigations and hearings.
(1) The First Selectman shall cause the Town Attorney to investigate
any allegation of a violation of the provisions of this section. If
the Town Attorney shall determine that there is probable cause
to believe that a violation of the provisions of the chapter has
occurred, he or she shall give written notice to the permittee by
mailing such notice, certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the address set forth upon the permit, that he or she has found
probable cause and that the permit will be revoked and the bond
forfeited in not less than seven days from the date of the notice.
The notice shall also contain a general statement of the alleged
violation, including the date thereof, and a statement that the
permittee may request a hearing on such revocation and forfeiture
by mailing such request by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the First Selectman not more than seven days following the date
of the Town Attorney's notice. If no request for hearing is made
by the permittee within the time herein allowed, the permit shall
be deemed revoked, and the bond shall be deemed forfeited to the
Town Treasurer.
(2) If a request for a hearing is made by the permittee within the
time allowed, the Selectman who, pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection B(3) of this section, will preside at said hearing shall
give notice of the time and place of said hearing to the permittee
by mailing such notice, certified mail, return receipt requested, not
less than seven days prior to the date of said hearing, to the address
set forth in the permittee's request for hearing.
(3) The First Selectman shall preside at said hearing unless said First
Selectman shall be disqualified, in which event the Selectman
commonly known as the "Second Selectman" shall preside.
(4) The permittee and the Town shall have the right to be represented
by counsel.
(5) All witnesses at said hearing shall be placed under oath, and each
party shall have an opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses
presented by the other.
(6) Unless both the Town and the permittee shall waive the keeping
of a transcript, a verbatim record of said proceeding shall be kept.
§ 213-27 BRANFORD CODE § 213-27
213:258
Either party shall have the right to order a copy of said record upon
the payment, in advance, of the cost thereof.
(7) The rules of evidence shall not apply to any proceeding hereunder,
and subject to the provisions of Subsection B(5), the presiding
Selectman shall be permitted to accept such evidence as he or she
shall deem appropriate.
(8) In the event that any member of the Board of Selectmen shall be
a witness in the proceeding, he or she shall be disqualified to act
upon said complaint.
(9) If any member of the Board of Selectmen shall be disqualified to
act upon said complaint for any reason, the remaining members
of the Board shall select an elector of the Town to replace said
disqualified Selectman at said hearing. If the remaining Selectmen
are unable to agree upon said replacement, the Representative
Town Meeting, acting at a regular or special meeting, shall select
said replacement.
(10) In the event that the Board of Selectmen shall determine, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the permittee has dumped
or deposited solid waste in violation of Subsection A above, the
Selectman presiding at said hearing shall take such action as may
be proper under the provisions of this chapter. Notice of such action
shall be given to the permittee, in writing, by mailing such notice,
certified mail, return receipt requested, to said permittee at the
address set forth on the permit not less than five days prior to the
effective date of said action.
§ 213-28. Term of permit for commercial solid waste haulers; return
of bond.
All permits issued to commercial solid waste haulers pursuant to §§ 213-25
through 213-27 above shall be in effect until revoked or until voluntarily
surrendered by the permittee. Any bond standing in the name of the
permittee shall be returned to said permittee within 10 days of the
voluntary surrender of the permit, provided that the permittee is not then
under investigation for or in violation of § 213-27 hereof.
§ 213-29. Permit required for incidental commercial user.
A. No incidental commercial user shall deposit or dump any solid waste in
any Town solid waste facility without first obtaining a permit to do so
from the Town Clerk or such other official as may be designated from
time to time by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Solid
Waste Management Commission. The permit shall be valid for a period
of one day and shall only be issued to the incidental commercial user
upon satisfactory proof that the materials to be dumped or deposited in
the Town solid waste facility originate from a source within the Town of
Branford.
B. An incidental commercial user shall not be subject to the bond
requirements of this chapter.
§ 213-27 SOLID WASTE § 213-30
213:259
§ 213-30. Permit required for Branford residents.
A. No resident of the Town of Branford shall deposit or dump any solid
waste in any Town solid waste facility without first obtaining a permit to
do so from the Town Clerk or such other official as may be designated
from time to time by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with
the Solid Waste Management Commission. Such permit shall be valid for
a period not to exceed two years and shall be issued upon satisfactory
proof that the applicant is a resident of the Town of Branford, and such
permit shall be used for household purposes only. Said permit may but
need not be combined with other functions requiring Town residency,
such as use of parks and beaches.
B. Said permit shall be deemed automatically revoked if the permittee
moves out of the Town of Branford.
§ 213-31. Inspections; notices; violations and penalties.
A. All solid waste is subject to inspection from the time it is placed at the
curb or in a dumpster through and including the time it arrives at its
ultimate disposal area.
(1) Said inspections may be carried out by any constable appointed by
the First Selectman in accordance with § 213-11D.
(2) The commercial solid waste hauler responsible for pickup of a
particular load of refuse or recyclables may inspect said refuse
and recyclables at curbside or in dumpsters for the purpose of
determining proper separation of waste streams as set forth in this
chapter.
B. An informational or warning notice may be given orally or in writing
whenever any provision of this chapter is ignored by any person,
partnership, firm, corporation or association.
C. The Town of Branford or its agent reserves the right to refuse to collect
garbage, rubbish or recyclables or to refuse to allow disposal in any of
the Town solid waste facilities or designated facilities where the spirit
or letter of any provision of this chapter or the regulations enacted
hereunder is ignored.
§ 213-32. Exceptions.
A. Exceptions to §§ 213-14, 213-16B and 213-17B of this chapter may be
granted on a case-by-case basis by the Recycling Coordinator upon
demonstration of extreme hardship.
B. Such an exception granted by the Recycling Coordinator must be in
writing, must state the duration of the exception and must not be in
conflict with any existing state law or regulation or with any contract
then in effect.
C. If a petitioner is dissatisfied with the response to his or her request for
such an exception, he or she may appeal the decision, in writing, to the
Recycling Committee of the Solid Waste Management Commission. Said
Committee must respond in writing within 60 days. The decision of the
Recycling Coordinator may be overturned only by a majority vote of said
Committee.
§ 213-30 BRANFORD CODE § 213-32
213:260
ARTICLE XI
Rebate for Residential Common Interest Communities
§ 213-33. Town collection of refuse and recyclables at RCIC's.
The Town shall provide collection of refuse and recyclables to RCIC's with
the same frequency as such collection is provided to private homes.
§ 213-34. RCIC rebate. [Amended 6-11-2003]
In lieu of collection of refuse and recyclables at any RCIC pursuant to
§ 213-33 hereof, the Town, upon the majority vote of the Board of
Selectmen, may make payment to the association of unit owners on behalf
of each eligible unit. An eligible unit shall be any and all which were
conveyed by the declarant of the RCIC pursuant to Section 47-72 or 47-220
and 47-223 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to
time. Said units must have been conveyed as of October 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first day of the fiscal year in which payment is to be
made. The amount payable to the association for each such unit shall be
determined by taking the amount of the municipal contract or contracts
for the collection of refuse and recyclables during the fiscal year in which
payment is made, and dividing it by the number of units included in the
Town contract. The number of units included in the Town contract shall be
determined by the Town, based upon the best available information from
the Assessor's records, and shall include, at a minimum, units in all private
homes, and all RCIC units from which the Town contract collects garbage
and recyclables. It shall not include any RCIC units which receive a rebate,
or other commercial or multifamily units not receiving Town collection.
§ 213-35. Date of payment.
Payment made pursuant to § 213-34 shall be made in one annual payment
on September 1 of each year.
§ 213-33 SOLID WASTE § 213-35
213:261
Chapter 216
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Litter on streets — See Ch. 176.
Parking on streets — See Ch. 223.
Streets in subdivisions — See Ch. 228.
§ 213-35 BRANFORD CODE § 213-35
216:262
ARTICLE I
Public Square
[Adopted 10-13-1884]
§ 216-1. Use for certain purposes prohibited.
The Selectmen shall be restrained from letting the Public Square for
circuses or any other purpose that may deface the same.
§ 216-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-1
216:263

ARTICLE II
Bicycles on Sidewalks
[Adopted 10-13-1890]
§ 216-2. Bicycle riding on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall be permitted to ride a bicycle on any of the sidewalks of the
Town.
§ 216-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any persons violating the provisions of the preceding section shall pay, for
each offense, a penalty of not more than $5 and not less than $1.
§ 216-2 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-3
216:265

ARTICLE III
Street Excavations
[Adopted 5-20-1958; amended in its entirety 6-12-199152]
§ 216-4. General provisions.
This article shall govern all excavation within the right-of-way of any public
street, highway, sewer or drainage right-of-way of the Town of Branford.
§ 216-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — An individual, partnership or corporation approved by the
Town Engineer to excavate within the Town highway or street.
HIGHWAY — A street, public way or public right-of-way maintained by the
Town, including the entire width between the street lines or right-of-way
lines.
INSPECTOR — The person duly authorized by the Town Engineer or
Director of Public Works who shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
in accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
TOWN — The Town of Branford, Connecticut, or any board, commission,
officer or agent duly authorized to act for it.
§ 216-6. Permit required; application.
A. No portion of any highway shall be excavated until the contractor has
obtained a permit from the Town in accordance with the provisions
described in these rules and regulations All work shall be performed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Application for permit.
(1) All applications for permits for work governed by these rules and
regulations shall be directed to the Town Engineer for approval.
(2) All applications for permits shall be made on a form prescribed by
the Town Engineer and shall contain all information necessary for
the Town Engineer to evaluate the application for compliance with
these regulations. The Town Engineer shall make the determination
as to what information is required.
(3) Application Fee. The application shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee from Appendix A.53
C. Work performed under contract for the Town of Branford shall be subject
to all requirements of these regulations except that the application fee
and the cash deposit shall be waived.
§ 216-7. Insurance; bonding; restoration deposit.
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that these provisions become effective 9-1-1991.
53.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 216-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-7
216:267
A. Before a permit is granted, the applicant may be required to provide
the Town Engineer with a permit bond. This is required to ensure the
faithful performance of the work contemplated. The bond shall be an
insurance bond issued by an approved surety company licensed in the
state, a passbook in the name of the Town of Branford or a letter of
credit issued with the Town of Branford as beneficiary. It shall be for a
minimum of $2,000 and vary upward on larger projects as required by
the Town Engineer. The bond shall be kept in force for the duration of
the excavation and for a period of one year after final inspection of the
work.
B. The contractor shall produce evidence satisfactory to the Town Engineer
of insurance as will protect him from claims set forth below which
may arise out of or result from the contractor's execution of the work,
whether such execution be by himself or by a subcontractor or by
anyone directly employed by any of them, or by anyone for whose acts
any of them may be liable.
(1) Claims under workmen's compensation, disability benefit and other
similar employee benefit acts.
(2) Claims for damage because of bodily injury, sickness, disease or
death of any person other than his employee.
(3) Claims for damages because of injury to or destruction of tangible
property, including loss of use resulting therefrom.
C. Certificates of insurance acceptable to the Town Engineer shall be filed
with the Engineering Department prior to the issuance of a permit for
the work. These certificates shall contain a provision that coverages
afforded under the policies shall not be cancelled unless 30 days' prior
written notice has been given to the Engineering Department.
D. The contractor shall procure and maintain, at his own expense, liability
insurance as hereinafter specified:
(1) Comprehensive general liability insurance issued to the contractor
and protecting him from all claims for bodily injury, including death,
and all claims for destruction of or damage to property arising out
of or in connection with any operations under the permit, whether
such operations be by himself or by any subcontractor under him
or anyone directly or indirectly employed by the contractor or by a
subcontractor under such employee. This insurance shall be written
for a limit of liability of not less than $300,000 each occurrence for
bodily injury and $100,000 each occurrence for property damage.
(2) Automobile liability insurance issued to the contractor and
protecting him from all claims for bodily injury and property damage
liability in connection with any operations under the permit for a
limit of not less than $500,000 each accident.
E. The contractor shall procure and maintain, at his own expense, during
the permit time, in accordance with the laws of the State of Connecticut,
workers compensation insurance, including occupational disease
provision, for his employees at the site of the project, and in case any
work is sublet, the contractor shall require such subcontractor similarly
to provide workmen's compensation insurance, including occupational
disease provision for all the latter's employees unless such employees
§ 216-7 BRANFORD CODE § 216-7
216:268
are covered by the protection afforded by the contractor. In case any
class of employees engaged in hazardous work is not protected under
workmen's compensation statutes, the contractor shall provide and shall
cause each subcontractor to provide adequate and suitable insurance for
the protection of his employees not otherwise protected.
F. The contractor shall provide the Town Engineer with a certificate of
insurance designating the Town Engineer and the Town of Branford and
its agents as additional insured.
G. In addition to the permit bond, a cash deposit in the amount of $2,000
shall be maintained to cover the cost of all repairs made by the Town
of Branford or a contractor engaged by the Town of Branford. This
deposit shall also cover the cost of the permanent pavement which will
be installed by the Town of Branford and any repairs which might occur
because of settlement of the trench during the one-year period in which
the contractor is responsible. As the account is drawn down to less than
50% of its original value, the Town shall notify the contractor that no
additional street excavation permits will be issued until the account is
returned to the required amount. The Town Engineer may require an
amount in excess of the minimum required if he deems it necessary to
cover a larger proposal or several anticipated excavations.
H. The contractor will indemnify and hold harmless the Town, its
Engineering Department and its agents and employees from and against
all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including attorney's fees,
arising out of or resulting from the performance of work pursuant to or
within the scope of this article, provided that any such claims, damage,
loss or expense attributable to bodily injury, sickness, disease or death
or injury to or destruction of tangible property, including the loss of use
resulting therefrom, is caused in whole or in part by any negligent or
willful act or omission of the contractor, any subcontractor or anyone
for whose acts any of them may be liable. Additional policies of owner's
protective liability and builder's risk coverage on larger projects may
also be required in addition to the above hold-harmless clause at the
discretion of the Town Engineer, the limits of such insurance to be
determined by the Town Engineer.
I. In any and all claims against the Town Of Branford, its Engineering
Department, the Town Engineer or any of their agents or employees by
any employee of the contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly or
indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them
may be liable, the indemnification obligation shall not be limited in any
way by any limitation on the amount or type of damages, compensation
or benefits payable by or for the contractor or any subcontractor under
workmen's compensation acts, disability benefit acts or other employee
benefits acts.
§ 216-8. Performance standards.
A. The contractor shall give written notice to the Town Engineer of his
intent to begin work at least one business day prior to commencement
of work.
§ 216-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-8
216:269
B. The contractor shall comply with all requirements of the "Call Before
You Dig" regulations of the State of Connecticut.
C. All excavation shall be by open cut, with no tunnelling unless special
circumstances require otherwise and prior written approval has been
obtained from the Town Engineer.
D. Trench box and/or sheeting shall be utilized as required by Occupational
Safety and Health Administration regulations to maintain safe working
conditions in and around the area of the excavation and additionally as
directed by the Town Engineer or his designated agent to protect the
highway or adjacent properties.
E. All backfilling shall conform to the specifications and regulations
hereinafter specified.
(1) All excavations shall be backfilled with bank-run gravel, processed
stone or native material meeting the requirements of the Town
Engineer or Inspector. If native material is employed, a minimum of
12 inches of compacted bank-run gravel or processed stone shall be
installed below the pavement.
(2) Backfill shall be properly compacted in lifts as directed by the Town
Engineer or Inspector so as to prevent settling of the finished grade.
The contractor shall be responsible for repairing any settlement for
a period of one year after final inspection of the work.
(3) Any leftover material or debris shall be removed from the worksite
and the site returned to a safe and presentable condition and in
a condition at least equal to the condition it was prior to
commencement of the work.
F. During the progress of the work, the contractor shall conduct his
operations and maintain the area of his activities so as to minimize
the creation of and dispersion of dust. It may be necessary to use
sprinkling or sweeping of streets or application of calcium chloride for
effective dust control; the Inspector may require such measures during
the course of construction.
G. Blasting shall be performed by persons qualified to do so by the State
of Connecticut only after obtaining a permit from the Fire Marshal.
All blasting shall be conducted with all possible care to avoid injury to
persons and property. Blasting shall be done only with such quantities
and strengths of explosives and in such manner as will break the rock
to approximately the intended line and grade. Care should be taken to
prevent injury to existing pipes or other structures above or property
aboveground or below-ground. The rock shall be covered with mats
where required so as to prevent damage or injury to property or persons.
Sufficient warning shall be given to all persons in the vicinity of the work
before a charge is exploded.
H. All excavations shall be dewatered as necessary to maintain a dry work
environment. Discharges for dewatering equipment shall be installed
into storm drains or as approved by the Town Engineer with measures
employed to prevent erosion and siltation.
I. The contractor shall notify the Town Engineer as each stage of work
is started and the estimated time of completion. The contractor shall
§ 216-8 BRANFORD CODE § 216-8
216:270
not close any work until the Inspector has inspected and approved each
phase of the work.
§ 216-9. Restoration of damage.
A. After all damaged pavement has been removed and all edges have a
cleancut vertical face, a temporary pavement patch two inches thick of
Class 2 bituminous concrete shall be spread and rolled to form a smooth
surface with the existing highway. During the time of year in which the
asphalt plants are shut down, a two-inch course of Class 5 shall be used
in lieu of the Class 2.
B. The contractor shall be responsible for the cost to repair any and all
damages to curbs, sidewalks, roads and property of the Town of Branford
and adjacent private property caused by the contractor, his agents,
employees, subcontractors and their agents or employees. All repairs to
damage shall be done to the complete satisfaction of the Inspector.
C. After installation of the temporary patch, the Town or a contractor
selected by the Town shall perform any work to correct or maintain the
temporary patch, complete any unfinished work and, within six months
of the installation of the temporary patch and after a proper settling
period, install the permanent patch. The cost of this work to the Town
shall be deducted from the cash deposit.
D. The contractor shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any trench
settlement for a period of one year from the date of final inspection.
E. The contractor shall grade, loam, seed and mulch any unpaved areas
disturbed by his activity on the site.
F. The contractor shall maintain all erosion control measures in functional
condition until stabilization of all erodible areas.
G. The Town Engineer may require the contractor to compensate the Town
for or make repairs to any paved areas not in the immediate vicinity
of the construction that have been damaged by the activities of the
contractor or as a result of his activities.
§ 216-10. Safety requirements.
A. Traffic safety.
(1) The contractor shall install barricades, warning signs and lights as
necessary so as to adequately warn traffic of the work in progress.
(2) The contractor shall provide flagmen as necessary to aid traffic flow
or as directed by the Town Engineer or Police Department.
(3) The Town Engineer may require that the contractor devise a traffic
control plan. This plan shall be subject to the approval of the Town
Engineer who may also require review and approval by the Police
Department at his discretion.
B. Pedestrian safety. At all times, the excavation shall be protected to
prevent pedestrian access to the construction area. At the close of the
work each day, the contractor shall secure the area to prevent access to
the site by pedestrians. Warning light barricades, signs and tape shall be
used as necessary.
C. In the interest of maintaining a safe construction site, the hours of work
shall be limited to normal business hours unless approved by the Town
§ 216-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-10
216:271
Engineer. In the event that after-hours work is approved, the contractor
shall reimburse the Town for all overtime costs incurred by providing
after-hours inspection of the work.
D. Emergency repairs may be made as necessary without regard to the
hours of work requirement above, provided that the Police Department
is notified upon commencement of any work that is performed under this
section and of any hazardous condition that exists. The contractor shall
still be responsible to reimburse the Town for any costs incurred as a
result of emergency work in connection with the project.
E. The Town may make any repair or correction it deems necessary in the
interest of public safety at any time. The contractor shall be responsible
for the full cost of any work performed under this section.
§ 216-11. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any contractor who violates any provision of these regulations shall be
liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage which may be caused
to the Town highway or property by reason of such violation.
B. Any contractor violating any provision of these regulations shall be given
a written notice by the Town Engineer stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The contractor shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, correct such violation. If a hazardous condition exists as
determined by the Town Engineer, the contractor shall respond within
24 hours of verbal notification.
C. Any contractor who continues to violate any provision of these
regulations after the time limit specified in a notice given in accordance
with Subsection B above has expired shall be fined not more than
$100 for each offense. Each day that the violation of these regulations
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense for the purpose of
the penalty.
D. The Town Engineer may refuse to issue any permits to a contractor who
is in violation of any provisions of these regulations until such time as
satisfactory compliance is obtained.
E. The permit shall expire and become void 30 days from the date of
issuance if the contractor does not perform any work during that time.
When a permit becomes void, it is the responsibility of the contractor to
reapply and obtain a new permit before any work is performed.
F. The cancellation of the bond or insurance shall automatically void any
permit which has been issued.
§ 216-12. Release of bond and deposit.
Request for refund of cash deposits. If the contractor wishes to terminate
his excavation activities in the Town of Branford once he has posted his
cash deposit, insurance and bond and wishes to have the balance of his
cash deposit returned, he must formally request this, in writing, from the
Town Engineer. The written request shall provide the permit number and
location of any excavation by the contractor during the twelve-month period
preceding the request or, if none during this period, the permit number and
location of the most recent excavation he has done. Once the twelve-month
§ 216-10 BRANFORD CODE § 216-12
216:272
maintenance responsibility on all the permits has expired and the Town
Engineer has determined that all costs incurred by the contractor have been
deducted from the cash deposit, the Town Engineer may return the balance
to the contractor.
§ 216-13. Waiver of bond.
The following may make a written request to the Town Engineer to waive
the performance bond and cash deposit, provided that they agree to
maintain the excavation and place and maintain the permanent pavement
as provided in § 216-9B and C. This permanent pavement shall consist of
a three-inch base and a one-and-one-half inch finished course. The base
course shall be Class 1 mix and the finished course shall be Class 2 mix
unless otherwise directed by the Town Engineer. The work is to conform
to the Town of Branford standards and comply with all other conditions of
these rules and regulations, including obtaining a permit and paying the
application fee.
A. Public utilities duly licensed by the State of Connecticut.
B. Contractors or developers working on road in subdivisions or other
developments approved and bonded by the Town of Branford Planning
and Zoning Commission where the road has not been dedicated to the
Town of Branford.
§ 216-13.1. Interpretation.
In case a question arises as to the interpretation of these regulations, the
decision of the Town Engineer shall be final.
§ 216-13.2. Severability; effective date.
A. These regulations shall become effective September 1, 1991.
B. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall
for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decree or
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining portion of
this article.
§ 216-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-13.2
216:273

ARTICLE IV
Highway Specifications
[Adopted 8-11-1976]
§ 216-14. General standards and requirements.
All highways hereafter to be accepted by the Town of Branford must be
constructed according to the following standards and requirements:
A. Such highway shall be at least 50 feet wide.
B. It shall be surveyed and a map thereof, certified by a licensed surveyor,
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
C. It shall be marked with permanent bounds which are to be shown on said
map.
D. It shall be properly graded to shed water, and water conditions shall be
corrected by suitable subdrainage and such catch basins or other forms
of construction as may be required.
E. It shall have a paved surface at least 30 feet wide, curb to curb.
§ 216-15. Conformance with section drawing required.
Such highway shall be in accordance with the section drawing on file in the
Town Engineer's office and conform to the following specifications.
§ 216-16. Cross section.
Pavements shall be constructed with a crown with a cross slope of 1/4 inch
per foot. A ten-foot sidewalk area shall be provided and graded on each side
of the pavement. The sidewalk area shall be graded level with the top of
the curb and shall be loamed and seeded. The Town Engineer may require
modification of this grading requirement in order to preserve substantial
existing trees.
§ 216-17. Preparation of subgrade.
Preparation of subgrade. All trees and roots shall be stripped, to below the
base course of the pavement and for the full width of the pavement. All soft
spots, peat, loam, organic material, soft clay, spongy soil, boulders, ledges
and other unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced by material
approved by the Town Engineer. All fill that is placed to an elevation
of less than three feet above the water table at the time of filling shall
consist of rock or free-draining soil meeting State Highway Department
specifications. Where ledge rock is encountered, it shall be removed to
a depth of one foot below subgrade and the area backfilled with gravel.
Embankments shall be constructed of suitable fill material deposited in
successive layers not exceeding 12 inches in depth. The subgrade shall be
compacted by distributing the hauling over the area by the use of tread-type
of equipment, by power rollers of at least 10 tons or by other mechanical
means approved by the Town Engineer.
§ 216-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-18
216:275
§ 216-18. Installation of gas and water services.
Gas and water services, if available, shall be installed for each lot to
the curbline or beyond as required by the utility company before the
construction required by the next hereinafter subsection is started.
§ 216-19. Subbase.
A. After subgrade has been rolled and brought to a uniform surface and
approved by the engineer, there shall be spread eight inches of bank-run
gravel compacted by a three-wheeled ten-ton roller to a uniform surface,
rolling until there is no further movement of compacted gravel.
B. All bank-run gravel shall be from an accepted pit and shall meet the
graduations of the Connecticut State Highway Department
specifications.
C. In lieu of bank-run gravel, select material may be used, provided that its
quality uniformly meets the required standards in terms of bearing ratio
and from susceptibility as approved by the Town Engineer.
§ 216-20. Base course.
A. Upon the completed subbase, a course of bituminous concrete binder,
Class IV, Connecticut State Highway Specifications Form 809, shall be
spread to a depth of three inches when compacted. This shall be placed
and compacted in accordance with Connecticut Highway Specifications
Form 809.
B. In lieu of the binder, a course of penetration macadam may be placed
according to the following specifications:
(1) Upon completed bottom course of bank run of gravel or crusherrun
stone, a course of 2 1/4 inches broken stone shall be placed to
a depth that, when compacted with a three-wheeled ten-ton roller,
shall be a uniform four inches in depth. Upon this compacted
surface, there shall be spread two gallons per square yard of paving
asphalt, 85-120 penetration, using a pressure distributor. The face
of the concrete curbing shall be protected at all times from being
disfigured by oil application.
(2) Over this oiled surface there shall be spread one-half-inch stone in
an amount to completely fill all voids, rolling the same with a tenton
roller. The rate of application shall be between 48 pounds and 54
pounds per square yard.
§ 216-21. Certificate of occupancy.
There shall be no certificate of occupancy issued for any residence until the
phases of construction provided for in the previous sections are completed
to such extent as to provide access to such residence.
§ 216-22. Surface course.
When the base course has been completed with the provisions of the
hereinbefore, a surface course of bituminous concrete shall be spread and
compacted to a thickness of 1 1/2 inches and shall be placed over the entire
§ 216-18 BRANFORD CODE § 216-22
216:276
travelled portion of the road. Bituminous concrete shall be in conformity
with State of Connecticut Highway Specifications Form 809, Section 4.04.
The base and surface course shall not be laid between October 1 and May
1 or when the temperature is below 50° F., unless written permission is
obtained from the Town Engineer.
§ 216-23. Curbs.
On each side of such highway and 15 feet from the center line, there shall be
installed a concrete curbing in accordance with the section drawing on file
in the Town Engineer's office. Said curbing shall conform to the following
specifications:
A. Joints and forms.
(1) Concrete shall be one-to-two-to-four mix. One-half-inch expansion
joint material shall be placed every 50 linear feet.
(2) One-eighth-inch contraction joints shall be installed every 10 feet.
Steel plates shall be used or alternate sections shall be poured.
(3) Expansion joints shall be held plumb and in a true plane for full depth
and width of section.
(4) Forms shall be wood or steel, of sufficient strength and with proper
bracing to maintain perfect shape and alignment. Forms shall be
oiled with nonstaining oil.
(5) Concrete shall be well spaded to prevent honeycombs.
B. Bituminous concrete curbs are to be used on the curved portion of any
temporary turnarounds and at the curved portions of any intersection
with an existing highway which has not been built to present highway
standards. This curbing shall be built to conform to the specifications of
Subsection C.
C. Bituminous concrete may be used for such curbing under the following
conditions:
(1) The developer shall post with the Town Engineer, in an amount
acceptable to the Town Engineer, a maintenance bond for such
curbing, issued by a surety company licensed to do business in
Connecticut, guaranteeing the maintenance of such curbing for a
period of two years after acceptance of such road by the Town of
Branford.
(2) Such bituminous concrete shall conform to the following standards
and specifications (references are to the standard specifications of
the Connecticut Department of Transportation for Roads and
Bridges and Incidental Construction):
(a) Materials for this work shall conform to the requirements of
Article 4.03.02 for hot asphalt concrete or Article 4.06.02 for
dense graded bituminous concrete.
(b) The construction methods for the bituminous concrete lip
curbing shall conform to the requirements described in Article
4.03.03 or 4.06.03 as supplemented by the following
requirements:
[1] Prior to the arrival of the mixture on the work, the surface
of the pavement where the bituminous concrete lip curbing
is to be constructed shall have been cleaned of all loose and
§ 216-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-23
216:277
foreign material. The surface shall be perfectly dry and clean
at the time the mix is placed and shall be coated with an
R.C.-2 or other approved bitumen just before the arrival of
the mixture.
[2] Upon arrival at the site, the mixture shall be deposited
directly in place or on platforms outside the area on which
it is to be spread and shall then be immediately distributed
into place by suitable means. The mixture shall be kept clean
and free from dirt or foreign materials at all times. It shall
be compacted to the required cross section by the use of
suitable iron tampers weighing not less than 12 pounds and
having a bearing area not exceeding 50 square inches, or by
means of a roller weighing not less than 150 pounds per foot
of tread. The surface of the lip curbing shall be tested with
a ten-foot straight edge laid parallel with the center line of
the road, and any variations from a true profile exceeding 1/
4 inch shall be satisfactorily corrected.
(c) After the completion of the lip curbing, traffic shall be kept at a
safe distance for a period of not less than 24 hours and until the
curbing has set sufficiently to prevent injury to the work.
§ 216-24. Turnarounds.
A. Any such road ending at a dead end shall have, at such dead end,
a turnaround consisting of a circular area not less than 120 feet in
diameter, the surface of which shall meet the foregoing requirements.
B. Where acceptable to the Town Engineer, an island suitably landscaped
and enclosed with a curbing may be installed within the turnaround.
§ 216-25. Underdrains.
The Town Engineer may require the installation of underdrains beneath the
street pavement where necessary to protect the stability of the pavement.
§ 216-26. Slopes.
Cut or fill sections beyond the sidewalk area shall not exceed a slope of
one on two except in rock. The Town Engineer may require a decrease
in the amount of slope to whatever extent is necessary to maintain the
stability of the bank under the particular soil conditions. All earth surfaces
of slopes and areas that have been disturbed in any way due to grading and
construction of the streets shall be covered with a minimum of four inches
of topsoil and suitably seeded or planted to prevent soil erosion. The Town
Engineer may require the removal or lowering of embankments adjacent
to street intersections in order to assure adequate sight distance at the
intersection. No cut or fill sections beyond the sidewalk area shall extend
into property outside the subdivision or property not owned by the applicant
unless appropriate slope rights are obtained for the Town. In the absence
of such slope rights, appropriate retaining walls shall be constructed within
the subdivision to prevent encroachment upon the adjoining property.
§ 216-23 BRANFORD CODE § 216-27
216:278
§ 216-27. Construction procedures.
Line and grade stakes shall not be spaced more than 50 feet apart and shall
be set by a land surveyor or engineer and maintained in good order during
construction and until the street is approved by the Town Engineer. No
street shall be opened or used for travel until it shall have been approved by
the Town Engineer. All water mains, sewers, pipes and other underground
utility lines shall be installed prior to placing the base course. Whenever
possible, underground utility lines shall be installed outside the pavement
portion of the street.
§ 216-28. Removal of debris and equipment.
All large rocks, boulders, felled trees, stumps and brush shall be removed
from the street right-of-way. All temporary structures, tools, equipment
and waste materials shall be removed from the street right-of-way upon
completion of the work.
§ 216-29. Storm drainage.
Storm drainage shall be constructed in accordance with the following
standards:
A. All pipe shall meet State Highway Department specifications. Reinforced
concrete pipe shall be used for surface drainage stormwater systems
and cross culverts. Where vertical clearance is limited, and on grades in
excess of 10% or where uneven support may be expected, A.C.C.M. pipe
or pipe arches shall be used. All pipe shall be bedded carefully on soil
approved by the Town Engineer. There shall be a four-inch sand cushion
bedded under the pipe on any rock or ledge formation.
B. All open drainage ditches, except stream relocations or improvements,
shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches, a maximum depth of three
feet and a maximum slope of 1 1/2. If required by the Commission or
the Town Engineer, ditches shall be paved either with two inches of hot
bituminous concrete thoroughly compacted on an eight-inch gravel base
or with 1/3 sections or reinforced concrete pipe. All ditches shall be
constructed as approved by the Town Engineer.
C. The joints of all pipe shall be shoved tight. Pipe laid in sandy, silty
or other soil in which, in the judgment of the Town Engineer, there is
danger of washing or cave-ins shall have joints thoroughly sealed with
one-to-three concrete mortar.
D. Catch basins and manholes. Catch basin and manhole types shall be
approved by the Town Engineer and constructed in conformity with
Connecticut State Highway standard specifications. Catch basins may be
depressed slightly to facilitate the collection of water.
E. Backfill. Where the drainage pipe is necessary to serve as an underdrain
for the street or to control the water table, the pipe shall be bedded on
at least six inches of one-inch washed stone; three-fourths-inch washed
stone shall be placed around and over the pipe to a height of six inches
and then covered by heavy tar paper and backfilled with bank-run gravel.
§ 216-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-29
216:279
Backfill for all other pipe shall be tamped pneumatically every 12 inches
in even layers.
F. Construction procedure. All pipe shall be laid to line and grade as shown
on approved drainage plans and profiles. Line and grade stakes shall be
set by a land surveyor or engineer and shall be maintained in good order
until the work has been inspected and approved by the Town Engineer.
Four batter boards (three sections) shall be maintained in place at all
times when laying pipe and shall not be spaced more than 30 feet apart.
The exact grade for each pipe shall be maintained. No pipe shall be
laid on water, and water shall not be permitted to rise over freshly
mortared joints until they are properly hardened. Ground- or surface
water accumulating in the trench must be pumped out.
§ 216-30. Guard posts.
Guard posts or guide railings shall be installed at all drainage headwalls in
the right-of-way and along all streets where there will be an embankment
with a depth of four feet or more within 20 feet of the proposed pavement.
Creosoted or cedar guard posts shall be spaced six feet on center and shall
have a minimum tip diameter of five inches and a minimum length of seven
feet with 3 1/2 feet set in the ground. Subject to the approval of the Town
Engineer, three-cable guide railing, metal-beam-type guide railing or steel
guard posts of suitable design may be substituted for the creosoted or cedar
guard posts.
§ 216-31. Supervision and inspection.
Construction of all required improvements shall be carried out under the
supervision of the Town Engineer and the Board of Selectmen and shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the Town Engineer and the Board of
Selectmen or their authorized agent. The Town Engineer or his agent shall
be notified when any preliminary grading of streets has been completed
and upon completion of subgrade preparation and shall be notified at
least 48 hours prior to installation of the gravel subbase course and any
base and surface course. No pipe, catch basin, manhole or other structure
shall be backfilled until inspected and approved by the Town Engineer
or his agent. The Town Engineer or his authorized agent shall have free
access to the construction work at all times and shall be authorized to take
material samples, cores and other tests as deemed necessary to determine
compliance with these regulations. The Town Engineer may require the
applicant, at his own expense, to have such tests made and certified by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
§ 216-32. Bond.
A. The developer shall, upon approval of his plans, file with the Town
Engineer a bond to guarantee completion of the road within two years.
The bond shall be in form and amount and with surety acceptable to the
Town Engineer and Town Counsel and shall be a surety bond, executed
by a surety company authorized to enter into such bond in the State of
Connecticut.
§ 216-29 BRANFORD CODE § 216-32
216:280
B. Release of bond. No bond shall be released until the improvements
covered by such bond have been inspected by the Town Engineer. For
purposes of maintenance and to cover unforeseen deficiencies, a portion
of any subdivision bond shall not be released until one year after
completion of required subdivision improvements, and the amount of
such portion shall be determined by the Commission with the
recommendation of the Town Engineer. The applicant, however, may post
a new bond to cover the required portion of the original bond.
§ 216-33. Materials and workmanship.
Materials and workmanship shall be of good quality and in all respects
satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer.
§ 216-34. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any road maintained by the Town prior to this
date or to any road detailed on a subdivision plan approved prior to this
date by the Planning and Zoning Commission for which grading, drainage
and subbase have been constructed or for which a bond has been accepted,
nor to any road started prior to this date upon which a house or houses
shall have been built, provided that their exclusion shall not apply to the
portion of said road lying beyond said house or houses. These roads may
be completed in accordance with the specifications existing at the time
the work commenced, or they can complete their roads in accordance with
these specifications.
§ 216-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-34
216:281

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 10-10-198454]
§ 216-35. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 7-117, 7-118 and 7-119 of the General
Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended,55 the Town of
Branford hereby adopts and enacts this Sidewalk Ordinance.
§ 216-36. Installation on existing roads.
The Board of Selectmen shall determine where and when sidewalks shall be
installed on existing Town roads in the Town of Branford.
§ 216-37. Specifications and enforcement.
The Town Engineer or his agent shall designate the required specifications
for sidewalks, shall superintend all original construction and repairs and
shall act as Sidewalk Inspector and Enforcement Officer.
§ 216-38. Financing.
Except as hereinafter set forth, the Town of Branford shall pay the entire
cost of original installation of sidewalks from an annual capital
improvement appropriation to be requested in the annual budget.
§ 216-39. Installation procedure.
A. Citizens may request the Town Engineer to investigate the need for
sidewalks, or the Town Engineer may suggest sidewalk construction
proposals.
B. Any property owner may apply for a permit to build a sidewalk on Town
property, said application to be made to the Town Engineer. If with the
advice of the Town Engineer, the Board of Selectmen finds that the
sidewalk is not necessary, the Town will not pay the cost. Subject to the
approval of the Board of Selectmen, the property owner may build the
sidewalk at his own expense in accordance with the specifications of the
Town Engineer.
§ 216-40. Bids.
A. Preparation of bids. The Town Engineer will prepare the necessary
engineering information upon which bids will be based, including
grades, elevations, specifications for paving material, retaining walls,
steps, curbs, driveways, loam, seeding, fill, guardrails and excavation,
etc., to furnish an installation to the satisfaction of the Town.
54.Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted 10-10-1984 is a compilation and revision of previous
ordinances adopted 9-12-1961, 1-14-1964, 10-27-1964, 2-13-1974 and 2-10-1982.
55.Editor's Note: Sections 7-117, 7-118 and 7-119 of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
were repealed 1982, P.A. 82-327.
§ 216-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-40
216:283
B. Competitive bidding. The Board of Selectmen will request competitive
bids from contractors for the complete installation of sidewalks in each
area designated.
§ 216-41. Repairs and obstructions. [Amended 3-14-2001]
A. Every person owning any land, upon or adjacent to which there is a
sidewalk, shall keep such sidewalk at all times in a safe and convenient
condition for the use of the public and shall remove therefrom all
obstructions in any way endangering or impeding the public travel upon
the same. Any substantial defect which may constitute a risk to public
safety shall be reported by said property owner to the Director of Public
Works. If deemed necessary, any repairs or replacement shall be the
responsibility of the Town of Branford. Where driveways or other
appurtenant uses are coincident with the sidewalk, any associated costs
for repair or replacement over and above that of the basic sidewalk
construction shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner.
B. All repairs to sidewalks shall be in conformity with such specifications as
may be set by the Town Engineer from time to time.
C. If, after notice, the property owner fails to comply with Subsection A
hereof, the Board of Selectmen shall cause the same to be done at
the expense of the property owner. Said expense shall be a lien upon
the premises adjoining such sidewalk, and the Selectmen shall cause a
certificate of lien to be recorded in the Town Clerk's office within 60 days
from the incurring of such expense.
§ 216-42. Snow and ice removal.
A. Snow and ice removal. [Amended 3-12-1997]
(1) The owner, tenant, occupant or any person having the care of any
land or building adjoining any sidewalk or gutter shall, after the
cessation of any storm of snow, ice or sleet, if in the daytime, within
eight hours, and if in the night, before 11:00 a.m. in the forenoon
succeeding, cause the same to be removed from so much of such
sidewalk as shall be paved, concreted, cemented or worked. If the
same cannot be wholly removed as required by this section, the
owner, tenant, occupant or person having the care of such land shall
sprinkle and keep thereon sand or other proper substance so that
such sidewalk shall be and remain safe for travel, until such time as
said snow, ice or sleet can be thoroughly removed therefrom when
it shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, occupant or persons having
the care of such land to forthwith remove the same.
(2) After the expiration of the time limited as aforesaid for removing
such snow, ice or sleet, the Selectmen shall cause the same to be
removed and the expense thereof shall be a lien upon the premises
adjoining such sidewalk. The Selectmen shall cause a certificate of
lien to be recorded in the Town Clerk's office within 60 days from the
completion of such removal.
B. No property owner shall permit snow or ice, removed from his property,
to be placed on any public highway of the Town of Branford in such
manner or to such an extent as to unreasonably impede or cause
§ 216-40 BRANFORD CODE § 216-42
216:284
inconvenience to travel on the public highways in the Town of Branford.
[Amended 3-12-1997]
C. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, sump pumps and
footing drains and other open areas on any property owner's property
shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. For
purposes of this subsection, "public nuisance" means any discharge as
set forth above that causes a health or safety hazard or unreasonably
impedes or causes inconvenience to travel of public highways in the
Town of Branford. [Added 2-27-200756]
D. Every person or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
section shall pay a penalty of $25 for each such violation. Each day
that such violation shall continue shall be considered a separate offense.
[Amended 5-14-1996]
E. The provisions of Public Act No. 81-340 are hereby adopted and are set
forth in Subsection E(1), (2) and (3) below:
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13a-149 of the General
Statutes or any other general statutes, or any other general statute
or special act, the Town of Branford shall not be liable to any person
injured in person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow
on a public sidewalk unless the Town of Branford is the owner or
the person in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk,
other than land used as a highway or street, provided that the Town
of Branford shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such
sidewalk.
(2) The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a
public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to
the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk abutting his property
as the municipality had prior to the effective date of this section,
adopted pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 81-340 and shall
be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of
said duty is the proximate cause of said injury.
(3) No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property
caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against
a person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a
public sidewalk be brought but within two years from the date when
the injury is first sustained.
§ 216-43. Installation of sidewalks in subdivisions.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have jurisdiction over the
installation of sidewalks in subdivisions and may, on its own initiative,
order sidewalks installed in any subdivision at the expense of the developer
thereof, said sidewalk to be constructed in accordance with specifications
on file with the Town Engineer's office. Said sidewalk shall be installed no
closer than four feet from the aforementioned curb, and said sidewalk shall
be at least five feet in width. The area between said curb and sidewalk shall
be loamed, graded and seeded with grass.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C and D as
Subsections D and E, respectively.
§ 216-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 216-43
216:285
Chapter 220
TAXATION
§ 216-43 BRANFORD CODE § 216-43
216:286
ARTICLE I
Tax-Exempt Organizations
[Adopted 12-11-1968, amended in its entirety 6-9-1976]
§ 220-1. Effective date of property tax exemption.
Pursuant to Section 12-81b of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
property tax exemption authorized by Subsections 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16 and 17 of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be
effective as of the date of acquisition of the property to which the exemption
applies.
§ 220-2. Reimbursement for overpayment.
In cases where, at the transfer of title of the property subject to a tax
exemption, the tax-exempt organization pays taxes on said property for
a period subsequent to the date of acquisition, it shall be entitled to be
reimbursed for the same upon submission of proof of said payment to the
Tax Assessor. Upon receipt of said proof, the Tax Assessor shall notify the
Tax Collector in writing of such reimbursement as may be due said taxexempt
organization, who shall make note of the same on his records.
Thereafter, the Treasurer shall disburse to said tax-exempt organization the
amount of said reimbursement.
§ 220-3. Reimbursement of prior owner.
In cases where, at the transfer of title of the property subject to a tax
exemption, the tax-exempt organization reimburses the prior owner of said
property for the amount of any tax paid by said owner for a period
subsequent to the date of acquisition by said tax-exempt organization, it
shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the same, upon submission of proof
of said payment to the Tax Assessor, who shall notify the Tax Collector in
writing of such reimbursement as may be due said tax-exempt organization,
who shall make note of the same on his record. Thereafter the Treasurer
shall disburse to said tax-exempt organization the amount of said
reimbursement.
§ 220-4. Application for reimbursement.
Application for reimbursement under §§ 220-2 and 220-3 of this article must
be made by said tax-exempt organization within 60 days of the transfer of
title of the property subject to exemption.
§ 220-5. Applicability.
This article shall only apply to acquisition occurring after the date of its
adoption.
§ 220-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-5
216:287

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Solar Energy Systems
[Adopted 3-9-1977]
§ 220-6. Definitions. [Amended 8-8-2007]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEM — Equipment
which:
PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEM — A system
which utilizes the structural elements of a building for the collection of
incident solar energy and its storage and distribution for use in water
heating or space heating or cooling, which building absent such system
would require a conventional energy resource such as petroleum products,
natural gas or electricity, and which system meets standards established
by regulation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 54 of the
Connecticut General Statutes by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and
Management.
HYBRID SYSTEM — A solar energy heating or cooling system which
consists of both active and passive elements and which meets the standards
established for both.
§ 220-7. Exempt granted. [Amended 8-8-2007]
The following described property shall be exempt from taxation:
A. Any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after
October 1, 1976, which is equipped with an active solar energy heating
or cooling system, or any building to which a solar energy heating or
cooling system is added on after October 1, 1976, to the extent of the
amount by which the assessed valuation of such real property equipped
with such solar energy heating or cooling system exceeds the assessed
valuation of such real property equipped with the conventional portion
of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such system
related to solar energy, provided that this exemption shall only apply to
the first 15 assessment years following construction of such building or
addition of any such system to a building.
Provides for the collection, transfer, storage and use of incident solar
energy for water heating, space heating or cooling which, absent such
solar energy system, would require a conventional energy resource
such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity;
A.
Employs mechanical means such as fans or pumps to transfer energy;
and
B.
Meets standards established by regulation in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 54 of the Connecticut General Statutes by the
Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management.
C.
§ 220-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-7
216:289
B. Any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after April
20, 1977, which is equipped with a passive or hybrid solar energy
heating or cooling system, or any building to which such a system is
added on after April 20, 1977, to the extent of any amount by which the
assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such a system
exceeds the valuation at which such real property would be assessed if
built using conventional construction techniques in lieu of construction
related to such a system, as determined by the assessing officer of
the municipality, provided that this exemption shall only apply to the
first 15 assessment years following construction of such building or
addition of any such system to a building. Any portion of a hybrid
solar energy heating or cooling system which is allowed an exemption
pursuant to Subsection A above shall not be eligible for exemption under
this § 220-7B.
§ 220-8. Application for exemption.
Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this article shall
file with the Assessor within 30 days following the annual assessment date
written application claiming such exemption on a form as prescribed by the
State Tax Commissioner. Failure to file such application in said manner and
form within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right
to such exemption for the assessment year.
§ 220-7 BRANFORD CODE § 220-8
216:290
ARTICLE III
Motor Vehicles Tax
[Adopted 2-15-1978; amended in its entirety 3-3-2011]
§ 220-9. Payment of tax.
A. Pursuant to Section 12-114a of the Connecticut General Statutes, any tax
due the Town of Branford on motor vehicles levied in accordance with
the provisions of Section 12-71b shall be due and payable in a single
installment.
B. The Town authorizes pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-146 the requirement that
any delinquent property taxes with respect to motor vehicles be paid in
cash or by cashier’s check or money order when a release is requested
for the Department of Motor Vehicles.
C. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Sections 7-148 and 12-166, a
fee of $2 shall be imposed on any delinquent property tax or installment
thereof on any motor vehicle, which delinquency has been reported
to the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of the State of Connecticut
according to the provisions of Section 14-33 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. This must be paid before such tax is deemed to be
satisfied. [Added 9-11-2013]
§ 220-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-9
216:291

ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Vehicles Owned by Disabled Veterans
[Adopted 9-11-1985]
§ 220-10. Percentage of property tax allowed.
One hundred percent of the assessed value of one motor vehicle owned
by any veteran with a condition of disability enabling such veteran to
qualify for the exemption from property tax allowed under Subdivision 20
or Subdivision 21 of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
the same may have been in effect on June 25, 1985, shall be exempt from
personal property tax, provided that such motor vehicle must be specially
equipped for purposes of adapting its use to the disability of such veteran.
§ 220-11. Applicability.
Such exemption shall be applicable to the assessment year commencing
October 1, 1985, and each assessment year thereafter.
§ 220-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-11
216:293

ARTICLE V
Property Tax Exemption for the Blind
[Adopted 9-11-1985]
§ 220-12. Additional exemption granted; conditions.
Any person entitled to the exemption from property tax applicable to the
assessed value of property up to the amount of $3,000, as provided under
Subdivision 17 of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes, shall
be entitled to an additional exemption from such tax in an amount equal
to $2,000 of such assessed value, provided that the total of such person's
adjusted gross income, as determined for purposes of the federal income
tax, plus any other income of such person not included in such adjusted
gross income, individually if unmarried or jointly if married, in the calendar
year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with respect to
which such additional exemption is allowed, is not more than $14,000 if
such person is married or not more than $12,000 if such person is not
married.
§ 220-13. Application for exemption.
Any person submitting a claim for the additional exemption provided in
§ 220-12 of this article shall file an application on a form prepared for such
purpose by the Assessor, not later than the date of the assessment list with
respect to which such additional exemption is claimed. Such application
shall include a copy of such person's federal income tax return, or in the
event a return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be
required by the Assessor for the tax year of such person ending immediately
prior to the approval of a claim for such additional exemption.
§ 220-14. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to the assessment year commencing October
1, 1985, and each assessment year thereafter.
§ 220-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-14
216:295

ARTICLE VI
Tax Relief for Elderly and Disabled Citizens
[Adopted 6-13-2001; amended in its entirety 9-10-2003]
§ 220-15. Authorization.
The Town of Branford hereby enacts property tax relief for eligible elderly
and/or totally disabled homeowners, pursuant to the authority granted by
Connecticut General Statutes, Section 12-129n, as amended.
§ 220-16. Eligibility.
Any person who is liable for the payment of taxes on residential real estate
and who meets the eligibility requirements of this section shall be entitled,
subject to the limits, if any, of § 220-18 of this article, to tax relief in the
form of a tax deferral, as provided herein.
A. Such person shall be:
(1) Sixty-five years of age or over as of December 31 of the year prior to
his/her application; or
(2) His or her spouse living with said person is 65 years of age or over
as of December 31 of the year prior to his/her application; or
(3) The surviving spouse, 60 years or over as of December 31 of the
year prior to his/her application, of a taxpayer who has qualified in
Branford under this article at the time of his or her death; or
(4) Under the age of 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable
federal regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits
under social security, or have not been engaged in employment
covered by social security and accordingly have not qualified for
benefits thereunder, but have become qualified for permanent total
disability benefits under any federal, state or local government
retirement or disability plan, including the Railroad Retirement Act
and any government-related teacher's retirement plan, in which
requirements with respect to qualifications for such permanent total
disability benefits are comparable to such requirements under social
security.
B. Such person shall have been a taxpayer in the Town of Branford for one
year immediately preceding the receipt of tax benefits under this article.
C. The property for which the exemption is claimed must be the legal
domicile of such person and occupied as his or her principal residence.
D. Such person shall have applied for property tax relief under Connecticut
General Statutes, Sections 12-129b through 12-129d, inclusive, or under
Section 12-170aa. If such applicant has not applied for tax relief from
the state because he/she is not eligible, he/she shall so certify by filing,
on a form acceptable to the Tax Collector, an affidavit testifying to his/
her ineligibility and the basis for such ineligibility.
E. Reapplication each year will not be required, except that in any
subsequent calendar year that an applicant has income in excess of
the maximum described in this section, he/she shall notify the Tax
Collector on or before the next filing date and shall be denied tax relief
for that year and any subsequent year until he/she has reapplied and
§ 220-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-16
216:297
again qualified for relief under this article. The Assessor and/or the Tax
Collector shall require requalification every two years.
F. Such person shall have individually, if unmarried, or jointly, if married,
adjusted gross income as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, plus tax-exempt interest as defined in Section 103 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, dividend exclusions as set
forth in Section 116 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended,
social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits, income from other
tax-exempt retirement and annuity sources in an amount not more than
that stated in this Subsection F. To be eligible for tax relief from taxes
due on the Grand List of October 1, 2006, the maximum income level for
calendar year 2006 shall be as follows: [Amended 4-12-2007]
(1) Seventy-five thousand dollars of household income as defined in this
Subsection F if married.
(2) Sixty-two thousand five hundred dollars of household income as
defined in this Subsection F if single.
G. Such person shall be disqualified from the tax relief provided hereunder
with respect to any fiscal year if he/she owes delinquent taxes in the
Town of Branford as of the commencement of such fiscal year.
H. The tax deferral on real property as provided herein shall only apply to
the residence itself, the lot on which the residence is located, and any
such improvements on said lot.
§ 220-17. Time of application.
In order to be entitled to the benefits provided herein, an application must
be filed with the Tax Collector of the Town of Branford not earlier than
February 1 nor later than May 15 (November 30, 2003, in the case of
2003-2004 fiscal year applications) to obtain the benefits provided herein
for the next fiscal year. The application for tax relief must be made after
such person becomes eligible to apply as set forth above.
§ 220-18. Conditions and limitations of relief.
Any qualified recipient of tax deferral relief under this article shall be
subject to the following conditions and limitations:
A. Only one tax deferral as heretofore set forth shall be allowed for each
parcel of land eligible for the tax relief under this article. In any case
where title to real property is recorded in the name of the taxpayer or
his or her spouse who is eligible for tax relief, together with any other
person or persons, the tax relief under this article shall be prorated to
allow a tax deferral equivalent to the fractional share in the property of
such taxpayer or spouse, and the persons not otherwise eligible for tax
relief shall not receive any tax deferral.
B. An eligible person shall be entitled to deferral of all real property taxes
otherwise due, subject to the limitations of the following sentence, and
as otherwise provided herein. The real estate tax otherwise due shall not
be reduced by more than 75% by virtue of the deferral provided under
this article, together with all tax relief benefits obtained by said person
§ 220-16 BRANFORD CODE § 220-18
216:298
from the State of Connecticut pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes,
Sections 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, and Section 12-170aa.
C. All amounts deferred shall be reimbursed to the Town upon the earlier of
the death of the taxpayer or the conveyance of the real property subject
to taxation in accordance with § 220-21 of this article.
D. Interest charges. [Amended 4-12-2007]
(1) All amounts deferred shall be subject to an interest charge as
follows:
(a) No interest for any qualified recipient of tax relief under this
article who has been determined eligible for the Elderly and
Totally Disabled Tax Relief Program (Connecticut General
Statutes Sections 12-129b through 12-129d and 12-170aa) as
administered by the State of Connecticut;
(b) Equal to 1% per annum for any qualified recipient of tax relief
under this article whose income level as defined in § 220-16F
hereof exceeds the income guidelines established by the State
of Connecticut for the Elderly and Totally Disabled Tax Relief
Program (Connecticut General Statutes Sections 12-129b
through 12-129d and 12-170aa) but does not exceed $40,000.
(c) Equal to 2% per annum for any qualified recipient of tax relief
hereunder whose income level as defined in § 220-16F hereof is
more than $40,000 but does not exceed $60,000.
(d) Equal to 3% per annum for any qualified recipient of tax relief
hereunder whose income level as defined in § 220-16 F hereof is
more than $60,000.
(2) Such interest charge shall be included in the written agreement to
be entered into by the Town and the taxpayer. Such interest shall be
applied on the first day of each month and shall accrue from the date
of deferral until the date of payment. [Amended 4-7-2009]
E. Total deferment, including interest, for all years shall not exceed the
total assessed value of the real property.
F. The taxpayer shall enter into an annual written agreement with the Town
providing for reimbursement of the deferred taxes, interest and lien fees.
The principal amount of such tax deferral benefit, excluding interest,
shall be recorded in the land records of the Town and shall constitute a
lien on the property payable as set forth herein. [Amended 5-8-2006]
§ 220-19. Amount of tax relief deferral; program limitations.
[Amended 4-12-2007]
The total revenue loss to the Town under this article shall not exceed
$336,433 for the 2007-2008 fiscal year and for future years shall not exceed
0.50% of the total amount of taxes collected against the most recent grand
list year for which audit figures are available, which amount shall constitute
a spending "cap" for purposes of this article. In the event that applications
for relief filed would result in revenue loss to the Town exceeding that
amount, then the sum of eligible applicants shall be divided into said cap
amount, and the resulting relief amount shall be apportioned pro rata
among the eligible applicants. This cap amount and the income guidelines in
§ 220-16 of this article may be revised by the Representative Town Meeting
§ 220-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-19
216:299
on the recommendation of the Board of Finance from time to time, provided
that any such revision for a subsequent fiscal year shall be made prior
to the time that the Representative Town Meeting adopts a budget for
said fiscal year. The Tax Collector shall contact the Chairman of the Board
of Finance and the Moderator of the Representative Town Meeting on or
before February 1 of each year to discuss such possible revision.
§ 220-20. Implementation.
The Tax Collector of the Town of Branford shall prescribe, with regard to
his/her respective duties under this article, such forms and procedures as
may be necessary to implement this article. The Tax Collector, in addition,
shall satisfy himself or herself as to the qualifying income of an applicant
for benefits under this article and may request and review such evidence of
qualifying income as he or she may deem pertinent.
§ 220-21. Reduction of relief at conveyance or death.
If any person with respect to whom a claim for tax deferral in accordance
with this article has been approved for any assessment year transfers,
assigns, grants or otherwise conveys the interest in real property to which
such claim for tax deferral is related, whether at death or inter vivos, other
than to such person's qualified spouse or for purposes of collateral security,
such tax and any previous deferral benefits shall be due and payable and
collectable as other property taxes and subject to the same liens and
processes of collection, provided that such tax shall be due in an initial or
single installment not sooner than 90 days after the date such bill is mailed
or handed to the grantee (and in equal amounts in any remaining regular
installments as the same are due and payable).
§ 220-22. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. The invalidity of any word, clause, section or provision of this article
shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect
without such invalid part or parts.
B. This article shall take effect upon passage and publication in accordance
with the Branford Charter.
§ 220-19 BRANFORD CODE § 220-22
216:300
ARTICLE VII
Veterans' Tax Exemption
[Adopted 12-8-2004]
§ 220-23. Exemption authorized; amount; qualifying income limit.
[Amended 2-8-2006; 3-11-2015]
Effective for the assessment year commencing October 1, 2006, and each
assessment year thereafter, the additional property tax exemption
permitted by C.G.S. Section 12-81f is hereby authorized for veterans and
their spouses. Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax
in accordance with C.G.S. Section 12-81(19) or any veteran's surviving
spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with
C.G.S. Section 12-81(22) shall be entitled to an additional local option
exemption applicable to the assessed value of the property up to the total
amount of $10,000, provided such veteran or such surviving spouse meets
the eligibility requirements of said sections or whose income does not
exceed the applicable maximum income limits contained in those eligibility
requirements by more than $12,500.
§ 220-24. Additional exemption authorized. [Amended 2-8-2006;
3-11-2015]
Effective for the assessment year commencing October 1, 2014, and each
assessment year thereafter, the additional exemption from property tax
permitted by C.G.S. Section 12-81g(b) for veterans and their spouses
pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision (20) of C.G.S. Section 12-81 is
hereby authorized for those persons who meet the eligibility requirements
of said sections.
§ 220-25. Application for exemption.
Any such veteran or spouse submitting a claim for such additional
exemption shall be required to file an application, on a form prepared for
such purpose by the Assessor, not later than the assessment date with
respect to which such additional exemption is claimed, provided when an
applicant has filed for such exemption and received approval for the first
time, such applicant shall be required to file for such exemption biennially
thereafter, subject to the provisions of § 220-26 of this article. Each such
application shall include a copy of such veteran's or spouse's federal income
tax return, or in the event such a return is not filed, such evidence related to
income as may be required by the Assessor, for the tax year of such veteran
or spouse ending immediately prior to the assessment date with respect to
which such additional exemption is claimed.
§ 220-26. Grand List. [Amended 2-8-2006]
For the Grand List of October 1, 2006, only, any veteran or veteran's
surviving spouse who has properly filed for an additional exemption in
accordance with Section 12-81(f) of the General Statutes for the Grand List
§ 220-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-26
216:301
of October 1, 2006, and has been approved for such exemption shall be
awarded an exemption of $10,000 rather than $4,000 for the Grand List of
October 1, 2006; otherwise the provisions of this article shall apply to the
assessment on the Grand List of October 1, 2006 for those persons then
eligible.
§ 220-27. Requalification and disqualification. [Amended
3-11-2015]
Any person who has submitted an application and has been approved in
any year for the additional exemption under §§ 220-23 or 220-24 of this
article shall, in the year immediately following approval, be presumed to
be qualified to such exemption. During the year immediately following such
approval, the Assessor shall notify, in writing, each person presumed to be
qualified pursuant to this § 220-27. If any such person has qualifying income
in excess of the maximum allowed under §§ 220-23 or 220-24 of this article,
such person shall notify the Assessor on or before the next filing date for
such exemption and shall be denied such exemption for the assessment year
immediately following and for any subsequent year until such person has
reapplied and, again, qualified for such exemption. Any person who fails
to notify the Assessor of such disqualification shall make payment to the
Town of Branford in the amount of property tax related to the exemption
improperly taken.
§ 220-28. When effective; substitution of prior resolution.
[Amended 2-8-2006]
This article shall be effective in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the Town of Branford and shall be a complete substitution of
§§ 220-23, 220-24 and 220-26 of the Code of the Town of Branford.
§ 220-28.1. Exemption for gold star parents and spouses. [Added
10-10-2018]
A. Effective October 1, 2018, and applicable to assessment years
commencing on or after October 1, 2018, and pursuant to Public Act
17-65, upon application, as set forth in Subsection E of this section,
to the Assessor, any parent whose child was killed in action or the
surviving spouse of a person who was killed in action while performing
active military duty with the armed forces, as defined in Subsection (a)
of Section 27-103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, which parent
or surviving spouse is a resident of the Town of Branford, shall be
entitled to an exemption from property tax in the amount of $10,000,
provided that such parent's or surviving spouse's qualifying income does
not exceed the maximum amount applicable to an unmarried person
as provided under section 12-811 of the Connecticut General Statutes
plus $12,500. The exemption shall be applied to the assessed value of
any such eligible parent's or surviving spouse's property. The yearly
application filing period shall be February 1 thru October 1 each year.
Each application shall include a copy of such parent or surviving
spouse's federal income tax return or, in the event such a return is
§ 220-26 BRANFORD CODE § 220-28.1
216:302
not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required by the
Assessor for the tax year ending immediately prior to the assessment
date with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed.
B. If both parents of any such child killed in action while performing active
military duty with the armed forces are domiciled together, only one
such parent shall be entitled to an exemption from property tax provided
for under this section.
C. The exemption provided for under this section shall be in addition to
any exemption to which an eligible parent or surviving spouse may be
entitled under Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes. No
such eligible parent or surviving spouse entitled to exemption under
Section 12-81f or 12-81g of the Connecticut General Statutes and this
section shall receive more than one such exemption.
D. Any parent whose child was killed in action or the surviving spouse of
a person who was killed in action while performing active military duty
with the armed forces and who claims an exemption from taxation under
this section shall give notice to the Branford Town Clerk that he or she
is entitled to such exemption.
E. Any such parent or surviving spouse submitting a claim for such
exemption shall be required to file an application, on a form prepared
for such purpose by the Assessor, not later than the assessment date
with respect to which such exemption is claimed, which application shall
include at least two affidavits of disinterested persons showing that the
deceased child or person was performing such active military duty, that
such deceased child or person was killed in action while performing such
active military duty and the relationship of such deceased child to such
parent, or such deceased person to such surviving spouse, provided that
the Assessor may further require such parent or surviving spouse to
be examined by such Assessor under oath concerning such facts. The
Branford Town Clerk shall record each such affidavit in full and shall list
the name of such parent or surviving spouse claimant, and such service
shall be performed by the Branford Town Clerk without remuneration.
The Assessor, Board of Assessment Appeals or other official of Branford
shall not allow any such claim for exemption unless evidence as herein
specified has been filed in the office of the Branford Town Clerk. When
any such parent or surviving spouse has filed for such exemption and
received approval for the first time, such parent or surviving spouse
shall be required to file for such exemption biennially thereafter, subject
to the provisions of Subsection H of this section.
F. The Assessor shall annually make a certified list of all such parents
or surviving spouses who are found to be entitled to exemption under
the provisions of this section, which list shall be filed in the Branford
Town Clerk's office, and shall be prima facie evidence that such parents
or surviving spouses whose names appear thereon are entitled to such
exemption as long as they continue to reside in such municipality and as
long as the legislative body of such municipality continues to provide for
such exemption, subject to the provisions of Subsection H of this section.
The Assessor may, at any time, require any such parent or surviving
spouse to appear before such Assessor for the purpose of furnishing
§ 220-28.1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-28.1
216:303
additional evidence, provided that any such parent or surviving spouse
who by reason of disability is unable to so appear may furnish a
statement from such parent's or surviving spouse's attending physician
or an advanced practice registered nurse certifying that such parent or
surviving spouse is totally disabled and is unable to make a personal
appearance and such other evidence of total disability as the Assessor
may deem appropriate.
G. No such parent or surviving spouse may receive such exemption until
such parent or surviving spouse has proven his or her right to such
exemption in accordance with the provisions of this section, together
with such further proof as may be necessary under said provisions.
Exemptions so proven shall take effect on the next succeeding
assessment day.
H. Any such parent or surviving spouse who has submitted an application
and been approved in any year for the exemption provided in this section
shall, in the year immediately following approval, be presumed to be
qualified for such exemption. During the year immediately following
such approval, the Assessor shall notify, in writing, each parent or
surviving spouse presumed to be qualified pursuant to this subsection.
If any such parent or surviving spouse has qualifying income in excess
of the maximum allowed under Subsection A of this section, such parent
or surviving spouse shall notify the Assessor on or before the next filing
date for such exemption and shall be denied such exemption for the
assessment year immediately following and for any subsequent year
until such parent or surviving spouse has reapplied and again qualified
for such exemption. Any such parent or surviving spouse who fails to
notify the Assessor of such disqualification shall make payment to the
Town of Branford in the amount of property tax loss related to such
exemption improperly taken.
§ 220-28.1 BRANFORD CODE § 220-28.1
216:304
ARTICLE VIII
Tax Credit for Qualified Elderly and Disabled Citizens
[Adopted 6-14-2006; amended in its entirety 4-12-2007]
§ 220-29. Eligibility for and amount of tax credit.
Any person who is liable for taxes assessed on real property located in the
Town of Branford, which property is occupied by such person as his or her
personal residence, whether such person is owner of the real property or
is liable for taxes therein under provisions of Connecticut General Statutes
Section 12-48, as amended, as a tenant for life or for a term of years, and
who shall be determined eligible for the Elderly and Totally Disabled Tax
Relief Program (Connecticut General Statutes Sections 12-129b through
12-129d and 12-170aa) as administered by the State of Connecticut, shall
be entitled to tax relief as authorized by Section 12-129n of the Connecticut
General Statutes in the form of a tax credit. The amount of the tax credit
afforded under this article shall not exceed $300 per eligible applicant and
shall apply only to owner-occupied residential dwellings or portion thereof
occupied and to residential dwelling site lots on which an eligible dwelling is
situated. The total of all credits granted under provisions of this article shall
not exceed $134,000 for the 2007-2008 fiscal year and for future years shall
not exceed 0.20% of the total amount of taxes collected against the most
recent grand list year for which audit figures are available. The amount of
tax collection receipts multiplied by 0.20% shall constitute a spending cap,
which shall not be exceeded. If the sum of all credits exceeds such spending
cap, then the credits shall be prorated among all eligible claimants in this
program. This article shall become effective and apply commencing with
taxes due on the Grand List of October 1, 2006.
§ 220-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-29
216:305

ARTICLE IX
Waiver of Property Tax Bills
[Adopted 4-7-2009]
§ 220-30. Authorization to waive certain bills.
The Town authorizes the waiving of any property tax of a total amount of
less than $5 before the date such tax is due pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-144c.
§ 220-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-30
216:307

ARTICLE X
Retention of Excess Taxes
[Adopted 4-7-2009]
§ 220-31. Authorization to retain certain excess payments.
The Tax Collector is authorized pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-129 to retain
payments in excess of the amount due, provided that the amount of the
excess payment is less than $5.
§ 220-31 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-31
216:309

ARTICLE XI
Handicapped Vehicle Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-13-2019]
§ 220-32. Exemption for ambulance-type motor vehicles.
A. There is hereby created, pursuant to Section 12-81c of the Connecticut
General Statutes, an exemption from personal property taxation for:
(1) Any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for
the purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual,
except any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for
profit;
(2) Any property owned by a nonprofit ambulance company; and
(3) Any motor vehicle owned by a person with disabilities, or owned by
the parent or guardian of such person, which vehicle is equipped for
the purposes of adapting its use to the disability of such person.
§ 220-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMBULANCE-TYPE VEHICLE/HANDICAPPED EQUIPPED VEHICLE — Any
motor vehicle specially equipped or modified in a significant way for the
purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual. Such
special equipment or modification includes but is not limited to the
installing of lifts, equipping with stretchers, beds or other special seating
or any significant modifications to accommodate medical or emergency
equipment.
MEDICALLY INCAPACITATED INDIVIDUAL — Any person for whose benefit
certain special equipment or modifications referenced in the definition of
"ambulance-type vehicle/handicapped equipped vehicle" is necessary.
TRANSPORTING — The provision of vehicular transportation for such
medically incapacitated individuals by themselves or another person.
USED EXCLUSIVELY — The vehicle is used for and devoted solely to the
purpose of transporting one or more medically incapacitated individuals,
and does not mean vehicles used partly for transporting medically
incapacitated individuals and partly for other purposes.
§ 220-34. Application for exemption.
Applications for the exemption permitted by this article shall be filed
annually with the Assessor of the Town of Branford, in such manner and
including such information as required by the Assessor, not later than
October 1 which is the assessment date with respect to which such
exemption is claimed. In the case of vehicles purchased on or after October
2 and on or before July 31 of the assessment year for which such exemption
is requested, not later than 30 days after such purchase. Applications for
exemption relative to the assessment year which commenced on October 1,
2019, shall be made on or before 30 days of the effective date of this article
§ 220-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-34
216:311
or for vehicles purchased after said effective date but on or before July 31,
2020, not later than 30 days after such purchase.
§ 220-35. Medical documentation; expiration of exemption.
A. The Assessor may require medical documentation verifying that the
modifications to the vehicle are directly related to the medical incapacity
or the physical disability of the individual seeking such exemption.
B. Any such exemption shall expire when the applicable vehicle is sold.
§ 220-36. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable with respect to the assessment year that
commences October 1, 2019.
§ 220-34 BRANFORD CODE § 220-36
216:312
Chapter 223
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking in fire zones — See Ch. 157. Use of vehicles for peddling — See Ch. 193.
§ 220-36 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 220-36
223:313

ARTICLE I
Snow Removal Parking
[Adopted 5-8-1962]
§ 223-1. Parking restricted.
During and immediately after all snow- and ice storms, no motor vehicle
shall be found parked on the even-numbered side of the street, unless
otherwise ordered by the Board of Selectmen, whether or not in a parking
space, nor shall such motor vehicle be found parked in such manner as to
interfere with and/or hamper the effective sanding of ice or removal of snow
from the streets and highways of the Town of Branford.
§ 223-2. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
Any motor vehicle found parked in violation of § 223-1 hereof may be
removed or conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the
Department of Police by means of towing the same or otherwise to a public
garage or its premises in the Town of Branford.
§ 223-3. Redemption of impounded vehicles.
The removal of any motor vehicle pursuant to § 223-2 hereof shall be at the
risk and expense of the owner thereof; and before the owner or person in
charge of such motor vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from
the custody of the Department of Police, he shall furnish evidence of his
identity and ownership or right to possession and shall sign a receipt for
said vehicle.
§ 223-4. Towing and storage charges. [Amended 1-10-1973;
12-18-1979]
The fee for towing as above set forth shall be $25 plus a storage charge of
$5 per day after the first 24 hours, said fee and charge to be paid to the
owner of such public garage to which such motor vehicle shall be towed, or
to the duly authorized representative of said owner of said garage.
§ 223-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 223-4
223:315
Chapter 224
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Commission — See Ch. 105. Sewers — See Ch. 204.
§ 223-4 BRANFORD CODE § 223-4
224:316
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Extension of Water Mains57
[Adopted 6-30-199958]
§ 224-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the levying of unit benefit
assessments upon land and/or buildings in the Town of Branford which are
benefited by the extension of water mains which are funded, in whole or in
part, by the Town of Branford. When appropriating funds for the extension
of water mains and levying assessments for such extensions, the procedures
herein set forth shall be followed.
§ 224-2. Process.
The Branford Representative Town Meeting shall act on water assessments
on the recommendation of the Branford Water Commission.
§ 224-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
COMMERCIAL USE — Any use of a structure as a place for the exchange
of commodities, services or commercial recreation activities.
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or portion thereof, providing
housekeeping facilities for one family.
INDUSTRIAL OR RESEARCH LABORATORY USE — Any use of a
structure as a place to manufacture, fabricate, repair, build, package,
assemble, store, demolish, process or transform the quality or state of
any goods.
OFFICE USE — Any use of a structure as a place where a business
is transacted or service is supplied, including medical offices and
laboratories visited by clients/patients.
RESIDENTIAL USE — A use of any structure as the living quarters of
any person or group of persons.
B. Word usage. Whenever herein used and the context so permits, the
singular shall be construed to include the plural and the masculine or
neuter shall be construed to include both and the feminine gender; and
each owner or owners and their respective heirs, successors and assigns
shall be jointly and severally bound.
57.Editor's Note: See also Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-137c for statutory
provisions.
58.Editor's Note: This by law also superseded former Ch. 224, Water, Art. I, Reimbursement
for Extension of Water Mains, adopted by the Representative Town Meeting 6-25-1986.
§ 224-1 WATER § 224-4
224:317
§ 224-4. Notice of intention to extend main.
Before the Representative Town Meeting shall appropriate any funds to
extend or cause to be extended any water mains, at least 10 days' written
notice of the proposed extension shall be given by mail to each known
owner or owners of any land or buildings upon which the cost of such
water mains may be assessed and of the time and place when objections
to such extension shall be heard. Notice shall also be published not less
than 10 days prior to such meeting in a newspaper with a circulation within
the Town of Branford. Such notice shall generally outline the scope of
the construction project and shall inform such property owner or owners
that he will be required to make payment to the Town of Branford for his
equitable share of the cost of such water main extension and that such
owner or owners may have to pay to the South Central Connecticut Regional
Water Authority for connection to or use of such water main.
§ 224-5. Reimbursement of Town; exception.
Any owner or owners of lands or buildings which abut such main shall
reimburse the Town of Branford his proportionate share as determined
in accordance with this article; except that where the Town of Branford
and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection concur that the need
for such extension is in response to a community pollution problem as
defined by Section 22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town
of Branford may waive such reimbursement.
§ 224-6. Cost recovery.
All costs shall be proportioned in such a way as to ultimately leave the
Town of Branford free of any cost of the extension of the water main and
expenses incidental thereto except where any portion of such water service
is to be used for a municipal purpose, in which instance the municipality
shall contribute a fair portion of the expense representing such municipal
share. In the case of land zoned for other than commercial or industrial
purposes or classified as farmland, forest land or open space land on the
last completed Grand List of the Town of Branford, which exceeds by more
than 100% the size of the smallest lot permitted in the lowest density
residential zone allowed under the Town of Branford Zoning Regulations,59
such assessment shall be deferred until such time as such land shall be
built upon or a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever event occurs
first. The Town of Branford shall place a caveat on the land records in each
instance where an assessment is deferred.
§ 224-7. Unit charges.
A. Subject to reasonable allowances by the Representative Town Meeting
for particular situations, the number of units recovered from each piece
or parcel of land abutting said water main shall be determined as
follows:
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Zoning.
§ 224-4 BRANFORD CODE § 224-7
224:318
(1) Residential uses. One unit shall be recovered from each dwelling
unit.
(2) Office uses. A minimum of one unit shall be recovered from each
office structure. An additional unit shall be recovered for each
additional increment of 5,000 square feet or portion thereof of office
floor space located in that structure.
(3) Commercial uses. A minimum of one unit shall be recovered from
each commercial structure. An additional unit shall be recovered for
each additional increment of 5,000 square feet or portion thereof of
commercial floor space located in that structure.
(4) Industrial uses. A minimum of one unit shall be recovered from each
industrial unit located in a structure utilized for industrial use. An
additional unit shall be recovered for each additional increment of
7,500 square feet or portion thereof of industrial floor space located
in any individual industrial use in that structure.
(5) Open space or farmland uses. Any parcel that has been designated
as open space or farmland on the Grand List shall not be considered
as a unit as long as it is so designated. When this designation is no
longer in effect, the piece or parcel of land shall be assessed benefits
in conformance with the procedures set forth herein.
B. If any parcel is developed with a multiple use (commercial-residential or
office-residential), then the units to be recovered from that parcel shall
be the total of the units derived in conformance with the procedures for
each individual use.
C. Such shares shall represent a reasonable proportion of the total cost of
such water mains, including but not limited to materials, installations,
pumping stations, service connections, curb, sidewalk and highway
repairs and the cost of installation of gate-valves or shutoff, if any.
D. If residential or agricultural property or property zoned for residential or
agricultural use abuts lines of construction of water mains to be used for
industrial or commercial purposes or partly for industrial or commercial
purposes, and such property is not being used for such purposes, the
proportionate share of the owners of such property shall be computed on
a front-foot basis for a standard or minimum size main.
§ 224-8. Method of determining unit charges.
Subject to reasonable allowances by the Representative Town Meeting, the
basis for unit charges will be the lesser of the benefits that accrue to the
property by the installation of a water main; or the quotient derived by
dividing the total cost to be recovered by the total number of units abutting
such a main and subject to this article; provided, however, that the Town of
Branford will be left free from any cost of the extension of the water main
unless provided otherwise by this article.
§ 224-9. Liability for assessment.
The owner of real property subject to such a water main assessment shall
be liable for and shall be billed for payment of such assessment. Such
assessment, together with interest thereon, as defined by the Connecticut
§ 224-7 WATER § 224-9
224:319
General Statutes, shall constitute a lien upon the property being assessed,
and such lien may be foreclosed, and such charges may be collected in the
manner provided in Section 7-137d of the Connecticut General Statutes and
such other statutes which are applicable.
§ 224-10. Collection of assessment.
A. Notice of assessment.
(1) When the Representative Town Meeting has determined the amount
of assessment to be levied, whether installment payments shall be
permitted and the rate of interest on the outstanding balance of said
installments, it shall file a copy thereof in the office of the Town
Clerk.
(2) Not later than 45 days after the filing by the Representative Town
Meeting of its assessment with the Town Clerk, the Branford Tax
Collector shall cause a copy of such assessment to be published in
a newspaper having a circulation in the Town, and it shall mail a
copy of such assessment to the owner of any property as of the most
recent Grand List affected thereby. Said assessment shall be mailed
to the owner's address as shown in the last completed Grand List of
the Town.
B. Installment payments or assessments. The Representative Town Meeting
may allow assessments to be paid in installments over a period not
exceeding 20 years or such lesser period as the Representative Town
Meeting shall determine. The Branford Representative Town Meeting
shall fix the rate of interest to be paid on the outstanding balance of said
installments. Any such interest charge shall not exceed the maximum
rate the Town is obligated to pay on any of its then pending bonds and
notes.
C. Interest payments. Any installment payment due upon any such
assessment and any interest on the outstanding balance of such
assessment which is not paid when due shall bear interest, until paid,
at the maximum rate, from time to time, permitted by law for unpaid
property taxes.
D. Collection. The water main assessment shall be collected by the Tax
Collector of the Town of Branford.
§ 224-11. Amendments.
This article may be amended by the Representative Town Meeting from time
to time and at any time as it deems necessary subject to the Charter of the
Town of Branford and the statutes of the State of Connecticut.
§ 224-9 BRANFORD CODE § 224-11
224:320
Chapter 225
(RESERVED)
Chapter 226
ZONING FEES
§ 226-1. Peer review fees.
In all cases in which the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that
a peer review of the applicant's traffic report is warranted, the applicant
shall be required to reimburse the Town for the cost of the peer review. This
payment shall be made to the Town prior to the decision by the Commission
on the application.
Part III, Planning and Zoning Regulations
Chapter 228
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Agency — See Ch. 69.
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
71.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 130.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 161.
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
Zoning — See Ch. 233.
§ 224-11 ZONING FEES § 226-1
226:321

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 228-1. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the policy of the Branford Planning and Zoning
Commission to consider land subdivision as part of a plan for the orderly
and coordinated development and growth of the Town rather than as a
mere aggregation of lots. These regulations are adopted in order that
land subdivision may be made in the best interests of the Town and in
accordance with this policy and in order that land subdivided is of such
character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health
or safety, that proper provision will be made for water supply, surface
drainage and sanitary sewerage and open spaces for parks and playgrounds
and, in areas contiguous to brooks, rivers or other bodies of water subject
to flooding, including tidal flooding, that proper provision will be made
for protective flood control measures and that the proposed roads are
in harmony with existing roads and existing or proposed principal
thoroughfares shown on any plan of development for the Town especially
with regard to safe intersections and so arranged and of such width as to
provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective
traffic needs.
§ 228-2. Approval required.
These regulations shall apply to the subdivision and resubdivision of land
within the Town of Branford. Any subdivision or resubdivision of land within
the Town of Branford shall conform to the requirements of these
regulations. No subdivision or resubdivision of land shall be made by any
person, firm or corporation until a map for such subdivision or resubdivision
has been submitted to and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and has been endorsed by the Commission and recorded in the
office of the Branford Town Clerk.
§ 228-3. Endorsement required.
No subdivision or resubdivision shall be considered approved until the
Planning and Zoning Commission has endorsed its approval on the map.
§ 228-4. Following of procedures.
The Planning and Zoning Commission, in reviewing any proposed
subdivision or resubdivision, and the person, firm or corporation proposing
a subdivision or resubdivision shall follow the procedures hereinafter
specified. The Commission shall not approve any subdivision or
resubdivision unless it conforms to the standards hereinafter specified.
§ 228-5. Authorization of construction.
Construction and installation of roads, drainage and other improvements
to comply with the requirements of these regulations shall not be deemed
§ 228-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-5
228:323
authorized until the proposed subdivision or resubdivision has been
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 228-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision or resubdivision of
land without the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
subject to penalties in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 228-7. Definitions.
Certain words used in these regulations are defined and explained as
follows:
APPLICANT — Refers to the person, firm, partnership or corporation
proposing a subdivision or resubdivision.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
COMMISSION — Refers to the Planning and Zoning Commission of the
Town.
SUBDIVISION and RESUBDIVISION — Requirements applicable to
subdivisions shall also apply to resubdivisions. The terms "subdivision" and
"resubdivision," as used in these regulations, are defined in the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut. Chapter 126 of the 1958 Supplement
to the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, defines
"subdivision" and "resubdivision" as follows:
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract or parcel of land into three
or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of sale or building development expressly excluding development for
municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes
resubdivision.
A.
RESUBDIVISION — A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision or resubdivision if such change affects any street layout
shown on such map; affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or
diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional
building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after
the approval or recording of such map.
B.
§ 228-5 BRANFORD CODE § 228-7
228:324
ARTICLE II
Application Requirements and Procedure
§ 228-8. Informal preliminary consideration.
The Planning and Zoning Commission recommends that, prior to submission
of a formal application for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision, the
applicant prepare and present a preliminary plan of the subdivision or
resubdivision for informal consideration by the Commission. Presentation
of a preliminary plan is recommended to facilitate general consideration of
factors and problems affecting development of the land to be subdivided
or resubdivided before the applicant proceeds with formal application and
the preparation of final maps, plans and documents required for formal
consideration by the Commission. If the plan is presented in preliminary
rather than in final form, any alterations or changes recommended by the
Commission may be made more readily and economically by the applicant.
Neither the preliminary plan nor the informal consideration by the
Commission, however, shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the
official and formal procedure of applying for and approving subdivisions or
resubdivision of land under the provisions of the General Statutes of the
State of Connecticut.
A. Preliminary plan. The preliminary subdivision or resubdivision plan
should be drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch and
should show existing and proposed property and street lines, proposed
lots, existing and proposed drainage, watercourses, ponds, swamps and
existing contours from available United States Geological Survey maps
or other sources. The Commission recommends that the preliminary
plan conform in all respects to the requirements for a site development
plan as specified in § 228-12 of these regulations, in order to facilitate
the informal consideration by the Commission and in order that the
applicant may avoid submission of a site development plan as part of the
formal application. Six blue line or black line prints of the preliminary
plan should be submitted.
B. Informal action. The Commission may hold an informal discussion
meeting with the applicant. The Commission shall notify the applicant of
the date, time and place of the meeting at which the preliminary plan will
be given informal consideration. Whether or not the Commission meets
with the applicant to discuss the preliminary plan, the Commission shall,
within 60 days after receipt of the preliminary plan, advise the applicant
of its informal approval of the plan or of any changes it recommends be
made in the plan, in order to guide the applicant in preparing maps and
plans for formal subdivision or resubdivision application.
§ 228-9. Application requirements.
In order to apply for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision, and before
the Commission shall formally consider any proposed subdivision, the
applicant proposing the subdivision or resubdivision shall submit an
application and maps, plans and documents as follows:
§ 228-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-9
228:325
A. Presentation. All applications, maps, plans, documents and data
required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission or its authorized agent. Any such material may
also be transmitted by mail or may be presented to the Chairman or
Secretary of the Commission or at a Commission meeting. Any such
material not transmitted at a Commission meeting shall be considered
submitted at the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting. A
schedule of Commission meetings is on file with the Town Clerk.
B. Application. Application for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision
shall be made to the Commission in writing on forms prescribed by
the Commission and signed by the applicant or his lawful agent; if the
subdivision or resubdivision is proposed by a person, firm or corporation
other than the owner of the land to be subdivided, the application shall
also be signed by the owner or his lawful agent.
C. Application fee. An application fee of $15 for each lot shown on the
subdivision map shall accompany the application, but in any event the
minimum fee for each application shall be not less than $50. All
application fee payments shall be made payable to the Town of Branford.
D. Site development plan. A site development plan shall be submitted with
the application and shall conform to all of the requirements of § 228-12
of these regulations. In the event that a preliminary plan, as provided
in § 228-8A and meeting the requirements for a site development plan,
was submitted to the Commission and was given informal approval
or approval with modifications within the previous 120 days, a site
development plan need not be submitted with the application.
E. Record subdivision map. A record subdivision map shall be submitted
with the application and shall conform to all of the requirements of
§ 228-13 of these regulations.
F. Construction plans. Plan and profile drawings of all proposed streets,
storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches,
watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, bridges, culverts
and other structures and improvements required by these regulations
shall be submitted with the application and shall conform to all of the
requirements of § 228-14 of these regulations.
G. Grading plan. In the event that any major regrading, cuts, fills or soil or
rock removal is proposed in the area of the subdivision, a grading plan
shall be submitted with the application and shall conform to all of the
requirements of § 228-15 of these regulations. At minimum, the grading
plan shall cover those areas of the subdivision where proposed changes
in elevation exceed five feet.
H. Technical reports. When the subdivision is not to be served by municipal
sanitary sewers and/or public water supply, the applicant shall have
seepage tests taken in locations approved by the Town Engineer and
in accordance with Connecticut State Health Department specifications.
The applicant shall present a written report, prepared by a sanitary or
civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, describing
the tests taken and the results and certifying that the land to be
subdivided and the subdivision plan are satisfactory for private sewage
disposal and or water supply systems.
§ 228-9 BRANFORD CODE § 228-9
228:326
I. Connecticut State Highway Department permit. Where a proposed
subdivision street or storm drain joins with a state highway, the
applicant shall obtain evidence of application for a permit for such
connection from the Connecticut State Highway Department and shall
present a copy of such evidence of application to the Commission.
J. Public water supply. When public water supply is to be provided in any
subdivision, the applicant shall obtain a letter from the water company
stating that application has been made for water main extension and
service to serve the proposed subdivision, that water company
regulations have been complied with and that satisfactory water supply,
pressure and service are available to serve the proposed subdivision.
K. Floodplain area. Applications for subdivisions to be located in areas
of special flood hazard and involving more than 50 lots or five acres,
whichever is less, shall include base flood elevation data.
§ 228-10. Formal consideration.
After the above application requirements have been met, the Commission
shall follow the procedure hereafter specified:
A. Review. The Commission or its authorized agent shall give consideration
to the proposed subdivision or resubdivision and shall determine
whether the maps and plans and accompanying certificates and
documents conform to the requirements of these regulations. The
Commission or its authorized agent may request the submission of such
additional information from the applicant that it deems necessary to
make a reasonable review of the proposed subdivision in accordance
with the policy and requirements of these regulations.
B. Referral to Regional Agency. When a subdivision is proposed, the area
of which will abut or include land in an adjoining municipality, the
Commission shall submit a copy of the maps and plans to the Regional
Planning Agency of South Central Connecticut at least 30 days before
approving the subdivision.
C. Hearing. A public hearing regarding a subdivision application may be
held by the Commission if, in its judgment, the circumstances require
such action. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any
application for a resubdivision. Notice of any public hearing shall be
given not less than seven days before the date of the hearing by
publication of a legal advertisement once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town and by sending a copy thereof by certified mail
to the applicant. Whether or not a public hearing is held, every applicant
shall be afforded the opportunity to appear before the Commission
to discuss the application before final action by the Commission. The
Commission shall notify the applicant of the date, time and place of the
meeting of the Commission at which the final subdivision plan is to be
considered at least three days prior to said meeting. The applicant or his
authorized representative should attend said meeting.
D. Decision.
(1) After the public hearing, if any, or after the meeting afforded the
applicant, the Commission shall give approval to the subdivision
application if it shall find that the subdivision map and plans and
§ 228-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-10
228:327
accompanying certificates, documents and data conform to the
requirements of these regulations. Approval shall be conditioned
upon the following actions if applicable to the particular subdivision:
(a) Endorsement of any construction plans and grading plans as
approved by the Town Engineer, if such endorsement has not
already been obtained.
(b) Endorsement of the record subdivision map by the Director of
Health, if such endorsement has not already been obtained.
(c) Presentation of any easements and deeds as specified in
Subsection E below.
(d) Completion of any required subdivision improvements or the
execution of an agreement and posting of a bond to guarantee
such completion.
(2) In granting approval, the Commission may attach such conditions
that it deems necessary to modify the subdivision map, plans or
documents and to preserve the purpose and intent of these
regulations. The Commission shall approve, modify and approve or
disapprove any subdivision application or any accompanying map,
plan, certificate, document or data submitted therewith within 60
days after the submission thereof, unless the applicant consents in
writing to an extension of this period. In approving, modifying and
approving, or disapproving an application or accompanying item, the
Commission shall state in its records any conditions of approval, any
modifications required or the grounds for disapproval. Notice of the
Commission's decision shall be published in a newspaper having a
substantial circulation in the Town and addressed by certified mail
to the applicant within 10 days after the decision has been rendered.
Such notice shall be a simple statement that the application was
approved, modified and approved or disapproved, together with the
date of such action.
E. Easements and deeds. Any open spaces for parks and playgrounds to
be dedicated to the Town, any easements for sanitary sewers and public
rights-of-way and any easements for storm drainage and watercourses
draining existing or proposed public streets or public streets that may
be constructed in the future shall be confirmed by written easements
and deeds describing the land involved and the privileges of the Town
in a form satisfactory to the Town Counsel. In addition, a title certificate
shall be furnished, signed by a Connecticut attorney, showing that the
title to the property covered above is free of encumbrances which would
render the title unmarketable or would otherwise prevent the use of
the property for the purpose for which it is granted to the Town. The
applicant shall also submit a written agreement, in form satisfactory to
Town Counsel, permitting entrance by the Town onto the land covered
by the grants mentioned above, as well as the area of the streets shown
on the subdivision plan, for the purposes of inspection and of installing
the required improvements in the event of the failure of the applicant
to make such improvements or to properly maintain them until the
Town has assumed responsibility for them, and such written agreements
shall provide that the developer, on demand, shall execute and deliver
§ 228-10 BRANFORD CODE § 228-10
228:328
to the Town a deed to the area of the street or streets shown on the
subdivision plan as approved. Such easements, deeds and agreements
shall be presented prior to endorsement of the record subdivision map.
F. Map endorsement and bond. The Commission may approve the
subdivision and authorize the Chairman and Secretary to endorse the
record subdivision map to permit filing, but such endorsement shall
not be executed until all conditions of approval, if any, have been met.
The applicant shall comply with all such conditions of approval within
90 days of the date of action of the Commission, failure to do so shall
render approval null and void. The Commission shall not endorse the
record subdivision map to permit filing with the Town Clerk until all
conditions of approval have been met, all required easements and deeds
have been presented and all required subdivision improvements have
been completed in accordance with the plans as approved. In lieu of
completion of all or part of required improvements prior to endorsement
of the record subdivision map, the applicant shall execute an agreement
and file a bond with the Commission to guarantee such completion
within two years. The bond shall be in form and amount and with
surety acceptable to the Commission and to the Town Counsel and shall
be a surety bond, executed by a surety company authorized to enter
into such bonds in the State of Connecticut. In lieu of surety bond the
Commission may, upon approval of Town Counsel, accept an assigned
savings account passbook or a letter of credit from a recognized
financial institution. As provided in the Town Road Ordinance, no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any residence until the
subbase and base course phases of road construction are completed to
such extent as to provide access to such residence.60
G. Filing and recording. The endorsed subdivision map, showing any
modifications upon which final approval of the subdivision was
contingent, shall constitute the approved record subdivision map. The
date of endorsement of the record subdivision map shall be noted on
the map by the Chairman of the Commission. Within 90 days after the
endorsement of the record subdivision map, the applicant shall file and
record said record map, together with any related easements and deeds,
in the office of the Branford Town Clerk. Filing and recording fees shall
be paid by the applicant.
H. Certificate of compliance. Before release of any subdivision bond, or
before the Commission endorses any subdivision map to permit filing
with the Town Clerk, when no subdivision bond has been posted, the
following shall be completed by the applicant and submitted to the
Commission:
(1) The applicant's land surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of
Connecticut, shall certify the installation and precise location of
monuments by noting such monuments and their location on the
linen construction plans and by signing and sealing the plans.
(2) The applicant's land surveyor or engineer, licensed to practice in the
State of Connecticut, shall update the linen construction plans to
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
§ 228-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-10
228:329
show as-built conditions and shall sign and seal said plans, certifying
that all of the required improvements have been completed in the
location and at the elevation shown thereon.
(3) The applicant shall submit a formal request for Town of Branford
acceptance of all streets shown on the record subdivision map; such
request shall be in a form and with accompanying documents as
approved by the Town Counsel.
I. Release of bond. No bond shall be released until the improvements
covered by such bond have been inspected by the Town Engineer and
the certificates of compliance submitted as provided in Subsection H.
For purposes of maintenance and to cover unforeseen deficiencies, a
portion of any subdivision bond shall not be released until one year
after completion of required subdivision improvements, and the amount
of such portion shall be determined by the Commission with the
recommendation of the Town Engineer. The applicant, however, may
post a new bond to cover the required portion of the original bond.
If no bond has been posted to guarantee completion of improvements,
the applicant shall post a one-year bond, meeting requirements of
Subsection F for purposes of maintenance and to cover unforeseen
deficiencies.
§ 228-10 BRANFORD CODE § 228-10
228:330
ARTICLE III
Maps and Plans
§ 228-11. General requirements.
The maps and plans required by these regulations shall show the
information and be prepared in accordance with the standards hereinafter
specified. In accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes of
the State of Connecticut which define "professional engineer" and "land
surveyor" and which limit practice to the field of registration, all required
maps and plans that involve the design of roads (both horizontal arid
vertical alignment), drainage systems (including the design and location of
structures and pipe), sanitary sewer systems, sewage disposal systems and
water supply and distribution systems constitute professional engineering
and as such must bear the name and seal of a Connecticut-licensed
professional engineer; a land surveyor's seal or an architect's seal is not
acceptable for this phase of land subdivision design work. Conversely, the
phase of land subdivision, including all required maps and plans which
relate to topography and the delineation of the boundary lines of the
perimeter of the subdivision, as well as the interior lots and streets,
constitutes land surveying within the meaning of the General Statutes and
as such must bear the name and seal of Connecticut-licensed land surveyor;
a professional engineer's seal or an architect's seal is not acceptable for this
phase of land subdivision. Pertinent survey data and computations shall be
presented to the Town Engineer for review if requested by him.
§ 228-12. Site development plan.
A. The site development plan shall be drawn on sheets 25 inches by 36
inches to a scale of one inch equals 40 feet but in no case less than
one inch equals 100 feet. The plan shall show existing conditions, the
proposed layout of lots, streets and improvements for the proposed
subdivision and a tentative layout of all contiguous land of the applicant
that may be subdivided in the future. The purpose of the plan is to
allow the Commission to complete a general planning review of the
proposed subdivision, including its relationship to the future subdivision
of contiguous land of the applicant. Four blue line or black line prints
shall be submitted.
B. The plan shall show at least the following information:
(1) Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely
approximate the title of any previous subdivision in the Town of
Branford.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided; name
and address of applicant if different from the owner.
(3) Date, scale, North point, Town and state.
(4) Existing and proposed property and street lines: adjoining property
lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet: and the names of all
adjacent subdivisions or property owners from current Assessor's
records.
§ 228-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-12
228:331
(5) Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds, swamps, shorelines,
easements and rights-of-way; the line of mean high tide in case the
subdivision is adjacent to tidewater.
(6) Existing contours at an interval not exceeding four feet on steep
land and not greater than two feet on rolling land, based on field
or aerial survey or Townwide topographic maps and using the same
bench mark as provided in § 228-14.
(7) Proposed lots and lot numbers; existing and proposed areas for
parks, playgrounds and open spaces.
(8) Existing permanent buildings and structures.
(9) Principal wooded areas and the approximate location of any large
isolated trees.
(10) Any ledge outcrops and existing stone walls arid fences within the
subdivision.
(11) Approximate dimensions on all proposed property and street lines;
approximate lot area and the total acreage of land included in the
subdivision and total acreage of contiguous land of the applicant.
(12) Proposed width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; the
proposed width of all pavement; and proposed street names.
(13) Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal boundary line;
and any zoning district boundary line.
(14) Existing and proposed storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins,
manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalls, gutters,
curbs and other structures, including tentative invert elevations at
key points.
(15) Key elevations of existing adjoining roads and spot elevations
showing tentative grading of proposed roads within the subdivision.
(16) Location of any test holes.
(17) Any areas subject to periodic or potential flooding.
(18) A location map (scale of one inch equals 800 feet) showing the
location of the subdivision in relation to existing roads in Town.
§ 228-13. Record subdivision map.
A. The record subdivision map shall be prepared with an accuracy meeting
or exceeding standards for a Class A-2 Transit Survey as defined by the
Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. The map for filing with the Town
Clerk shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall be submitted on good
quality heavy linen tracing cloth on sheets not exceeding 25 inches by 36
inches. The map should be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 40 feet but
in no case at a scale less than one inch equals 100 feet. A transparency
of the record subdivision map shall also be submitted on good quality
heavy linen tracing cloth for the records of the Town Engineer. Four blue
line or black line prints of the map shall also be submitted.
B. The map shall show the following:
(1) Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any
previous subdivision in the Town of Branford.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided; name
and address of the applicant if different from the owner.
(3) Date, scale, North point, Town and state.
§ 228-12 BRANFORD CODE § 228-13
228:332
(4) Existing and proposed property and street lines; adjoining property
lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet; and the names of all
adjacent subdivisions or property owners from current Assessor's
records.
(5) Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds, shorelines, easements
and rights-of-way; the line of mean high tide in case the subdivision
is adjacent to tidewater.
(6) Proposed lots and lot numbers; existing and proposed open spaces
for parks and playgrounds: the square footage or acreage of all
lots and open spaces and the total acreage of land included in the
subdivision.
(7) Existing permanent buildings and structures.
(8) Dimensions on all lines in feet and decimals of a foot to the
hundredth of a foot and all bearings or deflection angles on all
straight lines and the central angle, tangent distance and radius of
all arcs.
(9) The width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; street names.
(10) Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal boundary line.
(11) A location map (scale of one inch equals 800 feet) showing the
location of the subdivision in relation to existing roads in the Town.
(12) An index map, if the proposed subdivision is divided into sections
or is of such size that more than one sheet is required, showing the
entire subdivision with lots, lot numbers, streets, street names and
delineation of areas covered by the section or sheet.
(13) The survey relationship of proposed streets to nearby monumented
Town streets or state highways where practical.
(14) The error of closure, which shall not exceed one in 5,000.
(15) The words "approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
Town of Branford," with a designated place for the signatures of the
Chairman and Secretary and date of signing.
(16) The words "approved by the Director of Health" with a designated
place for signing and date of signing.
§ 228-14. Construction plans.
A. Plan and profile drawings of all proposed streets, storm drains, sanitary
sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls,
sidewalks, gutters, curbs and other structures shall be drawn on good
quality heavy linen plan-profile tracing cloth, approximately 22 inches
in width, and shall be drawn to horizontal scale of one inch equals 40
feet and a vertical scale of one inch equals four feet. Four blue line or
black line prints shall be submitted. The original reproducibles shall be
retained by the applicant for purposes of preparing as-built drawings
upon completion of improvements. Profile drawings and elevations shall
be based on official Town, state or United States Geological Survey
bench marks or other permanent bench marks approved by the Town
Engineer; the bench marks used shall be noted on the plan. All
construction plans shall bear the words "approved by the Town
Engineer" with a designated place for signing and date of signing.
Construction drawings shall show at least the following information in
§ 228-13 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-14
228:333
accordance with good engineering practice and as appropriate for the
particular subdivision:
(1) Title of the subdivision, date, scale, Town and state.
(2) For streets, the existing grades at the center line and both street
lines and the proposed grade at the center line; spot elevation on
proposed center lines at beginning and end of all vertical curves;
apex elevation; elevation at all even stations; percentage of grade on
all tangents; street lines and edge and width of pavement; sample
street cross sections; stations on center line at one-hundred-foot
intervals and at beginning and end of all horizontal curves and at
center-line intersections.
(3) Depth, invert, slope and size of all pipes, ditches, culverts, manholes,
catch basins, headwalls and watercourses; sample ditch and
watercourse cross sections; sufficient computations to permit the
Commission or Town Engineer to check drainage design.
(4) Location of existing and proposed monuments.
(5) Approximate location of lot lines intersecting the street line; lot
numbers and street names.
(6) Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and special structures.
(7) Detail drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes and
other special structures.
B. In addition to the above plan-profile drawings, other necessary
construction drawings and details shall be submitted on good quality
heavy linen tracing cloth along with four blue line or black line prints.
§ 228-15. Grading plan.
A. The area shown on the grading plan may be limited to the portion of
the subdivision affected by the proposed major regrading, cuts, fills or
soil or rock removal. At minimum, the grading plan shall cover those
areas of the subdivision where proposed changes in elevation exceed
five feet. The grading plan shall be drawn on good quality heavy linen
tracing cloth to the same scale as the record subdivision map. Contours
and elevations shall be based on the same bench marks as provided
in § 228-14. In addition to the linen tracing, four blue line or black
line prints shall be submitted. The grading plan shall bear the words
"approved by the Town Engineer" with a designated place for signing
and date of signing. The grading plan shall show at least the following
information:
(1) Title of the subdivision.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided; name
and address of the applicant if different from the owners.
(3) Date, scale, North point, Town and state.
(4) Layout of existing and proposed lot lines and street lines affected by
the proposed grading.
(5) Existing and proposed contours at an interval not exceeding two feet
based on field or aerial survey or Town topographic maps.
(6) Existing and proposed drainage and water courses.
(7) Existing permanent buildings and structures.
(8) Location of all test holes, test pits or borings.
§ 228-14 BRANFORD CODE § 228-15
228:334
B. In addition to the above grading plan, the Commission or the Town
Engineer may request the submission of cross-section drawings covering
the proposed excavation area.
§ 228-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-15
228:335

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 228-16. General.
Subdivisions shall be designed to conform to the current Comprehensive
Plan of Development, adopted by the Commission for the Town or the
neighborhood encompassing the subdivision, particularly in regard to
streets, drainage and reservation of land for parks, recreation and open
space. Subdivisions proposed in areas of special flood hazard, including
their utilities and drainage facilities, shall be located and designed to be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. Proposed subdivisions
and resubdivisions and all street, drainage and other improvements
required by those regulations shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards hereinafter specified and in accordance with
the applicable ordinance of the Town of Branford.
§ 228-17. Building lots.
Proposed building lots shall be of such shape, size, location, topography
and character that buildings can be reasonably constructed thereon and
that they can be occupied and used for building purposes without danger
to the health and safety of the occupants and the public. Any lot which
is found to be unsuitable for occupancy and buildings by reason of water
or flooding conditions, unsuitable soil, topography, ledge rock or other
conditions shall be combined with another contiguous lot that is suitable
or shall be marked "this is not an approved lot" on the subdivision map,
until necessary improvements to the lot have been made and approved by
the Commission and a revised subdivision map has been submitted to and
approved by the Commission. Proposed building lots shall be designed and
arranged to make best use of the natural terrain, avoiding unnecessary
regrading, and to preserve substantial trees and woods.
A. Lot size. Each lot shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance applicable
to the area of the subdivision. In addition, where the lot is not to be
served by public water supply and/or sanitary sewers, each lot shall
have sufficient area and suitable dimensions to provide ample space
to accommodate a private water supply system (where adequate public
water supply is not available) and/or to accommodate the proper layout,
installation and future extension of a private sewage disposal system
(where sanitary sewers are not available), both as needed by the
intended use of the lot and both in accordance with good engineering
practice and the applicable requirements of the Connecticut State
Department of Health and the Director of Health of the Town of
Branford.
B. Lot numbers. All lots shall be numbered beginning with the numeral
one and shall continue consecutively throughout the entire subdivision
with no omissions or duplications. No fractions or letters shall be used
unless necessary for clarity in a resubdivision. Adjoining subdivisions
and sections of a subdivision having the same title shall not duplicate
numbers but shall continue the sequence of numbers used previously for
§ 228-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-17
228:337
the adjoining land. All lot numbers shall be conspicuous and noted on the
map in the approximate center of the lots.
C. Lot lines. Insofar as practicable, the side lot lines of all lots shall be at
right angles to the street on which the lot faces or shall be radial to
the street line. It shall be the discretion of the Commission to refuse to
permit municipal boundary lines to cross any lot, and in the event of such
refusal, such boundary line shall be made to constitute one of the lot
lines.
§ 228-18. Streets.
Streets shall be planned and designed for acceptance by the Town of
Branford, and to conform to the following standards:
A. Classification. All proposed streets in the subdivision shall be classified
by the Commission as one of the following:
(1) Major street: a street of considerable existing or potential continuity
on which traffic past abutting lots will be dominant and serving as
an artery for intercommunication among large areas of the Town.
(2) Secondary street: a street serving as a feeder to a neighborhood
or a collector of several local streets, including commercial streets,
primarily providing access to abutting lots used for commercial,
business and industrial purposes or providing circulation within
commercial, business and industrial areas.
(3) Local street: a street primarily providing access to abutting lots
used for residential purposes.
B. Street planning. Proposed streets and rights-of-way shall be planned
in such manner as to provide safe and convenient access to proposed
lots and safe and convenient circulation for present and prospective
traffic within the neighborhood in which the subdivision is located.
In planning streets, due consideration shall be given to accomplishing
an attractive layout and development of the land. Streets should, in
general, follow the contour of the land and should have a location
and grade which preserves natural terrain, substantial trees, woods
and other natural features and which enhances property values in the
subdivision. Permanent dead-end streets shall be avoided unless
connecting streets are impractical. Proposed streets which may be
projected into adjoining properties shall be carried to the boundary
line; no reserve strips will be permitted. Streets shall be planned in
accordance with the following additional standards:
(1) Major street. Major streets shall be provided as indicated on any
Comprehensive Plan of Development adopted by the Commission
and where necessary to connect major areas of Town or to serve a
major commercial or industrial area.
(2) Secondary street. Secondary streets shall be planned as a logical
system of feeders and collectors connected to the major street
system and shall be planned to accommodate the volume, type and
concentration of traffic anticipated in the commercial, business or
industrial areas.
§ 228-17 BRANFORD CODE § 228-18
228:338
(3) Local street. Local streets shall provide for continuation of existing
streets in adjoining areas and for projection into adjoining
properties when subdivided.
C. Right-of-way width. Streets shall have the following minimum width of
right-of-way according to their classification:
(1) Major street: 80 feet.
(2) Secondary street: 60 feet.
(3) Local street: 50 feet.
D. Width of pavement. Streets shall be designed with the following width
of pavement centered between the street lines:
(1) Major street: 40 feet.
(2) Secondary street: 36 feet.
(3) Local street: 30 feet.
(4) Turnaround: fifty-foot radius.
E. Alignment. Connecting curves between tangents shall be provided for
all deflection angles in excess of 5°. Suitable tangents shall be provided
between curves. A minimum tangent length of 300 feet shall be provided
between reverse curves. The minimum radius of curvature at the center
line of streets shall be as follows:
(1) Major street: 600 feet.
(2) Secondary street: 300 feet.
(3) Local street: 150 feet.
F. Grade. The minimum grade for any street shall be 1.0%, except that a
minimum grade of from 0.5% to 1.0% may be established for 100 feet
or less and as tangents of vertical curves. The maximum grade for any
street shall not exceed the following according to its classification:
(1) Major street: 6%.
(2) Secondary street: 8%.
(3) Local street: 10%.
(4) Turnaround: 3%.
G. Vertical curves: Appropriate vertical curves shall be established on all
streets and at street intersections to ensure adequate sight distance in
accordance with the classification of the street and good engineering
practice. Where any street approaches an intersection at a grade of
4% or more, a transition area, having a maximum grade of 2%, shall
be provided for a minimum of 50 feet measured from the right-of-way
line of the street intersected. The following minimum stopping sight
distances shall be provided:
(1) Major street: 350 feet.
(2) Secondary street: 250 feet.
(3) Local street: 250 feet.
H. Intersections. The following standards shall apply to street
intersections:
(1) No more than two streets shall intersect at one point. In general,
intersections shall be spaced not less than 200 feet apart.
(2) Streets shall intersect one another at as near to a right angle as is
practical. No intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60°.
(3) At street intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by an
arc having a minimum radius of 25 feet.
§ 228-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-18
228:339
(4) The distance between intersections and connecting streets shall not
be less than 200 feet nor more than 1200 feet to avoid excessively
long blocks and unnecessary circuitous travel on streets.
I. Street lines. Street lines on each side of a proposed street shall be
parallel or shall be concentric arcs, except at intersections and
turnarounds designed in accordance with these regulations. No street
right-of-way shall be widened beyond the minimum width specified in
these regulations for the purpose of securing additional street frontage
for proposed lots. The boundary line between a private street and public
street shall be clearly delineated.
J. Dead-end streets. No permanent dead-end street shall be planned
except when topography or physical conditions make it impractical to
extend it or connect it with another proposed or existing street. No
permanent dead-end street shall exceed in length the frontage of six
lots per side; temporary dead-end streets may exceed such length but
shall not exceed a reasonable interim length for safe and convenient
vehicular access, including emergency vehicles, as determined by the
Commission.
K. Turnarounds. A turnaround with a minimum diameter of 120 feet for
the right-of-way shall be provided at the closed end of a cul-de-sac
or dead-end street which may be projected into adjoining property
at some future date and which provides sole access to one or more
building lots. Land for a turnaround on a temporary deadend street,
which may at some future date be projected into adjoining property,
shall be provided in the form of a temporary easement bearing a note
on the map, "easement for temporary turnaround which automatically
terminates upon extension of street."
L. Existing streets. Proposed subdivisions abutting an existing Town street
or state highway shall provide for proper widening of the right-of-way
of such street or highway to the width appropriate for the classification
indicated for such street or highway in the Zoning Regulations of the
Town of Branford.
M. Street names. All proposed streets serving one or more lots shall be
named and shall bear names which are appropriate to the character
of the Town and which do not duplicate or too closely approximate in
spelling or sound existing street names in Branford or any adjoining
municipality. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the
Commission.
N. Cross section. The street cross section shall be designed with a cross
section in accordance with the classification of the street and the
standard construction details of the Town of Branford.
§ 228-19. Monuments.
Monuments shall be located at all intersections and at all angles and points
of curve or other critical points on street lines to enable a land surveyor to
correctly stake out any lot or street in the subdivision.
§ 228-18 BRANFORD CODE § 228-20
228:340
§ 228-20. Storm drainage.
Storm drainage shall be provided and designed in accordance with the
following standards:
A. Pipe and ditches. Sufficient pipe shall be installed within the subdivision
to carry existing watercourses, other than rivers and large streams,
and to drain the proposed streets and streets which may reasonably be
expected to be constructed at some future date on adjoining land which
normally drains across the area of the proposed subdivision. If in its
judgment there will be no substantial danger from soil erosion or danger
to health and safety, the Commission may permit on lots of one acre
or larger the continuance of existing watercourses in their established
courses and may permit the discharge of stormwater in open ditches.
Ditches and open watercourses shall not be planned in the portion of
the lot customarily used for front and side yards or the portion which
might be used for private sewage disposal and/or water supply systems.
In general, the storm drainage system shall be piped to 50 feet beyond
the rear of proposed houses before being allowed to discharge into open
channels. All ditches shall be of such size and all pipe shall be of such
diameter (not less than 15 inches) as will, in the judgment of the Town
Engineer, be sufficient to carry properly the stormwater expected to
enter the ditch or pipe from the proposed subdivision and from other
properties when developed which normally drain across the area of the
proposed subdivision. The design of all storm drainage facilities shall be
subject to the approval of the Town Engineer. A minimum rate of rainfall
of two inches per hour shall be used in the design of roadway storm
drainage facilities, and four inches per hour shall be used in the design
of culverts under roads at brooks and watercourses. Design of all pipe
sizes shall give due consideration to the entire drainage area, whether
on-site or off-site. The minimum slope for fifteen-inch pipe shall be 1.0%.
The minimum cover over pipe shall be four feet from the invert but in no
case shall be less than two feet over the top of the pipe.
B. Manholes. Manholes shall be provided at each change in direction or
grade of the pipe and shall not be spaced more than 400 feet apart.
C. Catch basins. Catch basins shall be provided in order that surface water
will travel without interception not more than 300 feet.
D. Discharge. The discharge of all stormwater from the subdivision shall
be into suitable streams or rivers or into Town drains, ditches or other
Town drainage facilities with adequate capacity to carry the additional
water. Where the discharge shall be into private property adjoining the
proposed subdivision, proper easements and discharge rights shall be
secured by the applicant for the Town before approval of the record
subdivision map and acceptance of the drainage plan. No stormwater
shall be diverted from one watershed to another.
E. Headwalls and culverts. Suitable headwalls shall be provided at the open
end of any pipe. Culverts under streets shall be extended to the edge of
the right-of-way of the street and shall have a minimum diameter of 18
inches.
§ 228-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-21
228:341
§ 228-21. Special structures.
Bridges, box culverts, deep manholes and other special structures shall
be designed in accordance with good engineering practice. Bridges and
box culverts shall be designed to carry the full width of required street
pavement and at least a four-foot sidewalk on each side.
§ 228-22. Sanitary sewers.
Sanitary sewers shall be installed in or near areas served by Town sanitary
sewers. Plans shall be submitted to and approved by the Sewer Authority,
and the design and installation of sanitary sewers shall be in accordance
with good engineering and construction practice and in accordance with
the design standards of the Branford sanitary sewer system and the Town
Engineer. In areas of special flood hazard, sanitary sewers shall be located
and designed to avoid impairment and to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the system into
floodwaters.
§ 228-23. Water supply.
Public water supply shall be provided to lots in any subdivision located
within any area served by public water supply. In addition, for areas in
proximity to public water supply service, when it is deemed by the
Commission to be practicable, convenient and economically feasible to do
so, public water supply shall be extended to serve the subdivision. The
applicant shall obtain from the water company the location and size of the
nearest water main and shall indicate or note this information on the site
development plan. The decision by the Commission to require extension of
the public water supply system to serve the subdivision will be based upon
the location of the nearest main, the adequacy of pressure and service,
the proposed layout of the subdivision, the nature of the terrain of the
subdivision and such other additional information as the Commission may
deem pertinent. In areas of special flood hazard, water supply systems shall
be located and designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems.
§ 228-24. Curbs.
Portland cement concrete curbing shall be installed along the edge of
all permanent street pavement. Bituminous curbs may be used along the
edge of pavement of a temporary turnaround that is to be eliminated upon
extension of the street.
§ 228-25. Sidewalks.
At the request of the Commission, sidewalks shall be installed on major and
secondary streets, in pedestrian easements, on local streets in the vicinity
of schools and playgrounds and in other places deemed necessary by the
Commission for the public necessity and safety.
§ 228-21 BRANFORD CODE § 228-26
228:342
§ 228-26. Channel lines.
Channel and building lines shall be provided along any major stream or
river for the purpose of preventing encroachment upon and constriction of
the natural water channel by buildings, filling operations or other facilities
and construction. The width of the channel shall be based on sound
engineering calculations anticipating long-range storms and flow potentials
and recognizing proper alignment and gradients of the channel. A note
shall be placed on the record subdivision map explaining the channel and
building lines and stating the restrictions against encroachment upon the
channel in a manner approved by the Town Counsel.
§ 228-27. Pedestrian easements.
In areas where the proposed street system does not conform to a convenient
pattern of pedestrian circulation, particularly in the vicinity of parks,
schools, playgrounds or other public or semipublic places, the Commission
may require the provision of twenty-foot easements for the establishment of
pedestrianways.
§ 228-28. Easements.
Easements, having a minimum width of 20 feet or such greater width as may
be required by the Town Engineer, shall be provided for all stormwater and
sanitary sewer pipes which will not be installed in streets to be dedicated
to the Town. The easement shall be located so that the pipe is positioned
five feet from the boundary of such easement. Easements at least 20 feet in
width shall also be provided for the full width of the channel of any stream
or drainage ditch which will carry drainage runoff from any proposed
street, existing street or streets which may be constructed in the future on
unsubdivided land within the watershed. Easements shall also be provided,
in locations deemed proper by the Commission or the Town Engineer, for
stormwater and sanitary sewer pipes, water mains or other utility lines that
may need to be installed in the future.
§ 228-29. Reserved strips.
No reserved strips shall be provided in any subdivision.
§ 228-30. Open spaces for parks and playgrounds.
In subdivisions proposed for residential development, open spaces for parks
and playgrounds shall be provided in places deemed proper by the
Commission. In requiring the provision of such open spaces, the
Commission shall be guided by a minimum standard of 10% of the area of
the subdivision. The minimum area for any open space shall be one acre
unless the area is an addition to an existing or proposed park, playground,
open space or public land or unless a lesser area is approved by the
Commission as appropriate for the open space purposes intended. Land
shown on the subdivision plan as open space for parks and playgrounds
shall be of such size, location, shape, topography and general character
§ 228-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-30
228:343
as to be suitable to satisfy the needs determined by the Commission. The
open spaces provided shall conform to any Town Master Plan pertaining
to parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and open spaces. The Commission,
in requiring the provision of open space, shall give due consideration to
the proper development of the Town, the density of population, the existing
public open spaces in the vicinity of the subdivision and the preservation
and potential enhancement of existing natural features, large trees and
other scenic points. Proper pedestrian and vehicular access shall be made,
approved by the Commission, to ensure continued responsibility for longterm
reservation and maintenance of the open spaces by convenant in the
deed, by neighborhood association or other suitable means, unless the open
spaces are offered to and accepted by the Town. If the open spaces are
offered to the Town, a warranty deed and title certificate as provided in
§ 228-10E shall be submitted and if said land is not accepted by the Town
within 180 days of the date of filing of the record subdivision map with
the Town Clerk, said deed shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant
shall then make other arrangements, approved by the Commission, for the
preservation of the open spaces. When a subdivision plan is submitted
in sections, a proportionate part of the total open space area proposed
and approved on the overall site development plan shall be established in
the first section submitted, including suitable access to such land. Action
under this section by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be taken
after consultation with the Recreation Commission and the Conservation
Commission.
§ 228-30 BRANFORD CODE § 228-30
228:344
ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 228-31. Compliance required.
All required subdivision improvements shall be constructed in accordance
with the standards hereinafter specified and in accordance with applicable
ordinances and standard specifications of the Town of Branford.
§ 228-32. Supervision and inspection.
Construction of all required improvements shall be carried out under the
supervision of the Town Engineer and shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Commission and the Town Engineer or their authorized
agent. The Town Engineer or his agent shall be notified when any
preliminary grading of streets has been completed and upon completion
of subgrade preparation and shall be notified at least 48 hours prior to
installation of the gravel subbase course and any base and surface course.
No pipe, catch basin, manhole or other structure shall be backfilled until
inspected and approved by the Town Engineer or his agent. The Commission
and Town Engineer or their authorized agent shall have free access to the
construction work at all times and shall be authorized to take material
samples, cores and other tests as deemed necessary to determine
compliance with these regulations. The Commission or the Town Engineer
may require the applicant, at his own expense, to have such tests made
and certified by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of
Connecticut.
§ 228-33. Streets.
Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards:
A. Cross section. Pavements shall be constructed with a crown with a cross
slope of 1/4 inch per foot. A ten-foot sidewalk area shall be provided and
graded on each side of pavement. The sidewalk area shall be graded
level with the top of the curb and shall be loamed and seeded as
provided in Subsection G. The Commission or the Town Engineer may
require modification of this grading requirement in order to preserve
substantial existing trees.
B. Preparation of subgrade. All trees and roots shall be stripped to below
the base course of the pavement and for the full width of the pavement.
All soft spots, peat, loam, organic material, soft clay, spongy soil,
boulders, ledge and other unsuitable material shall be removed and
replaced by material approved by the Town Engineer. All fill that is
placed to an elevation of less than three feet above the water table at
the time of filling shall consist of rock or free-draining soil meeting State
Highway Department specifications. Where ledge rock is encountered,
it shall be removed to a depth of one foot below subgrade and the area
backfilled with gravel. Embankments shall be constructed of suitable
fill material deposited in successive layers not exceeding 12 inches in
depth. The subgrade shall be compacted by distributing the hauling over
§ 228-31 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-33
228:345
the area by the use of tread-type of equipment, by power rollers of
at least 10 tons or by other mechanical means approved by the Town
Engineer.
C. Subbase. The subbase shall be constructed in accordance with the Town
road specifications.61
D. Base course. The base course shall be constructed in accordance with
Town road specifications.62
E. Top course. The top course shall be constructed in accordance with
Town road specifications.63
F. Underdrains. The Town Engineer may require the installation of
underdrains beneath the street pavement where necessary to protect
the stability of the pavement.
G. Slopes. Cut or fill sections beyond the sidewalk area shall not exceed
a slope of one on two except in rock. The Town Engineer may require
a decrease in the amount of slope to whatever extent is necessary to
maintain the stability of the bank under the particular soil conditions.
All earth surfaces of slopes, and areas that have been disturbed in any
way due to grading and construction of the streets, shall be covered
with a minimum of four inches of topsoil and suitably seeded or planted
to prevent soil erosion. The Town Engineer may require the removal
or lowering of embankments adjacent to street intersections in order
to assure adequate sight distance at the intersection. No cut or fill
sections beyond the sidewalk area shall extend into property outside the
subdivision or property not owned by the applicant unless appropriate
slope rights are obtained for the Town; in the absence of such slope
rights, appropriate retaining walls shall be constructed within the
subdivision to prevent encroachment upon adjoining property.
H. Construction procedures. Line and grade stakes shall not be spaced
more than 50 feet apart and shall be set by the land surveyor or engineer
and maintained in good order during construction and until the street
is approved by the Town Engineer. No street shall be opened or used
for travel until it shall have been approved by the Town Engineer.
All water mains, sewers, pipe and other underground utility services
shall be installed prior to placing the base course. Whenever possible,
underground utility lines shall be installed outside the pavement portion
of the street.
I. Debris and equipment. All large rocks, boulders, felled trees, stumps
and brush shall be removed from the street right-of-way. All temporary
structures, tools, equipment and waste materials shall be removed from
the street right-of-way upon completion of the work.
§ 228-34. Storm drainage.
Storm drainage shall be constructed in accordance with the following
standards:
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
§ 228-33 BRANFORD CODE § 228-34
228:346
A. Pipe. All pipe shall meet State Highway Department specifications.
Reinforced concrete pipe shall be used for surface drainage stormwater
systems and cross culverts. Where vertical clearance is limited and on
grades in excess of 10% or where uneven support may be expected,
A.C.C.M. pipe or pipe arches shall be used. All pipe shall be bedded
carefully on soil approved by the Town Engineer. There shall be a fourinch
sand cushion bedded under the pipe on any rock or ledge formation.
B. Ditches. All open drainage ditches, except stream relocations or
improvements, shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches, a maximum
depth of three feet and maximum side slope of one on 1 1/2. If required
by the Commission or the Town Engineer, ditches shall be paved either
with two inches of hot bituminous concrete, thoroughly compacted on an
eight-inch gravel base or with 1/3 sections of reinforced concrete pipe.
All ditches shall be constructed as approved by the Town Engineer.
C. Joints. The joints of all pipe shall be shoved tight. Pipe laid in sandy, silty
or other soil in which, in the judgment of the Town Engineer, there is
danger of washing or cave-ins shall have joints thoroughly sealed with
one-to-three concrete mortar.
D. Catchbasins and manholes. Catch basin and manhole types shall be
approved by the Town Engineer and constructed in conformity with
Connecticut State Highway Standard Specifications. Catch basins may
be depressed slightly to facilitate the collection of water.
E. Backfill. Where the drainage pipe is necessary to serve as an underdrain
for the street or to control the water table, the pipe shall be bedded on
at least six inches of one-inch washed stone; three-fourths-inch washed
stone shall be placed around and over the pipe to a height of six inches
and then covered by heavy tar paper and backfilled with bank-run gravel.
Backfill for all other pipe shall be tamped pneumatically every 12 inches
in even layers.
F. Construction procedure. All pipe shall be laid to line and grade as shown
on approved drainage plans and profiles. Line and grade stakes shall be
set by a land surveyor or engineer and shall be maintained in good order
until the work has been inspected and approved by the Town Engineer.
Four batter boards (three sections) shall be maintained in place at all
times when laying pipe and shall not be spaced more than 30 feet apart.
The exact grade for each pipe shall be maintained. No pipe shall be
laid on water, and water shall not be permitted to rise over freshly
mortared joints until they are properly hardened. Ground or surface
water accumulating in the trench must be pumped out.
§ 228-35. Monuments.
Reinforced concrete monuments shall be built of one-two-four mix, four
inches square on the bottom and three feet long. Each monument shall be
suitably marked on the top and shall be set so that the marked center of
the top shall be the point of reference. The tops of such monuments shall be
set in place after all other street development is completed. The accuracy
of location of such monuments shall be certified in writing by the land
surveyor making the record subdivision map.
§ 228-34 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-36
228:347
§ 228-36. Guard posts.
Guard posts or guide railing shall be installed at all drainage headwalls in
the right-of-way and along all streets where there will be an embankment
with a depth of four feet or more within 20 feet of the proposed pavement.
Creosoted or cedar guard posts shall be spaced six feet on center and shall
have a minimum tip diameter of five inches and a minimum length of seven
feet with 3 1/2 feet set in the ground. Subject to the approval of the Town
Engineer, three-cable guide railing, metal-beam-type guide railing or steel
guard posts of suitable design may be substituted for the creosoted or cedar
guard posts. All materials and construction methods and details shall be
subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.
§ 228-37. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet and be located within
the street lines with one edge abutting the property line or in such other
location approved by the Commission or the Town Engineer. Sidewalks shall
be constructed in accordance with Town specifications.64
§ 228-38. Street signs.
Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections in locations
approved by the Town Engineer. Such signs shall be of a design and material
used by the Town of Branford.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. V.
§ 228-36 BRANFORD CODE § 228-38
228:348
ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 228-39. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land without the
approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission is subject to penalties
provided in the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
§ 228-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 228-39
228:349
Chapter 233
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Agency — See Ch. 69.
Planning and Zoning Commission; Zoning
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 71.
Signs — See Ch. 210.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 228.
§ 228-39 BRANFORD CODE § 228-39
233:350

Branford
Zoning
Regulations
BRANFORD, CONNECTICUT
Adopted 4.21.2011
Amended 12.4.2014
Effective 2.1.2015
ZONING REGULATIONS
TOWN OF BRANFORD, CONNECTICUT
These Regulations are the amended Zoning Regulations of the Town of Branford, Connecticut adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission on April 21, 2011, pursuant to the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and effective June 1, 2011.
Branford Planning And Zoning Commission
Ellsworth McGuigan, Chairman
Charles R. Andres, Secretary
Joseph Vaiuso
Stephen Duhamel
John B. Lust
Joseph Chadwick, Alternate
Marcia Palluzzi, Alternate Fred Russo, Alternate
Ex Officio
James B. Cosgrove, First Selectman
Town Staff
José Giner, AICP , Town Planner
Richard H. Stoecker, Assistant Town Planner
Janice A. Plaziak, Town Engineer
Jennifer F. Acquino, Zoning Enforcement Official
Michelle Arbachouskas, Administrative Assistant
CONTENTS
SECTION 1 INTRODUCTION............................................................1
1.1 AUTHORITY. ................................................................................................... 1
1.2 PURPOSES. ....................................................................................................... 1
1.3 JURISDICTION. ............................................................................................... 1
1.4 INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS. ................................................... 2
1.5 ZONING DISTRICTS. ..................................................................................... 3
1.6 ZONING MAP. ................................................................................................ 4
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS ..................................................................5
2.1 USE OF TERMS. ............................................................................................... 5
2.2 DEFINED TERMS. ........................................................................................... 6
SECTION 3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ........................................25
3.1 GENERAL. ...................................................................................................... 25
3.2 PURPOSES. ..................................................................................................... 25
3.3 PERMITTED USES......................................................................................... 27
3.4 BULK REQUIREMENTS. .............................................................................. 30
3.5 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE] ................................................................ 30
3.6 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE] ................................................................ 30
3.7 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. ..................... 31
3.8 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES................................................... 33
3.9 UNDERSIZED RESIDENTIAL LOTS. ........................................................ 34
3.10 HOME BASED BUSINESSES. ...................................................................... 35
SECTION 4 BUSINESS DISTRICTS ................................................37
4.1 CENTER BUSINESS BC DISTRICT. ............................................................ 37
4.2 MIXED-USE DISTRICT. ................................................................................ 38
4.3 RESTRICTED BUSINESS (BR) DISTRICT. ................................................. 39
4.4 LOCAL BUSINESS (BL) DISTRICT. ............................................................ 41
4.5 GENERAL INDUSTRY 1 (IG-1) DISTRICT. ............................................... 42
4.6 GENERAL INDUSTRY 2 (IG-2) DISTRICT. ............................................... 43
4.7 COMMERCE PARK (CP) DISTRICT. ......................................................... 44
4.8 TABLE OF USES - BUSINESS ZONES. ....................................................... 45
SECTION 5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS ...................................................51
5.1 COASTAL MANAGEMENT DISTRICT. ................................................... 51
5.2 TOWN CENTER VILLAGE DISTRICT....................................................... 54
5.3 ACCESS MANAGEMENT DISTRICT. ....................................................... 59
5.4 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. .................................................. 63
5.5 AFFORDABLE HOUSING. .......................................................................... 66
5.6 AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING DISTRICT................................................. 72
5.7 INCENTIVE HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT (IHOD) .......................... 78
5.8 STONY CREEK VILLAGE DISTRICT ......................................................... 83
SECTION 6 BASIC STANDARDS ...................................................87
6.1 BUILDING LOTS. .......................................................................................... 87
6.2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS. .................................................................. 88
6.3 LANDSCAPING. ........................................................................................... 90
6.4 TRAILERS AND STORAGE CONTAINERS. ............................................ 93
6.5 OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING. ................................................ 95
6.6 SIGNS. ........................................................................................................... 103
6.7 OUTDOOR LIGHTING. ............................................................................. 108
6.8 GRADING AND EARTH REMOVAL ACTIVITIES. .............................. 111
6.9 DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER CONTROL. .................................... 116
6.10 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. ...................................... 119
6.11 INTERIOR (REAR) LOTS. .......................................................................... 120
6.12 DRIVEWAYS. ............................................................................................... 122
6.13 FENCES AND WALLS. ............................................................................... 125
6.14 TOWN-WIDE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS. ......................................... 127
6.15 TRAFFIC........................................................................................................ 129
SECTION 7 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS .............................................131
7.1 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. ................................ 131
7.2 AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING. ................................................................. 132
7.3 OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. ................................... 134
7.4 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS. ................................................................... 138
7.5 APARTMENT(S) IN A BL ZONE. ............................................................. 139
7.6 GROUP DAY CARE HOMES AND DAY CARE CENTERS. ................ 139
7.7 BED AND BREAKFAST. ............................................................................. 140
7.8 HOSPITALS. ................................................................................................. 140
7.9 MARINAS, SLIP BASINS, BOAT STORAGE AND LANDINGS.......... 141
7.10 STORAGE TRAILERS. ................................................................................ 141
7.11 CONTRACTOR BUSINESSES AND STORAGE YARDS. ...................... 142
7.12 SELF-STORAGE. .......................................................................................... 144
7.13 COMMERCIAL KENNELS. ....................................................................... 145
7.14 COMMERCIAL HORSE STABLES. ........................................................... 146
7.15 DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOWS. ............................................................... 147
7.16 ADAPTIVE REUSE. ..................................................................................... 148
7.17 FARMERS’ MARKETS ................................................................................ 149
SECTION 8 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS ......................................151
8.1 NONCONFORMITIES. ............................................................................... 151
CONTENTS
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 9 PROCEDURES .............................................................155
9.1 ZONING APPLICATION TYPES. ............................................................. 155
9.2 ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION. (STAFF APPROVAL) ................... 156
9.3 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. (STAFF APPROVAL) .. 158
9.4 USE OF PARCELS CREATED BY FIRST CUT OR “FREE SPLIT.” ...... 159
9.5 DESIGN REVIEW FOR THE TOWN CENTER VILLAGE DISTRICT. (TOWN CENTER REVITALIZATION REVIEW BOARD) ................ 160
9.6 SITE PLAN APPLICATION. (COMMISSION) ........................................ 162
9.7 COASTAL SITE PLAN REVIEW. (COMMISSION) ................................ 166
9.8 SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION. (COMMISSION) .................... 168
9.9 REGULATION AMENDMENT. (COMMISSION) ................................. 173
9.10 MAP AMENDMENT. (COMMISSION) ................................................... 175
9.11 MOTOR VEHICLE LOCATION APPROVAL. (COMMISSION) ......... 179
9.12 APPEAL OF AN ORDER. (ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS) .............. 180
9.13 VARIANCE. (ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS) ..................................... 180
9.14 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL APPLICATIONS. .......... 181
9.15 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGN REVIEW FOR THE STONY CREEK VILLAGE DISTRICT. ............................................................................ 185
SECTION 10 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION ..............................187
10.1 ADMINISTRATION .................................................................................... 187
10.2 ENFORCEMENT. ........................................................................................ 188
10.3 BONDING REQUIREMENTS. ................................................................... 189
10.4 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. .............................................................. 191
APPENDICES .......................................................................................193
LIGHTING ............................................................................................................... 193
ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS .................................. 195
REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ............. 196
SITE PLAN AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS .................................................................................................................... 197
REGULATION CHANGE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ..................... 200
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT REQUIREMENTS ........................................ 201
CUMMULATIVE LISTING OF AMENDMENTS SINCE ADOPTION.......202

Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|1
Contents
SECTION
1
INTRODUCTION
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 AUTHORITY.
These Regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut (CGS), as amended.
1.2 PURPOSES.
1.2.A These Regulations are adopted to:
1. Guide the future growth and development of Branford in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development;
2. Lessen congestion in the streets;
3. Secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers;
4. Promote health and the general welfare;
5. Provide for adequate light and air;
6. Protect the environment,
7. Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid the undue concentration of population; and
8. Facilitate adequate provisions transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
9. Give consideration to the character of each area and its peculiar suitability for particular uses;
10. Conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout Branford;
11. Protect historic factors and resources;
12. Protect existing and potential public drinking water supplies;
13. Protect natural resources;
14. Provide for the development of housing opportunities, including opportunities for multifamily dwellings, consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastructure capacity;
15. Provide for housing choice and economic diversity in housing, including housing that will meet identified housing needs; and
16. Address and meet all state and federal requirements relating to zoning.
1.3 JURISDICTION.
1.3.A Area.
Within the Town of Branford, outside the limits of the Pine Orchard Association and the Civic Association of Short Beach, Connecticut, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with these Regulations. Coastal Site Plan Reviews within Pine Orchard and Short Beach are subject to these Regulations.
SECTION 1.4
2 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
1.3.B No lot or land shall be divided, altered in shape or size, sold, encumbered or conveyed so as to:
1. Make any use, building or other structure nonconforming or more nonconforming to or with these Regulations;
2. Reduce any setback, open space, or off-street parking and loading spaces to less than is required by these Regulations; or
3. Make any nonconforming setbacks, open space or off-street parking and loading spaces more non-conforming.
1.4 INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS.
1.4.A Prohibited If Not Permitted.
1. The following uses are prohibited in any zoning district:
a. Billboards
b. Junkyards
c. Occupancy of a travel trailer or tent as a dwelling
d. Outdoor storage in a residential district of any inoperable motor vehicle for more than 30 days.
e. Outdoor accumulation or storage of used or discarded materials, trash, rubbish, debris, building materials, or parts of motor vehicles or other machinery.
2. In addition to the foregoing expressly prohibited uses, any principal use of land, buildings or structures that is not expressly permitted by these Regulations in a particular zoning district shall be deemed to be prohibited in that district.
3. For a principal use permitted as of right by these Regulations, accessory uses that are clearly and customarily incidental and are subordinate to the permitted principal use are also permitted. For a principal use requiring a special permit or special exception, the Commission may restrict the scope or nature of accessory uses that will be permitted.
4. Any activity not expressly permitted by these Regulations in a particular zoning district is prohibited in that district.
1.4.B Minimum Standards.
The provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, unless the context clearly indicates that such provision is intended to be a maximum limitation.
1.4.C Multiple Standards.
1. In the event that there are found to be conflicting requirements within these Regulations, the most restrictive provision shall be applied
2. The provisions of these Regulations may be superseded by other local, state, or federal laws or regulations
3. These Regulations do not release a person from having to comply with a more restrictive law, ordinance, easement, covenant, rule, regulation, or permit.
SECTION 1.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|3
Contents
SECTION
1
INTRODUCTION
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business Zone
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
1.5 ZONING DISTRICTS.
For the purpose of these Regulations, the Town of Branford is hereby divided into the following classes of districts:
BASE ZONES
OVERLAY ZONES
FLOATING ZONES A traditional zoning district classification.
An area where additional regulatory provisions are superimposed upon a “base zone”
A zoning district that is established on the zoning map only when a master plan for a proposed development is approved Residence l R-1
Coastal Management CMOD
Planned Development PDD Residence 2 R-2
Town Center Village District TCVD
Age-Restricted Housing ARHD Residence 3 R-3
Access Management AMOD
Residence 4 R-4
Affordable Housing AHOD
Residence 5 R-5
Incentive Housing IHOD
Multifamily Residence MF
Center Business BC
Mixed Use MU
Restricted Business BR
Local Business BL
Commerce Park CP
General Industry 1 IG-1
General Industry 2 IG-2
SECTION 1.6
4 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
1.6 ZONING MAP.
1.6.A Map.
The boundaries of the districts specified in Section 1.5 are hereby established as shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map of the Town of Branford, Connecticut”, dated July 10, 1973 including any special maps and boundary descriptions supplementary thereto and any amendments thereof, which map is hereby declared to be a part of these Regulations and is herein referred to as “Zoning Map”.
1.6.B Interpretation of Map.
Where a question arises as to exact boundaries of a district shown on the Zoning Map, the Commission shall by resolution determine the location of the boundary, giving due consideration, among other factors, to the indicated location of the boundary on the Zoning Map, the scale of the Zoning Map and the expressed intent and purposes of these Regulations.
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|5
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
2.1 USE OF TERMS.
2.1.A Definitions to be Applied.
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, the words and phrases set forth in these Regulations shall be construed as defined in this Article, unless otherwise clearly qualified by their context.
2.1.B Specific Terms.
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, certain words contained herein shall be interpreted as follows:
1. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
2. The word "may" is permissive.
3. When not inconsistent with the context:
(1) Words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa.
(2) Words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa.
(3) Words in the masculine include the feminine and neuter and vice-versa.
4. The words "occupied" or "used" include the words "designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used."
5. The words "zone", "zoning district", and "district" have the same meaning.
6. The word "person" also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation or other legal entity.
7. “Filed” shall mean “submitted” and vice-versa.
8. The “Town” is the Town of Branford, Connecticut.
9. The “Commission” is the Planning and Zoning Commission.
10. “CGS” means the Connecticut General Statutes. All references in these Regulations to the CGS shall mean the most recently amended version of the statutes, unless specifically stated otherwise. For informational purposes and reader convenience, the version of certain statutes as of the time of adoption of these Regulations is reprinted herein. However, if the relevant statute was later amended, the versions reprinted herein may no longer be applicable. The reader should consult the current version of the statute when possible. Connecticut statutes may be searched “on line” at the following web address: www.cga.ct.gov
2.1.C Terms Not Defined.
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, words not defined in this Article shall be interpreted by the Commission or its designated agent. In connection with such interpretation, the Commission may consult one or more of the following:
1. The State Building Code, as amended.
2. The Connecticut General Statutes (“CGS”).
3. The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers University, Center for Urban Policy Research (Piscataway, NJ), as amended.
4. Black's Law Dictionary.
5. A comprehensive general dictionary.
SECTION 2.2
6 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
2.2 DEFINED TERMS.
For the purpose of these Regulations, the following words are defined below:
Accelerated Erosion. See Erosion, Accelerated @ “Erosion” Related Terms CONCEPT OF “ACCESSORY” AND “PRINCIPAL” Accessory. Subordinate and customarily incidental to a principal building, structure, or use on the same property. Principal. The primary or predominant building, structure, use, or activity on a lot or parcel
Accessory Apartment. See “Housing” Related Terms.
Accessory Building. See Building, Accessory @ “Building” Related Terms.
Accessory Structure. See Structure, Accessory @ “Building” Related Terms.
Accessway. Any portion of a lot that provides access to and from a street but that has a width that is less than the distance of the minimum frontage required in the relevant zoning district. For purposes of this definition, the width of the accessway at any location shall be measured parallel to a straight line passing between the two edge points of intersection of the accessway with the street line.
Adaptive Re-use. Renovation of an existing historic structure and conversion of the existing use to a use that is not otherwise allowed in the zone in which the structure is located. Uses allowable as adaptive re-use include any use that is permitted by site plan or special exception approval in any zoning district, as specified by these Regulations.
Amplified Entertainment. Public entertainment that is augmented, rebroadcast or amplified through the use of electrically powered microphones or speakers.
Animal Day Care. A business kept or maintained for the care, grooming, training, exercising and socialization of dogs or cats by a person other than the owner of the animal. Does not include overnight boarding. Overnight boarding may be permitted as part of a Commercial Kennel in accordance with Section 7.13.
Attic. The space between the ceiling joists and the roof rafters.
Average Ground Level. A reference plane established by the average of the ground level as measured at the base of all of the exterior walls. Measurements shall be taken at intervals of 10 feet around the perimeter of the building or structure.
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|7
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
Bed and Breakfast. See “Lodging” Related Terms
Billboard. See “Sign” Related Terms
Boat Trailer: See “Trailer” Related Terms
Bollard. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Bond. Any form of financial guarantee or financial security, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit, cash and passbook accounts. “BUILDING” AND “STRUCTURE” RELATED TERMS
Building. Any structure that has a roof and is supported on all sides by walls.
Building, Accessory. A building that is not a principal building. A building shall be considered an accessory building unless it shares a common wall or is connected to a principal building by an enclosed, heated space. The term “accessory building” when used in connection with a farm shall include all customarily used for farm purposes.
Building, Detached. A building separated on all sides from adjacent buildings by an open area from the ground up.
Building, Principal. A building in which the principal use of the underlying lot is conducted.
Building, Nonconforming. See “Nonconforming Structure” @ “Nonconforming” Related Terms.
Building Height. See “Height, Building”@ “Height” Related Terms
Building Lot. See “Lot, Building” @ “Lot” Related Terms
Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires a building permit.
Structure, Accessory. Any structure other than a principal structure. Any structure that is separated from the principal structure or is connected to such principal structure only by means of a porch, breezeway, passageway, garage or carport, shall be deemed an accessory structure.
Structure, Principal. A structure in which the principal use of the underlying lot is conducted. If the principal structure on a lot is a building, it shall be deemed a principal building.
Building Lot. See “Lot, Building” @ “Lot” Related Terms
Business Use. See “Use, Commercial” @ “Use” Related Terms
Caliper. The diameter of a tree trunk measured four feet above the ground.
Certification. See “Erosion” Related Terms
SECTION 2.2
8 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
Co-located Telecommunication Facilities. Telecommunications Facilities which utilize existing towers, buildings or other structures for the placement of Antennae and do not require the construction of a new tower. Co-located Telecommunications Facility may include accessory structures such as cabinets and sheds for associated telecommunications equipment. Any proposed Telecommunications Facility which utilizes a stub tower or other accessory support structure and exceeds the height of the existing structure by more than 25 feet shall not be considered a Co-located Telecommunications Facility.
Commercial Kennel. See “Kennel, Commercial”
Commercial Use. See “Use, Commercial” @ “Use” Related Terms
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission.
Common Driveway. A driveway that serves more than one lot.
Communications Tower. A structure that is intended to support equipment used to transmit and / or receive telecommunications signals.
Construction Trailer or Construction Field Office Trailer. See ”Trailer” Related Terms
Contractor’s Yard. The premises of any construction contractor or builder where equipment and / or materials are stored for use in a construction business.
Corner Lot. See “Lot, Corner” @ “Lot” Related Terms
Critical Coastal Resources. Critical Coastal Resources are coastal waters, estuarine embayments, rocky shorefronts, inter-tidal flats, islands, tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs and escarpments, beaches and dunes, as those terms are defined in CGS 22a-93(7). “COVERAGE” RELATED TERMS
Coverage, Lot. Lot coverage is the ratio (expressed as a decimal) of the area of maximum horizontal cross-section of all buildings on a lot (including porches, handicapped ramps, decks and balconies) plus the area covered by swimming pools, tennis courts, and all other structures unless specifically exempted, to the “lot area.”
Impervious Surface Area. The impervious surface area on a lot is derived by adding the area of buildings and structures used in calculating “Lot Coverage” to the area covered by parking and loading areas and driveways (whether paved or unpaved).
Impervious Surface Area Ratio. A ratio, expressed as a decimal, derived by dividing the impervious surface area by the total area of a lot.
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|9
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
Cultivation of Land. See “Farm” Related Terms
Cut Sheets. See “Lighting” Related Terms “DAY CARE” RELATED TERMS
Day Care. A program of supplementary care provided to one or more persons on a regularly recurring, but part-time basis, in a place other than the recipient’s own dwelling.
Day Care Center. As defined in CGS 19a-77.
Family Day Care Home. As defined in CGS 19a-77.
Group Day Care Home. As defined in CGS 19a-77.
Depth of Lot. See “Lot, Depth of” @ “Lot” Related Terms
Detached Building. See Building, Detached @ “Building” Related Terms
Development. See “Erosion” Related Terms
Direct Light. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Disturbed Area. See “Erosion” Related Terms
Dwelling. See “Housing” Related Terms
Dwelling Unit. See “Housing” Related Terms
Earth Disturbing Activities. See “Erosion” Related Terms
Efficiency Dwelling Unit. See “Housing” Related Terms
SECTION 2.2
10 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
“EROSION” RELATED TERMS
Certification. When used in connection with a soil erosion and sediment control plan, a signed, written approval by the Commission or its designated agent that the plan complies with the applicable requirements of these Regulations.
Development. Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate.
Disturbed Area. An area where the ground cover is altered, destroyed or removed.
Earth Disturbing Activities. Any activity or use of the land that results in a change in the natural or man-made cover or topography.
Erosion. The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water, gravity, ice, or any combination thereof. The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
Erosion, Accelerated. Any increase over the rate of natural erosion as a result of earth disturbing activities.
E&S Guidelines. The “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control,” as issued by the Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation in cooperation with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, DEP Bulletin 34, including any supplements, addenda, and corrections issued thereto.
Grading. Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof.
Inspection. When used in connection with sediment and erosion control measures, the physical observation and review of any such measures shown on the certified plan.
Sediment. Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
Sedimentation. The process of transporting sediment from its site of origin and/or forming of silt or other sediment due to earth-disturbing activities.
Soil. Any unconsolidated material or organic material of any origin located at or below the surface of the earth or removed from such area.
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
Family. A person or a group of persons, related by blood, marriage, civil union or similar legally recognized familial association, or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be so related, who are living as a single housekeeping unit and maintaining a common household.
Family Day Care Home. See “Day Care” Related Terms
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|11
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
“FARM” RELATED TERMS
Cultivation of Land. The improvement and preparation of land, by plowing or fertilizing, for raising crops; tillage.
Farm. An area devoted, for gain or the expectation of gain, to the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry, or dairy products. It includes necessary structures within the bulk and use requirements of these Regulations and the storage of materials and equipment used. It excludes the raising of fur bearing animals, riding academies, livery or boarding stables, and dog kennels.
Farm Stand. An accessory use related to a bona fide farm operation which offers for sale to the general public such food or plant products as fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, eggs, honey, maple syrup, dairy products, and seasonal items including Christmas trees, cemetery baskets, etc.
Farmers’ Market – A Certified Farmers’ Market as defined by the Connecticut Department of Agriculture in CGS 22-6r which is located at a fixed location, open to the public, at which:
(a) at least 70 percent of the vendors sell Farm Products or Value-added Farm Products and,
(b) at least 70 percent of the vendors who regularly participate during the market’s hours of operation are Producers, or family members or employees of Producers.
(c) If a booth sells Farm Products or Value-Added Farm Products that are not produced by the vendor, said booth must explicitly disclose the producer’s name and location in writing with lettering that is at least 2 inches tall and visible to the consumer.
(d) “Producer” means a person or entity that raises or produces Farm Products on land that the person or entity farms and owns, rents, or lease.
(e) “Value-added Farm Product,” means any product processed by a Producer from a Farm Product, such as baked goods, jams, and jellies.
“Farm Products” as used in Section 7.17 of these Regulations means fruits, vegetables, grains, mushrooms, herbs, nuts, shell eggs, honey or other bee products, maple syrup, flowers, nursery stock, livestock food products (including meat, milk, cheese, and other dairy products), and fish.
“Vendor” as used in Section 7.17 of these Regulations refers to any individual within the market exchanging goods for cash or equivalent payment.
“Producer” as used in Section 7.17 of these Regulations means a person or entity that raises or produces Farm Products on land that the person or entity farms and owns, rents, or lease.
“Value-added Farm Product,” as used in Section 7.17 of these Regulations means any locally produced food item from a Farm Product, such as prepared foods from Producers products, baked goods, jams, and jellies.
Fast Food Restaurant. See” Restaurant, Fast Food” @ “Restaurant” Related Terms
FDIC. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
SECTION 2.2
12 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
Financial Guarantee. A financial guarantee acceptable to the Town in amount, form, and substance for the purpose of ensuring that improvements or obligations required by these Regulations will be completed.
“FLOOR AREA” RELATED TERMS
Floor Area, Gross. As used in determining parking requirements and floor area ratios, “Gross Floor Area” shall mean the sum of the total horizontal area of all floors of a building as measured from the exterior walls. Such measurement shall not include any space with headroom of less than seven (7) feet.
“Gross Floor Area” does not include covered parking areas. Terraces, porches and decks shall be counted as “Gross Floor Area” only if used for conduct of a business, such as outdoor dining.
Floor Area Ratio. A ratio derived by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a property by the total area of a lot.
Footcandle. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Freestanding Sign. See “Sign, Freestanding” @ “Sign” Related Terms
Full Cutoff Type Fixture / Luminaire. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Fully-Shielded Fixture. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Glare. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Grade. See “Height Related Terms
Grading. See “Erosion” Related Terms
Gross Floor Area. See Floor Area, Gross @ “Floor Area” Related Terms
Group Day Care Home. See “Day Care” Related Terms
Guarantee. Same meaning as “Bond.”
Gable or dormer
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|13
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
“HEIGHT” RELATED TERMS
Height, Building. In measuring the height of a building or other structure to determine compliance with maximum height provisions, measurements shall be taken from the lower of either:
? The average pre-existing (pre-development) grade measured at the base of the building or structure (average ground level) to the level of the highest roof of the building or highest feature of the structure; or
? The average finished grade measured at the base of the building or structure (average ground level) to the level of the highest roof of the building or highest feature of the structure.
Light Fixture Height. See Height of Luminaire @ Lighting Related Terms.
Height, Sign. See Sign Related Terms.
HID. See “Lighting” Related Terms
High Traffic Generator. Any use which generates more than 10 trips per 1,000 square feet of floor area at peak hour (per the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation reference) shall be considered a high traffic generator. In addition, fast food restaurants, gas stations, convenience stores, grocery stores, truck stops and community shopping centers shall be considered high traffic generators. “HOME BASED BUSINESS” RELATED TERMS
Home-Based Business. The use of a portion of a dwelling or residential accessory building for business purposes by the resident occupants when clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling (such as a home office or a home occupation).
This definition includes, but is not limited to, the office, studio or workshop of an architect, artist, computer or Internet-based business, dentist, dressmaker, economist, engineer, insurance agent, lawyer, musician, photographer, physician, psychologist, real estate broker, serviceman or a dwelling also used for preserving or cooking for compensation. Such uses as restaurants, tearooms, funeral homes, dancing schools, public garages, and animal hospitals are not considered incidental and accessory to a residential use and shall not be deemed a home-based business.
Home Office / Studio. See Section 3.10.A.
Major Home Occupation. See Section 3.10.C.
Minor Home Occupation. See Section 3.10.B.
Home Office / Studio. See “Home Based Business” Related Terms
Hotel. See “Lodging” Related Terms
SECTION 2.2
14 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
“HOUSING” RELATED TERMS
Accessory Apartment. A complete self-contained housekeeping unit, with sleeping area, kitchen and bathroom facilities, on a lot with, and subordinate to, a single-family residence that is the principal use. The size of the an accessory apartment shall be limited to one-third of the size of the principal dwelling unit or 900 square feet, whichever is less.
Dwelling. A “dwelling” is a building containing one (1) or more “dwelling units”.
Dwelling, Single-Family. A building designed for and occupied exclusively as a dwelling unit for one (1) family and having no party wall in common with an adjacent dwelling. Where a private garage or accessory structure is attached to such building, it shall be considered as a part thereof.
Dwelling, Two -Family. Two (2) dwelling units in the same building on one lot (also known as a Duplex).
Dwelling Unit. A “dwelling unit” is a building or a part of a building designed for occupancy by one (1) “family”. Accommodations occupied for transient lodging in a hotel or motel shall not be considered to be a “dwelling unit”.
Dwelling Unit, Efficiency. An “efficiency dwelling unit” is a “dwelling unit” in a building containing three (3) or more “dwelling units” and having only one (1) room exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, pantry, communicating corridors or closets and exclusive of any dining alcove with less than 70 square feet of floor area.
Horizontal Illuminance. See “Lighting” Related Terms
HPS. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Impervious Surface Area. See “Coverage” Related Terms.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses. Inland wetlands and watercourses as defined in CGS Section 22a-38.
Inspection. See “Erosion” Related Terms
Interior Lot. See “Lot, Interior” @ “Lot” Related Terms
IsoFootcandle Diagram. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Junk Yard. A lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used for the collecting, storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded materials, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or discarded solid materials including garbage, scrap metal, junk, and refuse materials including inert matter and landscape refuse. The term “junk yard” shall be construed to include, but shall not be limited to, any “motor vehicle recycler’s business” and “motor vehicle recycler’s yard” as defined in CGS Section 14-67g.
Kennel, Commercial. Premises maintained and operated as a business for the grooming, boarding, daycare or training of dogs.
Lamp. See “Lighting” Related Terms
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|15
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
“LIGHTING” RELATED TERMS
Bollard. A short, thick post or pole with integrated lighting components used for illuminating walkways.
Cut Sheets. Product information sheets, or digital files from a lighting manufacturer that describes and illustrates a light fixture and its electrical, mechanical and performance specifications. (Specifications include: cutoff type, lamp type, lumen rating, etc.)
Direct Light. Light emitted directly from the light source (bulb/lamp/diode), off of the reflector, or through the refracting lens or diffuser of a light fixture.
Footcandle. A standard unit of measure used to describe the density of light at a given point. A unit of illuminance, equal to one lumen per square foot.
Full Cutoff or Fully-Shielded Fixture: A light fixture designed to control the view of direct light, in which the light source is enclosed, and hidden from view on all sides except the downward light-emitting opening.
Glare. Excessive brightness that interferes with vision.
HID - High Intensity Discharge. High intensity discharge (HID) is an efficient, long-life lamp type that is often used for commercial lighting. HID light fixtures feature high output and long bulb life. HID fixtures use a dedicated lamp & ballast system for a given light output rating.
Horizontal Illuminance. The light density measured on a horizontal plane. In site plans, horizontal illuminance is typically measured at the ground surface.
HPS - High Pressure Sodium. The orange-colored, high intensity discharge (HID) lamp type.
IsoFootcandle diagram. A computer-calculated diagram, which estimates the brightness levels that will be produced by a proposed lighting installation at a given site. The diagram depicts light density levels (horizontal illuminance levels), measured in footcandles, which are plotted at equidistant points across the ground level of a proposed site plan.
Lamp. The light source of a light fixture, as in the light bulb, or diode.
Light Pollution. That portion of artificial lighting which is directed or cast outward or upward and does not illuminate the ground or structure for which the lighting was designed or intended.
Light Trespass. Light pollution affecting adjoining or nearby property.
Lumen. A standard unit of measure used to describe the light output of a light source (a unit of luminous flux). Manufacturer’s specifications for lamps and light fixtures list the rate lumen output for the product.
Luminaire. A light fixture composed of a housing, lamp, electronics and wiring.
Max:Min Ratio (Uniformity Ratio). The ratio between the brightest illuminance (footcandle) level and the lowest level of a site lighting plan.
Continued…
SECTION 2.2
16 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
“LIGHTING” RELATED TERMS (continued)
Metal Halide (MH). The white-colored, high intensity discharge (HID) lamp type.
Over-lighting. Excessive exterior lighting, which exceeds industry-recognized, recommended practice guidelines for site lighting.
Uplight. Wasted illumination from a light fixture that is directed skyward where it serves no purpose and contributes to light pollution.
Limited Retail. See “Sales” Related Terms
Livestock. Animals commonly raised in an agricultural rather than a domestic environment, including but not limited to chickens, pigs, sheep, goats, horses, cattle, donkeys, llamas, emus, ostriches. “LODGING” RELATED TERMS
Bed and Breakfast. An owner-occupied dwelling unit that contains no more than four (4) guest rooms where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation.
Hotel. A building in which transient lodging is provided for compensation with or without meals. The term is intended to include facilities commonly known as motels, but it does not include bed and breakfast establishments, as defined in these Regulations.
“LOT” RELATED TERMS
Lot. A “lot” is a tract of land that meets one or more of the following descriptions:
? a discrete parcel of land that was created by subdivision and that is shown on a subdivision map approved by the Commission and filed in the office of the Branford Town Clerk;
? a parcel of land that was created by the first division occurring after June 16, 1954 (the date of first enactment of subdivision regulations in Branford) of a larger parcel of land and that conforms to the area, shape, frontage and other geometric requirements of these Regulations for the establishment of a principal use;
? a parcel of land that, since December 3, 1956 (the date of first enactment of zoning regulations in Branford) has been owned separately from any adjoining parcel or parcels as evidenced by deed or deeds recorded in the land records of the Town of Branford and that contains no less than 4,000 square feet of land area.
See Section 6.1 regarding the functional difference between a “lot” and a “building lot.”
Continued…
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|17
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
“LOT” RELATED TERMS (continued)
Lot, Corner. A “corner lot” is a “lot” having lot lines formed by the intersection of two (2) streets, whether public or private, and where the interior angle of such intersection is less than 135 degrees. A “lot” fronting on a curved street shall be considered a “corner lot” if the central angle of the curve is less than 135 degrees.
Lot, Interior. A lot that has lawful access from a street, but that lacks the minimum frontage required by Sections 3 and 4 of these Regulations.
Lot Area. The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
Lot Area, Minimum. In determining compliance with minimum lot area and shape requirements of these Regulations, land subject to easements for drainage facilities and underground public utilities may be included, but no street or highway, easement of vehicular access, private right-of-way for vehicles or easement for above-ground public utility transmission lines may be included.
Area consisting of steep slope (25 percent or greater), wetlands, watercourses, or critical coastal resources shall not be used for compliance with the minimum lot area, maximum coverage, floor area or impervious surface standards. Note that the area of steep slope, wetlands, watercourses and critical coastal resources shall be based on site conditions in existence prior to any proposed excavation, filling, or other earth moving activity.
Land in two (2) or more Zoning Districts may be used to satisfy a minimum lot area requirement provided that the requirement of the District requiring the largest lot area is met, but no land in a Residence District shall be used to satisfy a lot area requirement in any other District
Lot, Building. A parcel of land used or occupied, or that may lawfully be used or occupied, by a building or group of buildings and satisfying all applicable provisions of these Regulations for such use or occupancy. See Section 6.1 regarding the functional difference between a “lot” and a “building lot.”
Parcel of Land. For purposes of these Regulations, the term “parcel of land” shall refer to (1) any discrete, contiguous land area, the boundaries of which have been described or defined by a document properly filed or recorded in the Branford Land Records; or (2) any land area that is required by a judicial ruling or other legal requirement to be treated as separate and distinct from all adjoining land. The intention of the Commission in so defining the term is to distinguish a “parcel of land” from a “lot.” Each “lot” is also a “parcel of land,” as defined herein, but not every “parcel of land” is a “lot.”
Square, Minimum. As used in the various tables of bulk requirements in these Regulations, the term “minimum square” means that a square having side dimensions no less than the stated number must be capable of fitting entirely within the boundaries of the relevant parcel.
SECTION 2.2
18 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
“LOT LINE” RELATED TERMS
Lot Frontage (or Frontage). The length of a property line bounded by a public street. See streetline.
Lot Line. Any property line bounding a lot.
Lot Line, Rear. Except with respect to corner lots, any lot line or portion of a lot line that is parallel to, or within 45 degrees of being parallel to, the line along which lot frontage is measured shall be deemed to be a rear lot line. Corner lots shall have no more than one (1) rear lot line
Lot Line, Side: Any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line as defined herein.
Lumen. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Luminaire. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Major Home Occupation. See “Home Based Business” Related Terms
Max:Min Ratio. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Metal Halide. See “Lighting” Related Terms
Minimum Lot Area. See “Lot Area, Minimum” @ “Lot” Related Terms
Minimum Square. See “Square, Minimum” at “Lot” Related Terms
Minor Home Occupation. See “Home Based Business” Related Terms
Mixed-Use. See “Use, Mixed” @ “Use” Related Terms “NONCONFORMING” RELATED TERMS
Nonconforming. An adjective used to describe a use, activity, building, structure, or lot that does not conform to the current requirements of these Regulations.
Nonconforming Building. See Nonconforming Structure.
Nonconforming, Legal. The situation where a nonconforming use, activity, building, structure, or lot lawfully existed prior to the time:
? These Regulations became effective, or
? An amendment hereto which created the nonconformity became effective.
Nonconforming Lot. A parcel of land that fails to meet the area, shape, or frontage or any other applicable requirement of these Regulations pertaining to lots.
Nonconforming Structure. A structure that does not conform to these Regulations with respect to size, area, height, setback or other requirement for the zone in which it is situated.
Nonconforming Use. A use of land or of a building that does not conform to these Regulations for the zone in which it is situated.
Outside Storage. See “Storage, outside” @ “Storage” Related Terms
Over-lighting. See “Lighting” Related Terms
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|19
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
Parcel of Land. See “Lot” Related Terms
Permitted Use. See “Use, Permitted” @ “Use” Related Terms
Portable Storage Unit or Portable on Demand (“POD”) Container. See “Trailer” Related Terms
Portable Sign. See “Sign, Portable” @ “Sign” Related Terms
Principal Building. See Building, Principal @ “Building” Related Terms.
Principal Use. See “Use, Principal” @ “Use” Related Terms
Projecting Sign. See “Sign, Projecting” @ “Sign” Related Terms
Rear Property Line. See “Property Line, Rear” @ “Lot Line” Related Terms “RESTAURANT” RELATED TERMS
Restaurant, Table Service. Any business establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods or beverages, typically served by waiters/waitresses, to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in individual servings, or in non-disposable containers, and where the customers consume these foods while seated at tables or counters located within the building.
Restaurant, Fast Food. Any business establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, typically served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers, for consumption within the restaurant building, elsewhere on the premises or for carryout/delivery for consumption off the premises.
Resubdivision. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change (a) affects any street layout shown on such map, (b) affects any area reserved thereon for public use or (c) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
Retail Sales. See “Sales” Related Terms
Retaining Wall. Wall built to retain or support earth or other materials that are not part of a building or structure, and utilized to provide changes in grade that cannot be accomplished with stable earth or rock slopes. “SALES” RELATED TERMS
Limited Retail: Retail establishments in which the principal use is a showroom for large household items such as furniture, large appliances, or cabinets.
Retail Sales. The sale of goods or commodities, principally in small quantities, directly to consumers.
Wholesale Sales. The sale of goods, principally in large quantities, for purposes of resale.
Sediment. See “Erosion” Related Terms
Sedimentation. See “Erosion” Related Terms
Self Storage. See “Storage, Self” @ “Storage” Related Terms
Setback. The minimum required distance from any lot line to the nearest building or structure.
SECTION 2.2
20 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
“SIGN” RELATED TERMS
Billboard. An outdoor sign advertising products or services that are not made, produced, assembled, stored or sold from the premises upon which the sign is displayed, or any free-standing outdoor sign, the face of which exceeds 300 square feet in size..
Sign. Includes every sign, billboard, illustration, insignia, lettering, picture, display, banner, pennant, flag, or other device, however made, displayed, painted, supported or attached, intended for use for the purpose of advertisement, identification, publicity or notice, when located out-of-doors and visible from any street or from any lot other than the lot on which the sign is located. The term “Sign” shall not include any flag of any governmental unit.
Sign Area. The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing the extreme limits of sign display, including any frame or border. Curved, spherical, or any other shaped sign face shall be computed on the basis of actual surface area. Where there is no defined sign background or panel (such as individual detached letters or symbols which are mounted, placed or painted on a building or wall) the smallest rectangular area enclosing all such letters or symbols.
Sign, Freestanding. A sign supported by one (1) or more upright poles, columns, or braces placed in or on the ground and not attached to any structure.
Sign Height. The vertical distance measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point on the sign or sign structure.
Sign, Portable. Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure.
Sign, Projecting. A sign that is attached to, and that extends more than six (6) inches from the surface of, a building or other structure.
Sign, Temporary. A sign that is intended to advertise community or civic events, construction projects, real estate for sale or lease, or any other special event of a temporary nature.
Sign, Wall. A sign painted on the outside of a building, or attached to, and erected parallel to the face of a building (other than a “projecting sign”) and supported throughout its length by such building.
Sign, Window. A sign affixed to a surface of a window or erected inside of a window or within two (2) feet thereof.
Site Plan. A professionally prepared drawing, or set of drawings, regarding proposed development to a property, depicting and detailing boundary lines, setback lines, and other legal and regulatory lines relevant to the property, the existing and proposed topography, improvements and other features associated with the proposed development, and any other drawing-related information relevant to the proposed development, and including any covenants, studies, calculations, and other such documents relevant to the proposed development. When required by these Regulations, a site plan is subject to the approval and issuance of a permit by the Commission.
Soil. See “Erosion” Related Terms
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. See “Erosion” Related Terms
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|21
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
“STORAGE” RELATED TERMS
Portable Storage Unit or Portable on Demand (“POD”) Container. See “Trailer” Related Terms
Storage, Outside. The outside placement of an item for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours. Outside placement includes storage in a structure that is open or not entirely enclosed.
Storage, Self. Individual self-storage units for goods or possessions not related to a business being conducted on the storage unit premises, on a temporary or semi-permanent basis.
Storage Trailer or Storage Container. See “Trailer” Related Terms.
Special Exception, Special Permit, or Special Use. A use of property that may be appropriate in a given zoning district, but that may be incompatible in some locations within the district because of the size, intensity, design, traffic volumes, or other characteristics associated with the use, and that, therefore, is not permitted by right everywhere within such district. Such use is allowable only when the Commission finds that the facts and conditions upon which the use is permitted exist.
Steep Slopes. As used in determining the area of a lot that could be counted in calculating minimum lot area, maximum coverage, floor area or impervious surface standards, steep slope shall be measured prior to any proposed excavation, filling or other earth-moving activity. “Steep Slopes” are areas having a slope of 25 percent or greater as measured on a sealed survey, as prepared by a licensed land surveyor, with two-foot contour intervals and a scale of at least one (1) inch = 40 feet. Slope shall be calculated by measuring the distance between two (2) foot contours as shown on the map. A 25 percent slope shall be defined as any area where the two (2)-foot contour lines measure eight (8) feet apart in the horizontal plane. “STREET” RELATED TERMS
Street. Any public way duly accepted for vehicular travel by the Town of Branford. Also, any State Highway, except limited access State Highways; and any street shown on a subdivision map approved by the “Commission” and filed in the office of the Branford Town Clerk.
Street Width. The “width” of a street shall mean the distance between the “street lines”.
Street Line. The right-of-way, easement or taking line of any “street” or private road.
Structure. See “Building” Related Terms
Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the Commission, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes. Every resubdivision shall also be deemed to be a subdivision.
Temporary Sign. See “Sign, Temporary” @ “Sign” Related Terms
Tidal Wetlands. See “Wetland” Related Terms
Through Lot. See “Lot, Through” @ “Lot” Related Terms
SECTION 2.2
22 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
“TRAILER” RELATED TERMS
Trailer. A vehicle or other contrivance without motive power, designed to be towed or hauled by another vehicle, and used for:
? Short-term human occupation;
? Carrying or storing goods or objects; or
? Short term occupancy as a construction field office.
Boat Trailer. A trailer used solely for transporting a boat.
Construction Trailer or Construction Field Office Trailer. Any trailer used as an office and/or for storage in connection with and for the duration of a construction project on the lot where the construction trailer is located.
Portable Storage Unit or Portable on Demand (“POD”) Container. A moveable storage unit with a volume of less than forty cubic yards used for temporary storage of household goods before or after a move and/or during a renovation or other construction project, for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Storage Trailer or Storage Container. A portable warehouse, storage box, trailer portion of a tractor trailer vehicle, or similar moveable roofed enclosure, with a volume of less than 120 cubic yards, that is placed on a lot for the purpose of storing equipment, merchandise, supplies, or other materials, for a period not to exceed two years. Any detached trailer portion of a tractor-trailer vehicle parked on a property for a period of more than 90 days shall be considered a storage trailer rather than a vehicle.
Travel Trailer. A vehicular unit mounted on wheels, designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
Travel Trailer. See “Trailer” related terms
Uniformity Ratio. See “Max:Min Ratio” @“Lighting” Related Terms
Uplighting. See “Lighting” Related Terms
“USE” RELATED TERMS
Use. The specific purpose for which a building, structure or land is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
Use, Accessory. A use of land, buildings or structures that is incidental and subordinate to and customarily used in connection with, and located on the same lot with the principal building, structure or use.
Use, Commercial or Business Use. Activity carried out for monetary gain.
Use, Mixed. A building or property that contains both residential and commercial uses.
Use, Nonconforming. See “Nonconforming Use” @ “Nonconforming” Related Terms.
Use, Permitted. A use allowed by these Regulations, but specifically excluding any nonconforming use.
Use, Principal. The primary or predominant use of any lot or building.
SECTION 2.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|23
Contents
Introduction
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
Wall Sign. See “Sign, Wall” @ “Sign” Related Terms
Watercourse. See “Wetland” Related Terms “WETLAND” RELATED TERMS
Watercourse. The term “Watercourse” shall have the same meaning as defined in CGS Section 22a-38.
Wetland. The term “Wetland” shall have the same meaning as defined in CGS Section 22a-38, except that the term “tidal wetland” shall be defined in the same manner as the term “wetland” is defined in CGS Section 22a-29.
Wetland, Tidal. Wetlands as defined by CGS Section 22a-29.
Wholesale Sales. See “Sales” Related Terms
Width of Lot. See “Lot, Width of” @ “Lot” Related Terms
Window Sign. See “Sign, Window” @ “Sign” Related Terms
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS). All necessary devices that together convert wind energy into electricity, including the rotor, nacelle, generator, WECS tower, electrical components, WECS foundation, transformer, and electrical cabling from the WECS tower to the substation.
SECTION 2.2
24 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
Yard, Front. The area on a lot between any front lot line and the nearest line of any surface of the principal structure on the parcel.
Yard, Rear. The area on a lot between any rear lot line and the nearest line of any surface of the principal structure on the parcel.
Yard, Side. The area on a lot between any side lot line and the nearest line of any surface of the principal structure on the parcel.
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|25
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
SECTION
3
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
3.1 GENERAL.
In accordance with a comprehensive plan, the Commission has divided the town of Branford into various zoning districts. The provisions applicable in one district differ from those in other districts, and each district, as hereinafter described, has a general purpose in providing for the orderly growth, development and improvement of the Town.
3.2 PURPOSES.
3.2.A Residence R-1 District.
1. These districts are primarily residential in nature and consist of areas built up in years past with single-family, two family and multifamily structures. Their principal location is in the vicinity of Branford Center, where they constitute part of the village concentration around the Center.
2. An important purpose of the standards applicable in these districts is to recognize the relatively high concentration of dwellings and population already present, while preserving existing development from overcrowding. Nonresidential and nonagricultural uses may be appropriate in these districts, but only as Special Exceptions upon a finding that development will be compatible with the character of the district.
3.2.B Residence R-2 District.
1. These districts consist of residential areas that have been developed over a period of years primarily with single-family houses for seasonal as well as year-round occupancy on relatively small lots.
2. The applicable standards are designed to recognize and protect the current pattern of development. Nonresidential and nonagricultural uses may be appropriate in these districts, but only as Special Exceptions upon a finding that development will be compatible with the character of the district.
3.2.C Residence R-3 District.
These districts are designed to consist of single-family houses on lots of sufficient size to support private sewage disposal systems. Nonresidential and nonagricultural uses may be appropriate in these districts, but only as Special Exceptions upon a finding that development will be compatible with the character of the district.
3.2.D Residence R-4 District.
These districts cover much of the suburban single-family residential section of Town. The applicable standards are designed to encourage and protect the existing high quality development with ample lots to support private sewage disposal systems. Nonresidential and nonagricultural uses may be appropriate in these districts, but only as Special Exceptions upon finding that development will be compatible with the character of the district.
SECTION 3.2
26 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
3.2.E Residence R-5 District.
These districts cover much of the rural and topographically rugged sections of the Town and are designed to accommodate single-family residential construction of a high quality on spacious lots. Applicable standards are designed to recognize the likely long-term or permanent absence of sewers. Nonresidential and nonagricultural uses may be appropriate in these districts, but only as Special Exceptions upon a finding that development will be compatible with the character of the district.
3.2.F Multifamily Residence MF District.
1. This district provides for an attached housing unit alternative to the detached single-family units allowed in other residential districts.
2. The multifamily district is designed to provide moderate density housing in locations that are sewered, are adjacent to commercial districts and/or neighborhoods of similar or higher density, are served by adequate roadway systems, and are environmentally suitable for such development.
3. Each proposal for multifamily development is subject to Special Exception review to insure conformance with the Plan of Conservation and Development and all applicable standards.
SECTION 3.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|27
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
SECTION
3
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
3.3 PERMITTED USES.
3.3.A Principal Uses and Activities.
1. No permit required. ADDITIONAL CRITERIA (SEE SECTION)
(1) Agricultural uses and farms
(2) Cultivation of land
(3) Open space and passive recreation
(4) Public utility substations, pursuant to the Connecticut Siting Council.
2. Zoning Permit required (See Section 9.2). ADDITIONAL CRITERIA (SEE SECTION)
(1) Single-family dwelling (one (1) per lot)
(2) Two-family dwelling. (R-1 and R-2 Only – one (1) per lot)
(3) Agricultural and farm buildings. All buildings housing livestock or poultry shall be located at least 100 feet from any street or lot line
(4) Greenhouse
3. Site Plan Approval required (See Section 9.6). ADDITIONAL CRITERIA (SEE SECTION)
(1) Cemetery
(2) Parks / playgrounds
SECTION 3.3
28 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
4. Special Exception Approval required (See Section 9.8). ADDITIONAL CRITERIA (SEE SECTION)
(1) Age-Restricted Housing
7.2
(2) Open space residential development
7.3
(3) Dwellings containing three (3) to four (4) dwelling units (R-1 and R-2 Zones only)
(4) Dwellings containing three (3) or more dwelling units (MF Zones only)
7.1
(5) Single-family dwelling (one (1) per lot) (MF Zones only)
(6) Two-family dwelling (one (1) per lot) (MF Zones only)
(7) Day care center
7.6
(8) Group day care home
7.6
(9) Adaptive reuse (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones only)
7.16
(10) Churches and places of worship
(11) Colleges and schools / dormitories
(12) Commercial kennel (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones only)
7.13
(13) Commercial horse stable, riding or training school (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones only)
7.14
(14) Golf Course (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones only)
(15) Grading, excavation, removal or deposit of earth materials and related activities
6.8
(16) Hospitals and skilled nursing facilities
7.8
(17) Docks, wharfs, marinas, slip basins, boat storage and landings
7.9
(18) Municipal facilities and services
(19) Non-profit membership clubs
(20) Summer camps
(21) Railroad rights-of way and passenger stations, including customary accessory services therein but not including switching, storage, sidings, freight yard or freight terminals.
SECTION 3.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|29
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
SECTION
3
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
3.3.B Accessory Uses.
1. No permit required. ADDITIONAL CRITERIA (SEE SECTION)
(1) Home Office / Studio
3.10.A
2. Zoning Permit required (See Section 9.2). ADDITIONAL CRITERIA (SEE SECTION)
(1) Parking areas for Principal Uses (less than 25 parking spaces)
6.5
(2) Family day care homes registered pursuant to CGS Section 17b-733
(3) Farm Stand (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones only)
3.8
(4) Minor Home Occupation
3.10.B
(5) Portable on-demand storage units (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones only)
(6) Pools, tennis courts and other recreational structures (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones only)
3.8
(7) Sheds, decks, garages, up to 750 square feet total on a lot (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones only)
3.8
(8) Signs pertaining to a permitted principal use on a lot
6.6
3. Site Plan Approval required (See Section 9.6). ADDITIONAL CRITERIA (SEE SECTION)
(1) Parking areas for Principal Uses (25 or more parking spaces)
6.5
(2) Pools, tennis courts and other recreational structures (MF Zones only)
(3) Sheds, decks, garages, up to 750 square feet total on a lot (MF Zones only)
4. Special Exception Approval required (See Section 9.8). ADDITIONAL CRITERIA (SEE SECTION)
(1) Accessory Apartment (R-3, R-4 and R-5 only)
7.4
(2) Bed and Breakfast
7.7
(3) Major Home Occupation
3.10.C
(4) Sheds, decks, garages, over 750 square feet
3.8
(5) Farm Stand (MF Zones only)
SECTION 3.4
30 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
3.4 BULK REQUIREMENTS.
3.4.A Bulk Requirements.
ZONE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 MF MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA (square feet)
6,000
4,500
15,000
20,000
40,000
130,680 2. LOT AREA PER UNIT (square feet)
4,000
4,000
15,000
20,000
40,000
7,260 3. FRONTAGE (feet)
50
50
90
110
130
150 4. SQUARE (feet)
50
50
100
125
150
250 5. FRONT SETBACK (feet)
15
15
30
40
50
50 6. SIDE SETBACK (feet)
10
10
15
20
25
50 7. REAR SETBACKS (feet)
20
20
30
50
50
50 MAXIMUM 8. HEIGHT (feet)
35
35
35
35
35
35 9. FLOOR AREA
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.40 10. LOT COVERAGE
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.20 11. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.50
For Interior Lot Bulk Requirements, see Section 6.11.C
3.5 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
3.6 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
SECTION 3.7
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|31
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
SECTION
3
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
3.7 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
3.7.A Keeping of Animals (Non-commercial operations).
1. Where allowed by these Regulations, the following limitations and requirements shall apply to the keeping of animals as an accessory to a residential use:
(1) Dogs.
PERMIT TYPE DENSITY LIMITATION OTHER LIMITATIONS
No Permit
Required
Up to four (4) dogs over the age of eight (8) weeks per dwelling.
? Shall not be for compensation.
Special
Exception
More than four (4) dogs over the age of eight (8) weeks per dwelling.
? Minimum lot size of three (3) acres.
? Shall not be for compensation.
? Structures housing animals shall be located no less than 250 feet from any residence not the owner’s.
(2) Horses, Cows, Pigs, Sheep and similar large animals.
PERMIT TYPE DENSITY LIMITATION OTHER LIMITATIONS
No Permit
Required
Minimum lot size for one (1) animal is one and one-half (1½) acres. For each additional animal, the minimum lot size shall be increased by one-half (½) acre.
? All livestock shall be kept within a fenced enclosure designed to prevent animals from crossing or overhanging any property line
(3) Rabbits and similar small animals.
PERMIT TYPE DENSITY LIMITATION OTHER LIMITATIONS
No Permit
Required
For parcels containing at least one-half (½) acres, one (1) rabbit or similar small animal for the first 20,000 square feet of parcel area and one (1) additional rabbit or similar small animal for each additional 10,000 square feet of parcel area.
? All livestock shall be kept within a fenced enclosure designed to prevent animals from crossing or overhanging any property line.
SECTION 3.7
32 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(4) Chickens and other poultry.
PERMIT TYPE DENSITY LIMITATION OTHER LIMITATIONS
No Permit
Required
For parcels containing at least one (1) acre, 50 birds per 40,000 square feet.
? All poultry shall be housed within a building or fenced enclosure and no poultry shall be housed within 50 feet of any street or within 75 feet of any other property line.
? Such enclosure shall prevent poultry from leaving the property.
No Permit
Required
Farming on parcels containing five (5) acres or more, no limit.
? All poultry shall be housed within a building or fenced enclosure and no poultry shall be housed within 50 feet of any street or within 75 feet of any other property line.
? Such enclosure shall prevent poultry from leaving the property.
Certificate of Zoning
Compliance
For parcels smaller than one (1) acre, no more than six (6) hen chickens (roosters are not permitted)
? Shall not be for compensation.
? All poultry shall be housed within a building or fenced enclosure at least six (6) feet from all property lines and at least 25 feet from residences on adjacent lots.
? Such enclosure shall prevent poultry from leaving the property.
2. No manure shall be stored in the open within 100 feet of any property line.
SECTION 3.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|33
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
SECTION
3
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
3.8 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
3.8.A Purpose.
The purpose of this Section is to regulate accessory uses so that they will be compatible with principal uses and harmonious with uses similarly zoned.
3.8.B Applicability.
1. Accessory uses and structures shall be located on the same lot with the principal use to which it is accessory.
2. Except for farm structures, no accessory building shall be larger than the principal building.
3. No accessory structure shall be closer to the streetline than the principal structure on the property.
4. Except for sheds of 200 square feet or smaller, all accessory structures must meet the side and rear setback requirements of the zone in which it is located. Sheds of 200 square feet or smaller must be set back at least five feet (5’) from side and rear property lines..
5. Any accessory structure exceeding 15 feet in height or 750 square feet in coverage requires Special Exception approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3.8.C Vehicles.
1. Except in connection with a permitted farm, truck garden or commercial nursery, there shall be no more than one (1) commercial vehicle parked or stored on any lot, and such vehicle shall not exceed one and one half (1½) tons capacity and shall be parked or stored only in an enclosed garage.
SECTION 3.9
34 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
3.9 UNDERSIZED RESIDENTIAL LOTS.
3.9.A Purpose.
Undersized Residential Lots are primarily a result of property development prior to the adoption of Zoning. This Section is intended to provide relief from setback, coverage and floor area standards for these properties.
3.9.B Applicability.
1. Lots owned separately from adjoining tracts and existing prior to December 3, 1956, with area or frontage less than required by these Regulations may use the Undersized Residential Lots provision.
2. The Undersized Residential Lot provision does not apply to use or buffer requirements in the underlying zoning district.
3.9.C General.
1. For lots with less than the applicable minimum lot size required in the zone (see Section 3.4.A), the setback, coverage and floor area requirements shall be the same as the requirements for the zone that has a minimum lot size closest to the lot size of the subject lot.
SECTION 3.10
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|35
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
SECTION
3
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
3.10 HOME BASED BUSINESSES.
3.10.A Home Office / Studio.
A “home office” or a “studio” is a home-based business where there is occasional business use (as part of employment typically occurring elsewhere) or a home-based business involving no non-residents employees and no regular visitors to the business. Nothing in these Regulations shall restrict the use of a residence by the occupant for business purposes where:
1. No business is conducted on the premises except by computer, mail, telephone or future communication technology,
2. No persons other than members of the family are employed,
3. No external evidence of the business is visible,
4. No business signs are erected, and
5. No pedestrian or automobile traffic is generated other than that which is normally generated by a residence.
3.10.B Minor Home Occupation.
1. A “Minor Home Occupation” is a home-based business where such business is located on the same lot used by the business owner as his or her primary residence provided that:
(1) The area devoted to such accessory use (including storage of any supplies or materials) shall not exceed 25 percent of the total square footage of the dwelling (exclusive of garage, attic and basement);
(2) Not more than one (1) nonresident person shall be employed on the premises;
2. A “Minor Home Occupation” shall:
(1) Be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling by the resident occupant,
(2) Clearly be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes,
(3) Not change the exterior residential appearance or character of the building or be noticeable from the exterior of the building,
(4) Not materially change the traffic characteristics of the neighborhood,
(5) Not have any outside storage or display of merchandise, equipment, or machinery relative to the use,
(6) Not include the keeping of stock in trade nor the sale or rental of any goods not produced within the premises,
(7) Not involve the display of signs or products in, on, or about the premises except for a sign as permitted by these Regulations, and
(8) Not involve retail sales at the premises.
3.10.C Major Home Occupation.
A “Major Home Occupation” is any home-based business that cannot or does not comply with the requirements of Subsection 3.10.B.
SECTION 3.10
36 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(this page intentionally left blank)
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|37
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
SECTION
4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 4 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
4.1 CENTER BUSINESS BC DISTRICT.
4.1.A Purpose.
1. These districts are designed to encourage a concentration of retail services and office facilities of a “downtown” character primarily in Branford Center.
2. Automotive sales and services are excluded as incompatible with the purpose of the district.
3. Applicable standards allow multistory buildings, a high percentage of ground coverage and a high ratio of floor area to land area, with parking provided in centralized lots and structures.
4.1.B Bulk Requirements.
MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA
No minimum 2. LOT AREA PER UNIT (1) EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT (2) ONE-BEDROOM DWELLING UNIT (3) OTHER DWELLING UNITS
1,000 square feet
1,200 square feet
1,400 square feet 3. FRONTAGE
No minimum 4. SQUARE
No minimum 5. SETBACKS RESIDENTIAL USES BUSINESS USES (1) Side
10 feet
No minimum (2) Front
15 feet
No minimum (3) Rear
20 feet
No minimum 6. SETBACK FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
25 feet MAXIMUM 7. HEIGHT
40 feet 8. FLOOR AREA
2.00 9. LOT COVERAGE
1.00 10. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
n/a
SECTION 4.2
38 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
4.2 MIXED-USE DISTRICT.
4.2.A Purpose.
The purpose of the Mixed-Use District is to facilitate the integration of diverse but compatible uses into a single development, with the goal of creating a community that offers "live, work, and play" opportunities within convenient walking distance of each other.
4.2.B Bulk Requirements.
MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA
15,000 square feet 2. LOT AREA PER UNIT
5,000 square feet 3. FRONTAGE
100 feet 4. SQUARE
No minimum 5. SETBACKS RESIDENTIAL USES BUSINESS USES (1) Side
10 feet
No minimum (2) Front
15 feet
No minimum (3) Rear
20 feet
No minimum SETBACK FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
25 feet MAXIMUM 6. HEIGHT
40 feet 7. FLOOR AREA
1.5 8. LOT COVERAGE
0.80 9. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
0.80
SECTION 4.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|39
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
SECTION
4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
4.3 RESTRICTED BUSINESS (BR) DISTRICT.
4.3.A Purpose.
1. These districts are designed to recognize business areas developing as a result of conversion of residential structures to retail and office uses, as well as to provide sites for essential retail services in or adjacent to residential neighborhoods.
2. Parking needs for each building will be satisfied on its own lot, with no parking located in the required street setback area.
3. Review of detailed site and architectural plans for each development will be essential to assure adequate parking and traffic facilities, harmony with the neighborhood and a high quality of commercial development.
4.3.B Bulk Requirements.
MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA
6,000 square feet 2. LOT AREA PER UNIT
4,000 square feet 3. FRONTAGE
50 feet 4. SQUARE
50 feet 5. SETBACKS (1) FRONT (2) SIDE (3) REAR
15 feet
10 feet
20 feet 6. SETBACK FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
25 feet MAXIMUM 7. HEIGHT
40 feet 8. FLOOR AREA
0.30 9. LOT COVERAGE
0.25 10. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
0.60
4.3.C Additional Standards.
Special Exceptions to be established in any Restricted Business BR District shall conform to the following additional standards:
1. There shall be no off-street parking or loading spaces located in the required streetline setback area.
2. Any use that is designed as an addition to, extension of or alteration of an existing building originally designed as a house shall preserve the residential character of the building.
3. New commercial buildings shall be designed so as to preserve the residential character of the neighborhood.
4. Dwellings containing three (3) or more dwelling units, with units at the ground floor or basement level shall meet the following additional standards:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 120,000 square feet.
SECTION 4.3
40 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(2) Residential uses at the ground floor or basement level shall not be intermixed with business uses within the same building.
(3) Business uses shall occupy a minimum of 50 percent of the total ground floor or basement level floor area on the site.
(4) Each ground floor or basement level residential unit shall be provided with a private, exclusive outdoor living space of at least 100 square feet in the form of a patio, deck, terrace or porch.
SECTION 4.4
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|41
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
SECTION
4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
4.4 LOCAL BUSINESS (BL) DISTRICT.
4.4.A Purpose.
1. These districts are designed to accommodate a variety of commercial functions necessary for service to the community including retail, office, banks, restaurants, and general automotive sales and service uses.
2. The districts are situated on main highways and thoroughfares, and applicable standards are designed to recognize, preserve and improve the character of existing development as well as to be consistent with the intensity of use in adjacent residential areas; parking needs for each building will be satisfied on its own lot.
4.4.B Bulk Requirements.
MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA
20,000 square feet 2. LOT AREA PER UNIT
N/A 3. FRONTAGE
50 feet 4. SQUARE
100 feet 5. SETBACKS (1) FRONT (2) SIDE (3) REAR
15 feet
10 feet
15 feet 6. SETBACK FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
25 feet MAXIMUM 7. HEIGHT
40 feet 8. FLOOR AREA
0.30 9. LOT COVERAGE
0.25 10. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
0.60
SECTION 4.5
42 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
4.5 GENERAL INDUSTRY 1 (IG-1) DISTRICT.
4.5.A Purpose.
1. These districts consist of areas that have experienced heavy industrial development in the past. Applicable standards account for a range of size for establishments and relatively intensive use of the land.
2. Development of retail and residential uses in these districts would be inconsistent with their purpose.
3. Residential development is not compatible with the uses permitted in this district and is not allowed,
4.5.B Bulk Requirements.
MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA
20,000 square feet 2. LOT AREA PER UNIT
N/A – residential uses are not allowed in this zone 3. FRONTAGE
50 feet 4. SQUARE
100 feet 5. SETBACKS (1) FRONT (2) SIDE (3) REAR
30 feet
No minimum
30 feet 6. SETBACK FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
50 feet MAXIMUM 7. HEIGHT
40 feet 8. FLOOR AREA
0.40 9. LOT COVERAGE
0.30 10. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
0.60
SECTION 4.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|43
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
SECTION
4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
4.6 GENERAL INDUSTRY 2 (IG-2) DISTRICT.
4.6.A Purpose.
1. These districts consist of areas intended to be used for heavy commercial and industrial development on a less intensive basis than the IG-1 Districts.
2. They are designed for occupancy on somewhat larger sites with more spacious setbacks, in order to assure a high quality of development within the District and an agreeable relationship to adjacent districts.
3. Development of retail, business and residential uses in these districts would be inconsistent with their purpose and the purpose of the districts.
4. Residential development is not compatible with the uses permitted in this district and is not allowed,
4.6.B Bulk Requirements.
MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA
60,000 square feet 2. LOT AREA PER UNIT
N/A – residential uses are not allowed in this zone 3. FRONTAGE
50 feet 4. SQUARE
200 feet 5. SETBACKS (1) FRONT (2) SIDE (3) REAR
50 feet
30 feet
50 feet 6. SETBACK FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
100 feet MAXIMUM 7. HEIGHT
40 feet 8. FLOOR AREA
0.40 9. LOT COVERAGE
0.30 10. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
0.60
SECTION 4.7
44 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
4.7 COMMERCE PARK (CP) DISTRICT.
4.7.A Purpose.
1. These districts are designed to allow for a unified, coordinated development of tracts of land with a variety of lot sizes to accommodate high quality commercial, industrial, and limited retail development.
2. Development of residential uses in these districts would be inconsistent with their purpose and the purpose of Business Districts.
3. Residential development is not compatible with the uses permitted in this district and is not allowed.
4.7.B Bulk Requirements.
MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA
20,000 square feet 2. LOT AREA PER UNIT
N/A – residential uses are not allowed in this zone 3. FRONTAGE
50 feet 4. SQUARE
100 feet 5. SETBACKS (1) FRONT (2) SIDE (3) REAR
30 feet
10 feet
30 feet 6. SETBACK FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
50 feet MAXIMUM 7. HEIGHT
40 feet 8. FLOOR AREA
0.30 9. LOT COVERAGE
0.25 10. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
0.60
SECTION 4.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|45
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
SECTION
4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
4.8 TABLE OF USES - BUSINESS ZONES.
P = Zoning Permit S = Site Plan SE = Special Exception N = Not Permitted
4.8.A RETAIL USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Retail < 3,000 square feet.
S
S
S
S
SE
SE
SE
2. Retail = 3,000 square feet, but < 20,000 square feet.
S
SE
S
S
N
N
N
3. Retail = 20,000 square feet.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
4. Retail, Limited.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
SE
5. Sale at retail of any commodity manufactured, processed, fabricated or warehoused on the premises provided the total floor area devoted to retail sales does not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the building.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
6. Outside storage or display of merchandise.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
4.8.B SERVICE-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Personal service establishment (hair, nails, tailoring, tanning, tattoos, massage).
S
S
S
S
N
N
S
2. Printing and publishing establishments < 5,000 square feet
S
S
S
S
SE
SE
SE
3. Printing and publishing establishments = 5,000 square feet
N
N
N
N
SE
SE
SE
4. Service establishment (repair, rental and/or service of any item, except automobiles, trucks and trailers, that is allowed to be sold in the zone).
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
5. Self-service automatic laundry and on-site washing service.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
6. Dry cleaning establishment.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
7. Day care center. (See Section 7.6)
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
8. Family day care home.
S
S
S
S
N
N
N
9. Group day care home. (See Section 7.6)
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
10. Funeral home.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
SECTION 4.8
46 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
P = Zoning Permit S = Site Plan SE = Special Exception N = Not Permitted
4.8.C OFFICE-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. General or business office.
S
SE
SE
S
SE
SE
SE
2. Medical or dental office, clinic or laboratory.
S
SE
S
S
SE
SE
SE
3. Banks and financial institutions.
S
SE
S
S
S
S
S
4.8.D MARINE-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Commercial Fishing Operations
SE
SE
SE
N
SE
SE
N
2. Marine Repair
SE
SE
SE
N
SE
SE
N
3. Marinas, Slip Basins, Boat Storage and Landings. (See Section 7.9)
SE
SE
S
SE
SE
SE
N
4. Private docks.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
5. Repair and sale of pleasure boats and marine equipment, engines, supplies and provisions.
S
SE
S
S
S
S
S
4.8.E FOOD / HOSPITALITY-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Restaurant, Table Service (excludes fast-food restaurant and drive-through window).
S
SE
SE
S
SE
SE
SE
2. Restaurant, fast food – with drive-through window. (See Section 7.15)
N
SE
SE
N
SE
SE
SE
3. Restaurant, fast food – without drive-through window.
S
S
S
S
SE
SE
SE
4. Drive-through window service of any kind. (See Section 7.15)
N
SE
SE
N
SE
SE
SE
4.8.F LODGING-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Bed and breakfast. (See Section 7.7)
SE
SE
N
SE
N
N
N
2. Hotel, which may include a table service restaurant (but not a fast-food restaurant or any drive-through facilities), banquet hall and/or conference center.
SE
SE
S
SE
N
N
N
SECTION 4.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|47
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
SECTION
4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
P = Zoning Permit S = Site Plan SE = Special Exception N = Not Permitted
4.8.G RECREATION / AMUSEMENT-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Indoor recreational uses including but not limited to facilities for tennis, swimming, ice skating, bowling, and billiards.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
2. Outdoor recreational uses, including but not limited to baseball batting facility, miniature golf and putting course, tennis facilities, ice skating facilities and golf driving ranges.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
3. Playground or recreation areas operated by a governmental unit.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
4. Theaters and assembly halls.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
4.8.H RESIDENTIAL USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Accessory apartments. (See Section 7.3.G.3)
SE
N
N
SE
N
N
N
2. Assisted living facility, congregate housing, continuing care retirement community, or a nursing facility.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
3. Caretakers quarters.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
N
4. Multi-family dwelling units.
SE
SE
N
SE
N
N
N
5. Single-family dwelling.
P
P
N
S
N
N
N
6. Two-family dwelling.
SE
SE
N
SE
N
N
N
7. Letting of rooms.
S
S
S
S
N
N
N
8. Home-based Businesses (Home Office and Home Occupation).
S
S
S
S
N
N
N
SECTION 4.8
48 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
P = Zoning Permit S = Site Plan SE = Special Exception N = Not Permitted
4.8.I AUTOMOTIVE-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Gasoline filling station.
N
N
SE
N
SE
SE
SE
2. Automobile washing, lubricating and / or detailing.
N
N
SE
N
SE
SE
SE
3. Motor vehicle sales.
N
N
SE
N
SE
SE
SE
4. Motor vehicle rentals.
N
N
SE
N
SE
SE
SE
5. Motor vehicle service (limited repair license or general repair license).
N
N
SE
N
SE
SE
SE
6. Motor vehicle and other junkyard (in an enclosed building).
N
N
N
N
SE
SE
N
7. Off-street parking facilities.
SE
SE
SE
SE
S
S
SE
4.8.J INSTITUTIONAL USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Town of Branford buildings, facilities and uses.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
2. State and Federal Government buildings, facilities and uses.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
3. Cemetery.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
4. Churches and places of worship.
S
SE
SE
S
SE
SE
SE
5. Club, lodge or fraternal organization (private and operated for the benefit of the members and not for gain).
S
SE
S
S
SE
SE
SE
6. Private schools, colleges and universities.
SE
SE
SE
SE
N
N
SE
7. Hospitals and convalescent homes. See 7.8
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
8. Museum.
S
S
S
S
N
N
S
SECTION 4.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|49
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
SECTION
4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
P = Zoning Permit S = Site Plan SE = Special Exception N = Not Permitted
4.8.K STORAGE-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Bulk storage of material.
N
N
N
N
S
S
N
2. Commercial storage, sale and distribution of fuel and bottled gas, excluding tanks for petroleum products having a capacity in excess of 10,000 gallons.
N
N
N
N
S
S
N
3. Portable storage trailers, containers and boxes.
N
N
SE
N
SE
SE
SE
4. Climate-controlled self storage. (See Section 7.12)
N
N
SE
N
N
N
N
5. Self-storage facilities. (See Section 7.12)
N
N
N
N
SE
SE
SE
4.8.L INDUSTRIAL USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Freight and bus terminals.
N
N
N
N
S
S
N
2. Assembling, manufacturing and processing.
N
N
N
N
S
S
S
3. Contractor yard for vehicles, equipment, materials and/or supplies.
N
N
N
N
SE
SE
SE
4. Landing or takeoff area for rotorcraft, not including maintenance, repair, fueling or hangar facilities.
N
N
N
N
SE
SE
SE
5. Railroad rights of way and passenger stations.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
6. Research laboratory.
SE
SE
SE
SE
S
S
S
7. Warehousing and wholesale businesses (not retail).
N
N
N
N
SE
SE
N
4.8.M UTILITY-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Co-located telecommunications facilities.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
2. Utilities, including gas regulation stations, telephone exchanges, pumping stations, aboveground water storage tank, water reservoirs and satellite and cable television facilities.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
3. Utility substation.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
4. Wind-energy conversion systems.
N
N
N
N
SE
SE
SE
SECTION 4.8
50 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
P = Zoning Permit S = Site Plan SE = Special Exception N = Not Permitted
4.8.N AGRICULTURAL USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Commercial nurseries and greenhouses.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
2. Farms.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
3. Farm stands.
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
4. Farmers’ Markets (See Section 7.17)
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
4.8.O ANIMAL-RELATED USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Animal hospital or veterinarian office.
N
N
S
N
S
S
S
2. Commercial kennel and animal shelters. (See Section 7.13)
N
SE
SE
N
SE
SE
N
3. Animal day-care, grooming and training facility.
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
4. Riding stables and schools. (See Section 7.14)
N
SE
SE
N
SE
SE
N
4.8.P ACCESSORY USES BC BR BL MU IG1 IG2 CP
1. Signs
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
2. Parking lots
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|51
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
5.1 COASTAL MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
5.1.A Purpose.
1. This district is in addition to and overlaps one (1) or more other districts for the purpose of defining the coastal area of Town where it is necessary to insure that the development, preservation or use of land and water resources proceeds in a manner consistent with the capability of the land and water resources to support such development, preservation or use without significantly disrupting either the natural environment or sound economic growth.
2. A Coastal Site Plan Review for all buildings, uses or activities to be located in this District is essential to determine whether or not the potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on Coastal Resources and future water-dependent development activities are acceptable under the Connecticut Coastal Management Act.
5.1.B General.
1. The use of land, buildings and other structures within the Coastal Management District shall be established and conducted in conformity with the underlying zoning classification, subject to the additional requirements of this Section. Accordingly, such residential and nonresidential uses shall be permitted as are permitted and in the same manner as permitted in the underlying zone, provided the coastal site plan review determines that the potential adverse impacts of the proposed use on both the coastal resources and future water dependent activities are acceptable within the meaning of the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended.
2. No application for a Zoning Permit shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and no Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued by him until he has made a determination and certifies in writing that such use or structure has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended, or is a use exempt from such review as provided for below.
3. No parking area, building or other structure shall extend within less than 25 feet of any critical coastal resource except for walkways, drainage facilities and other utilities, raised boardwalks, piers, docks and similar facilities. Any land disturbance within this 25 foot setback area may be permitted only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commission that proper precaution will be taken to prevent adverse impact of the critical coastal resource
5.1.C Exemptions.
Pursuant to CGS 22a-109(b), the following activities, whether authorized as a matter of right, subject to approval of a site plan, approval of a Special Exception, or granting of a variance from these Zoning Regulations by the Zoning Board of Appeals, are exempt from coastal site plan review requirements:
1. Gardening, grazing and the harvesting of crops;
2. Minor additions to or modification of existing buildings or detached accessory buildings, such as garages and utility sheds;
3. Modification of existing structures or construction of new structures incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property including but not limited to walks, terraces, driveways, above-ground swimming pools, tennis courts, docks, and detached accessory buildings;
SECTION 5.1
52 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
SECTION 5.1
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|53
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
4. Construction of new or modifications of existing on-premise structures including fences, walls, pedestrian walks and terraces, underground utility connections, essential electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer service lines, signs, and such other minor structures as will not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources as defined by CGS 22a-93(7) or restrict access along the public beach;
5. Construction of an individual single-family residential structure except:
(1) When such structure is located on an island not connected to the mainland by an existing road bridge or causeway; or
(2) When such structure is in or within 100 hundred feet of the following coastal resource areas: Tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs and escarpments, and beaches and dunes;
6. Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, wildlife and other coastal land and water resources;
7. Interior modifications to buildings;
8. Minor changes in use of a building, structure, or property except those changes occurring on property adjacent to or abutting coastal waters.
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, shoreline flood and erosion structures as defined in the CGS 22a-109(c) shall not be exempt from Coastal Site Plan Review. Proposals for such structures must also be referred for review to the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, Office of Long Island Sound Programs.
5.1.D Vegetated Buffers.
1. In coastal site plans where there are environmentally sensitive and/or ecologically fragile natural resources, the Commission may require the provision of a vegetated buffer in order to protect and preserve such resources and coastal water quality.
2. A vegetated buffer, which is an undisturbed area or strip of land covered with permanent stable vegetation adjacent to the resource area, is an effective method for protecting a sensitive resource from disturbance.
3. It is therefore the policy of the Planning and Zoning Commission to require, as part of any site plan review for any property that includes or is adjacent to a critical coastal resource that any existing vegetated buffer be retained and / or a new vegetated buffer be established.
4. The width of the buffer should be appropriate to the quality of the coastal resource, the extent and type of development proposed, and the topography of the site. Plantings should be salt tolerant native species suited to the coastal resource buffer environment.
5. Mowed lawns are not considered to be vegetated buffers.
6. Vegetated buffer plans should be prepared by an appropriate environmental professional.
SECTION 5.2
54 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.2 TOWN CENTER VILLAGE DISTRICT.
5.2.A Purpose.
The purpose of the Town Center Village District (TCVD) is to preserve the character of the Town Center and to guide improvements in keeping with this character. The Branford Town Center is the heart of the community, with a concentration of civic and religious institutions, a thriving retail and restaurant area, attractive residential neighborhoods, and an abundance of social and cultural activities on the Town Green. The strong sense of place so evident in the Town Center reinforces community structure and enhances the overall quality of life in Branford.
In order to nurture the physical qualities that support this sense of place, the TCVD establishes a design review process to advise the Commission on aesthetic concerns.
Guiding principles of this review process are:
1. To protect distinctive architectural character, historic structures and attractive landscaping elements and encourage compatible design in new development;
2. To create an architectural design context that pays tribute to the historic vocabulary, landmarks, and character of the area and creates a marketable appeal;
3. To guide and improve the relationship and compatibility of structures, landscaping, signs, roadways, parking lots and drives, street hardware, lighting and similar features using guidance on matters such as color, material, height, proportion, orientation, roof treatments and setbacks;
4. To promote activity nodes and context through the organization, placement, scale, and design of buildings;
5. To maintain and improve public views and amenities;
6. To enhance the image and pedestrian use of the TCVD through use of consistent standards for the design, treatment, and layout of roadways, sidewalks and streetscape features.
5.2.B General.
1. The TCVD is a Village District in accordance with CGS 8-2j.
2. The TCVD is in addition to and overlays other districts for the purpose of defining the Town Center, where it is necessary to insure that the development, preservation, or use of land proceeds in a manner that focuses on design principles and results in creative solutions that preserve the village and historic character of the district and protect the coastal resources, public health, safety, convenience and property values.
3. The use of land, buildings and other structures within the Town Center Village District shall be established and conducted in conformity with the underlying zoning classification, subject to the additional requirements of this Section.
4. No application for a Zoning Permit shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and no Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued until a determination has been made (in writing) that such a use or structure has been reviewed according to the procedures specified in these Regulations.
SECTION 5.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|55
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.2.C Activities, Structures and Uses Covered.
Any new structure, addition, or modification of a structure and use or change of use that requires site plan or Special Exception approval of these Regulations and that is located within the Town Center District, is subject to the requirements of, and eligible for the special provisions of, the Town Center Village District. Review of such new use or change of use shall cover the following aspects of the proposal:
1. Facades.
2. Pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
3. Parking.
4. Streetscape (including lighting, street furniture, fencing and sidewalk paving).
5. Landscaping.
6. Signs.
7. Permitted Uses.
8. Utilities.
5.2.D Design Guidelines Purpose.
The following design guidelines are in addition to “Basic Standards,” Section 6 of these Regulations. They are designed not only to preserve and enhance the characteristics that contribute liveliness and beauty to the Town Center but also to address the challenges of those same characteristics. These characteristics include, but are not limited to:
1. Very dense development with small lots and a preponderance of small-scale buildings;
2. Limited space for parking, snow removal, landscaping and other amenities;
3. Contrasting architectural styles, historic structures and new development in close proximity;
4. Mixed use, with residential and commercial uses as well as public and private spaces in close proximity; and
5. High volume of pedestrian traffic, with pedestrian-oriented businesses and public use of outdoor space for recreation, socializing and civic activities.
5.2.E Overall Design Guidelines.
The following design guidelines for the TCVD are intended to guide the applicant when preparing an application in the TCVD. These guidelines promote creativity through the design process and are supportive of the TCVD design goals:
1. Maintain privacy between commercial and single-family residential uses.
2. Minimize any adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
3. Locate all utilities underground.
4. Emphasize curb cuts and internal circulation routes with landscaping or appropriate lighting and without the need of excessive signs.
5. Provide safe and accessible access to the site and building which blends in with the architecture and landscaping of the site.
6. Minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles with consistent treatments of sidewalks, driveways and parking lots.
7. Provide for snow storage or removal areas that do not damage landscaped areas.
8. Encourage outdoor art in public spaces and along pedestrian walkways.
9. Create a strong architectural setting by locating as much of the parking as possible in the rear of the site. Additional parking may be located on the side of the building.
10. Screen parking areas from public view by using landscaping, berms, fencing or elements of the building.
11. Locate no more than 20 parking spaces in a row without providing for a landscaped divider.
SECTION 5.2
56 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
12. Where appropriate, provide for a landscaped buffer between the parking area and the building.
13. Pave and grade parking and site to prevent storm water from crossing public sidewalks.
14. Shared parking is encouraged where site conditions and uses permit.
15. Plant street trees along the frontage of the site to establish a canopy.
16. Utilize plant materials that provide year-round interest in color, texture, shape or form.
17. Avoid blocking sight lines at curb cuts and intersections.
18. Include walks as public amenities and include benches, decorative paving, walls or other features to promote pedestrian use and gathering.
19. Bike racks are encouraged throughout the TCVD.
20. Install trash receptacles.
5.2.F Architecture.
The following guidelines shall be incorporated in all new buildings and renovated structures located within the TCVD:
1. Create visual variety by avoiding large, long or monolithic building facades without defining architectural features.
2. Incorporate existing architectural features into new structures.
3. Create visual points of interest and pedestrian amenities particularly on large tracts of land.
4. Preserve historic structures, historic character and reflect historic massing and scale where applicable.
5. Incorporate rooflines of adjacent properties in the design of new buildings.
6. Pitched roof structures are encouraged to reinforce existing prominent buildings.
7. Provide a balance of massing between the building and roof.
8. Provide prominent building entrances oriented to the street and include features that encourage pedestrian use.
9. Utilize architectural treatments to minimize the appearance of large buildings.
10. Provide breaks in the frontage of such buildings by incorporating appropriate features that reduce the buildings bulk.
11. Create variety in the TCVD by encouraging buildings that complement one another in form, color, or architectural detail.
12. Ensure that proportions between building height, length and width are consistent with contemporary design standards.
13. Conceal all views of roof-mounted mechanical equipment and other appurtenances by incorporating these features into the building design, not by artificial screening methods.
14. Because the TCVD possesses an assortment of architectural styles, these standards do not offer any particular architectural style or genre. Rather, they describe basic design elements and relationships that should be adhered to in order to maintain and enhance the architectural fabric that currently exists.
15. Preferred building materials are brick, stone and wood. Well executed cast stone details are also appropriate. Limited use of concrete and concrete block is acceptable if detailed and finished to be compatible with surrounding buildings. Corrugated, split block and “cider block” exteriors visible by the public are not appropriate.
16. Materials should be used according to their particular logic of use and assembly and with appropriate detailing and expression. Cladding materials, such as wood siding, should not be used as a monolithic treatment, but rather broken up by appropriate trim and detailing.
SECTION 5.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|57
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
17. The following roofing materials are encouraged: slate, wood shingles, shakes, and standing seam metal. Asphalt shingles are acceptable and should be neutral to dark in color.
18. Any new or exterior alterations should have significant trim detail to be compatible with surrounding architecture. Renovation should not significantly reduce the level of architectural detail, and new construction should be detailed at a level compatible with the immediate area.
19. Trim details such as rake boards, corner boards and fascia trim should be of a material and dimension appropriate to the overall treatment of the façade.
20. Windows and doors should be balanced in their placement on building facades. Though literal symmetry is not necessary, a general balance among façade elements is desirable.
21. Buildings should have many windows and doors at street level to encourage pedestrian traffic and commercial activity. Frequent entries contribute to a lively pedestrian space.
22. All exterior walls should have windows, especially if they face the street or any other public space.
23. Principal building entries should be oriented toward and visible from the street.
24. Conceal views of all roof-mounted equipment from the public right-of-way by using detailing incorporated into the architectural design as opposed to an applied barrier.
25. Screen all ground-mounted equipment (e.g. "heating, ventilating, and air conditioning," electrical, gas) using evergreen plantings or architectural detailing.
26. Conceal garage doors and loading areas from view from surrounding streets.
5.2.G Landscaping.
Landscaping must be designed to meet the following standards to the extent practicable:
1. Outdoor areas for public enjoyment are encouraged.
2. New development in the TCVD shall include landscaping, including lawns, plantings and walkways compatible with the traditional character of the TCVD.
3. The use of indigenous plant material and native characteristic species is encouraged.
4. Berms may also be required by the Commission where deemed necessary as an additional buffer.
5. Landscaping shall be provided in all front, side and rear setbacks.
6. A front yard landscape buffer may be required by the Commission where necessary to preserve and protect residential property values and privacy of residential developments.
7. An appropriate landscaped buffer shall be provided along the side and rear yards where commercial uses abut residential uses or residential zones.
8. Canopy trees should be deciduous shade trees planted at least three (3) inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 35 feet. Trees planted under utility lines should be carefully selected so that their mature height does not interfere with the lines. Trees should be deciduous shade or ornamental trees planted at two (2) inches in caliper with a mature height of at least 12 feet.
9. Evergreens should be coniferous species planted at six (6) to eight (8) feet in height. Shrubs should be either deciduous species planted at two and one-half (2½) feet in height with a mature height of at least six (6) feet or coniferous species planted at two and one-half (2½) feet in spread. The mature height of all plant material should be respected in selection and design.
10. Parking areas in particular should be provided with landscaping, to provide a buffer to adjacent properties and break up large expanses of paving.
SECTION 5.2
58 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
11. The Commission may require additional landscaping or more mature plantings when circumstances require, for noise and light abatement to prevent the depreciation of adjoining residential properties.
5.2.H Exterior Site Lighting.
1. Avoid relative brightness differences with adjacent dissimilar land uses.
2. Conceal the lighting source from the public view.
3. Coordinate lighting fixtures with architecture it serves.
4. Provide photometric data with site development submissions.
5.2.I Signs.
1. Avoid visual competition with other signs in the area.
2. Minimize the number of building and directional signs to avoid repetition.
3. Integrate signage architecturally into the building façade.
4. Avoid repetitious signage information on the same building frontage regardless of the sign area allowed in the zoning Regulations.
5. Construct freestanding monument signs at a low height whenever site conditions allow for visibility. Avoid top heavy, pole-mounted freestanding signs.
6. Do not use advertising and business slogans but identify the business and street address.
7. For buildings with more than one (1) occupant, a unified sign plan is required. The site should have an identifier sign that is generally freestanding and located at the main entrance. Signs for each occupant may be placed on the building but need to be coordinated with each occupant.
8. It is recommended that the color of the signs complement either the body or trim color of the structure being served.
9. Applicants should look to provide signs of appropriate scale to the site and building being designed.
10. Directional signs shall be used only when necessary. These signs shall mark entrance and direct traffic. Maximum area: three (3) square feet.
11. Temporary outdoor signs used to announce grand opening or temporary sales activities shall be consistent with the requirements contained within the zoning Regulations.
5.2.J Public Amenities.
New buildings in the TCVD are encouraged to incorporate public spaces to enhance the pedestrian environment, reinforce the open space network and provide for a balance of public and private space. All open space elements should enhance a pedestrian oriented environment that has the appearance of stability, quality and safety. To this end, the following elements are encouraged:
1. Orient public space to receive the maximum direct sunlight possible, using trees, overhangs and umbrellas to provide shade in the warmest months.
2. The design of planters, landscaping, walls and other street elements should allow visibility into and out of the open space.
3. Public spaces can feature art works; street furniture and landscaping that invite customers or enhance the building’s setting. Examples of desired features include walking surfaces of attractive pavers, site furniture, art work, or amenities such as fountains, seating and kiosks.
SECTION 5.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|59
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.3 ACCESS MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
5.3.A Purpose.
1. This District is established to implement the access management objectives of Branford identified in the “U.S. Route 1 / North Main Street Access Management Plan” dated June 2008.
2. The goal of this Section is to reduce traffic accidents, personal injury, and property damage attributable to poorly designed access systems, and to improve the safety and operation of U.S. Route 1.
3. This will protect the substantial public investment in the existing transportation system and reduce the need for expensive remedial measures.
4. This Section also serves to further the orderly layout and use of land, protect community character, and conserve natural resources by promoting well-designed road and access systems.
5.3.B General.
1. The use of land, buildings and other structures within the Access Management Overlay District shall be established and conducted in conformity with the underlying zoning classification, subject to the additional requirements of this Section.
2. No application for a Zoning Permit shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and no Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued by him until he has made a determination and certifies in writing that such use or structure has been reviewed and approved as provided for below.
5.3.C Design.
1. Driveway Offsets.
(1) Where feasible, new driveways shall be aligned with existing driveways or streets on the opposite side of U.S. Route 1 PREFERRRED DRIVEWAY ALIGNMENT ILLUSTRATION
(2) If such alignment is not feasible, new driveways shall be offset from existing driveways or streets a minimum of 250 feet along arterials or thoroughfares, and 150 feet along collector streets.
SECTION 5.3
60 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
ALTERNATIVE DRIVEWAY ALIGNMENT ILLUSTRATION
(3) Greater offsets may be required in accordance with the findings and recommendations of a traffic impact study.
2. Driveway Spacing Standards.
(1) The minimum spacing between driveways and street intersections and between separate driveways without traffic lights shall be determined based upon the posted speed limit of U.S. Route 1 at the point where the driveway is located.
(2) The following driveway spacing guidelines shall be measured from the centerlines of the driveways or street right-of-way: MINIMUM DRIVEWAY SPACING NEEDED TO POSTED SPEED LIMIT 35 MPH 45 MPH
PREVENT RIGHT TURN OVERLAP CONFLICT
100 feet
300 feet
MAINTAIN THROUGH TRAFFIC WITHIN 15 PERCENT OF POSTED SPEED LIMIT
375 feet
700 feet
PROVIDE MAXIMUM EGRESS CAPACITY AT CURB CUTS
320 feet
860 feet
(3) The location of a new driveway should generally be designed to maximize driveway spacing and separation distance. The Commission may approve shorter distances if it finds that such distances will adequately protect public safety and are reasonable in light of the specific development proposal for the property.
SECTION 5.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|61
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.3.D Shared and Cross Access.
1. Adjacent commercial or office properties classified as major traffic generators (i.e., uses that generate more than 30 peak hour trips, as cited in the Institution of Transportation Engineers' (ITE) trip generation tables) shall, where possible, provide a Shared Access Drive and Pedestrian Access to allow circulation between sites.
2. For new commercial retail and service uses, a system of shared use driveways and cross access easements shall be established wherever feasible and shall incorporate the following:
(1) A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation consistent with the access management classification system and standards.
(2) A design speed of 10 mph and a maximum width of 24 feet to accommodate two-way travel aisles designated to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles;
(3) Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service drive;
(4) A Unified Access and Circulation System Plan for coordinated or shared parking areas is encouraged.
3. Pursuant to this Section, property owners shall:
(1) Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the shared use driveways and cross access or service drive;
(2) Pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the shared-use driveway;
(3) Record a shared maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.
(4) The Commission may modify or waive the requirements of this Section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make a development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.
5.3.E Requirements for Phased Development Plans.
1. In the interest of promoting unified access and circulation systems, development sites under the same ownership or consolidated for the purposes of development and composed of more than one (1) building site shall be reviewed as single properties in relation to the access standards of this ordinance.
2. The number of access points permitted shall be the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to these properties, not the maximum available for that frontage.
3. Driveways shall be designed to avoid queuing across surrounding parking and driving aisles and pedestrian ways and sidewalks.
5.3.F Temporary Access.
1. The Planning Commission may approve temporary driveways on U.S. Route 1 as part of a site plan approval where continuation of shared access is not currently feasible, but is anticipated to be constructed within the next five (5) years.
2. A financial guarantee shall be submitted by the applicant to ensure closure and removal of the temporary access when the new shared access is constructed.
SECTION 5.3
62 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.3.G Nonconforming Access Features.
Legal access connections in place as of the date of adoption of this regulation that do not conform to the standards herein are considered nonconforming and shall be brought into compliance with applicable standards under the following conditions:
1. When new access or modified accesses to public rights-of-way and/or access permits are requested;
2. Change in use or enlargements or improvements that will increase trip generation, as cited in the Institution of Transportation Engineers' (ITE) trip generation tables).
5.3.H Reverse / Dual Frontage.
Lots that front on more than one (1) street may be required to locate motor vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification.
5.3.I Additional Site Plan Requirements.
Applicants shall submit a preliminary site plan for review by the planning department. At a minimum, the site plan shall show:
1. Location of existing and proposed access point(s) on both sides of the road where applicable;
2. Distances to neighboring constructed access points, median openings (where applicable), traffic signals (where applicable), intersections, and other transportation features on both sides of the property;
3. Number and direction of lanes to be constructed on the driveway plus striping plans;
4. All planned transportation features (such as sidewalks, bikeways, auxiliary lanes, signals, etc.);
5. Parking and internal circulation plans including walkways and bikeways, parking, loading spaces and bicycle racks.
SECTION 5.4
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|63
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.4 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
5.4.A Purpose.
1. Planned Development Districts may be established by the Commission in accordance with the procedures hereinafter specified. The provisions of this Section are designed to permit modification of the strict application of the standards and provisions of these Regulations to accomplish the purposes set forth below. A Planned Development District may be established by the Commission when found necessary and appropriate for the following purposes:
2. To permit the use of land, buildings and other structures for purposes that would be beneficial to and consistent with the character of the Town and the long range improvement of the neighborhood and consistent with any comprehensive plan of development adopted by the Commission, when such uses are located on tracts of sufficient size to accommodate harmonious design of buildings, structures and facilities in connection with the use and when another zoning district could not be appropriately established to accomplish such purposes.
5.4.B Establishment of District.
1. The Commission shall establish the PDD by approving a Master Plan in accordance with Section 9.10.F and this Section, which while not intended to be a substitute for detailed documentation associated with a site plan, provides sufficient information to determine whether the proposal is in conformance with Section 9.10.F and the Plan of Conservation and Development (POCD). Such adoption shall constitute a zoning map amendment in accordance with Section 9.10 of these Regulations.
2. District Eligibility. The following characteristics are required for a site to be eligible for the PDD designation:
(1) Public water and public sewers shall be provided.
(2) Minimum District Size: 60,000 square feet.
(3) Within the Coastal Management District, particularly in suburban residential areas currently zoned Residence R-3 and R-4, the use of PDD’s are not encouraged solely for the purpose of achieving higher densities of residential development but rather to allow greater flexibility in planning and design, free from the rigid constraints of uniform locational standards, at densities consistent with the immediately adjacent neighborhood and capable of being supported by the available water supply and sewage disposal facilities. Proposed PDD’s should be guided by and be consistent with Branford’s Municipal Coastal Program.
3. Appropriateness: In determining the appropriateness of a proposed PDD Zone, the Commission shall consider the following factors:
(1) Accessibility to major roads and proximity to community services.
(2) Physical characteristics of the lot.
(3) The existing municipal infrastructure's capability to support the proposed development.
(4) The Commission may consider any other factors that it deems applicable to a change of zone request.
SECTION 5.4
64 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.4.C Master Plan.
1. The purpose of the Master Plan submission is to determine whether the proposed uses and layout conform to Section 5.4.A and to the Plan of Conservation and Development. The Master Plan, once adopted, shall establish the dimensional characteristics of the PDD and its uses.
2. Project Phasing/Construction. When a mixed-use development is proposed the Commission may require the residential portion of the development to be constructed simultaneous to the commercial or business portion of the development.
3. Changes to the Master Plan.
(1) Any modifications that decrease the dimensional elements (e.g. reduction of building size) shall follow the Site Plan Procedures in Section 9.6.
(2) Any modifications that increase the dimensional elements in the Master Plan (e.g. expansion of building size) shall follow the Special Exception Procedures in Section 9.8.
(3) Any modifications to the use elements in the Master Plan shall follow the Zoning Map Amendment Procedures in Section 9.10.
5.4.D Site Plan.
1. As part of, or after Master Plan approval for districts established after June 1, 2011 a site plan application must be submitted for approval in accordance with Section 9.6 and including all the information required by the approved Master Plans.
2. Site Plans may be submitted in stages provided that such stages encompass not less than the minimum required tract size and include all those public amenities and features used as a public protection for the surrounding area. Such stages shall be capable of complete and self-sufficient existence without the completion of the remaining stages.
3. Site Plans must be submitted within 24 months of Master Plan Adoption. The Master Plan shall become null and void if the Site Plan is not approved within that timeframe.
5.4.E Maximum Building Height.
1. Buildings and other structures shall not exceed a height of 40 feet.
2. Notwithstanding anything in these regulations to the contrary, the Commission may permit the maximum height for buildings and other structures to be measured from the average finished grade measured at the base of such buildings or other structures to the level of the highest roof of such buildings or other structures when a Planned Development District is proposed for real property located in the General Industry 1 (IG-1) District which real property is located between two or more public streets, such streets being at disparate or unequal elevations whereby a building deck is proposed in order to make level the grade and under which building deck covered parking spaces shall be provided, and any portion of such real property (a) is located adjacent to a railroad; (b) is located in the coastal management district; (c) is located in the town center village district; and (d) qualifies as an “establishment” pursuant to section 22a-134 et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Such maximum height shall not apply to the following when not for human occupancy: spires, ornamental cupolas, towers, chimneys, flagpoles and silos, as well as features such as tanks and heating, ventilating, air conditioning, railings, and elevator equipment, that are located on the roof of a building and do not occupy more than 25 percent of the area of the roof.
SECTION 5.4
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|65
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.4.F Informal Consideration.
1. The Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of a formal application for approval of a Planned Development District, the applicant review with the Commission and its staff in a preliminary and informal manner any proposal for a Planned Development District.
2. The Commission recommends that the preliminary plans meet the requirements for a Master Plan. The Commission or its staff may request that the applicant submit such additional information as may lead to a rendering of a nonbinding opinion by the Commission.
5.4.G Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
1. Prior to the issuance of any Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance to permit any occupancy of the development, the developer shall file with the Commission a financial guarantee, in form, amount and surety approved by the Commission in accordance with Section 10.3, to guarantee the provision of all facilities common to the entire development, including but not limited to private roads, buffer strips, walkways, recreational facilities, club houses and other common areas.
2. Said financial guarantee shall be conditioned upon completion of said common facilities within one (1) year of the date of approval of the first such Certificate of Zoning Compliance, except that the Commission may extend the time for completion for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year after public hearing for a good cause shown.
5.4.H Additional Limitations.
1. Adoption of a Planned Development District by the Commission shall constitute authorization to establish the uses, buildings, structures and site development in accordance with the standards and Site Plans adopted by the Commission for the District and in accordance with detailed specifications approved by the Commission.
2. The development authorized by the Commission shall be completed within five (5) years from the effective date of the District, except that the Commission may extend the time for completion for one (1) year periods after public hearing for good cause demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission; otherwise the Commission shall be deemed authorized by the owner or owners of land within the District to amend these Regulations and the Zoning Map, deleting the Planned Development District and establishing for such land the provisions of another zoning district.
SECTION 5.5
66 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.5 AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
5.5.A Purpose.
1. Whereas, over 30 percent of the housing units in the Town of Branford are multi-family units, and whereas, regulations that allow for construction of affordable multi-family units have been in effect since zoning regulations were first adopted, on December 3, 1956, the following Regulations provide the opportunity to develop an alternative type of affordable unit. The intent of these Affordable Housing Regulations is to encourage development of affordable owner-occupied single-family detached homes on individually owned lots. To reduce costs, the Regulations allow for small lots (4,500 square feet minimum area). To insure quality, there are design standards for construction and specific landscaping requirements. A common interest ownership association is required to insure that common areas are maintained. At least 20 percent of the units in a development must be priced to meet the definition of "affordable housing," as defined in CGS Section 8-39a. Deed restrictions are required to maintain an affordable price for 40 years. The Commission may establish an Affordable Housing District (AHD) if it finds that the AHD will permit tracts of a size set forth below to be designed and developed for single-family residential use and similar purposes in such manner as to accomplish one or more of the following purposes:
2. To encourage the private sector to build moderate cost, single-family detached housing;
3. To demonstrate that changes in zoning requirements can promote production of attractive housing at less than average market rates;
4. To offer a home ownership opportunity for moderate income families;
5. To permit an alternative housing option for single person households and the elderly.
6. Creation of an AHD as a common interest ownership community is required to ensure that high standards within the development will be maintained, and that fees assessed on residents will be used to pay for maintenance and other common areas. All requirements of this Section apply to an AHD, even if the AHD would be exempt from certain CIOA requirements.
5.5.B Establishment of District.
1. The Commission shall establish the AHD by approving a Master Plan in accordance with Section 9.10.F and this Section, which while not intended to be a substitute for detailed documentation associated with a site plan, provides sufficient information to determine whether the proposal is in conformance with Section 9.10.F and the Plan of Conservation and Development (POCD). Such adoption shall constitute a zoning map amendment in accordance with Section 9.10 of these Regulations.
2. District Eligibility. The following characteristics are required for a site to be eligible for the AHD designation:
(1) The AHD may not be located within one-half mile of any portion of any other development approved under this Section of the zoning Regulations within the previous three (3) years.
(2) Public water, sewerage and roadway systems necessary to serve the development shall be in place or necessary improvements shall be included in the AHD Basic and Site Plans.
(3) The proposed development shall be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood with regard to scale, character and use of land.
SECTION 5.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|67
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
3. Minimum Development Area: Each AHD shall be located on a parcel of land at least five (5) acres in size, and with a minimum of thirty-five (35) dwelling units.
4. Appropriateness: In determining the appropriateness of a proposed AHD Zone, the Commission shall consider the following factors:
(1) Accessibility to major roads and proximity to community services.
(2) Physical characteristics of the lot.
(3) The existing municipal infrastructure's capability to support the proposed development.
(4) The Commission may consider any other factors that it deems applicable to a change of zone request.
5.5.C Master Plan.
1. The purpose of the Master Plan submission is to determine whether the proposed uses and layout conform to this Section and to the Plan of Conservation and Development. The Master Plan, once adopted, shall establish the dimensional characteristics of the PDD and its uses.
2. Project Phasing. Construction may be phased over a period according to a plan submitted by the developer. Project design and planning standards must be submitted as part of the Site Plan to ensure continuity between phases. These standards become part of the approval. At least 20 percent of the units in each phase must be deed-restricted affordable units.
3. Changes to the Master Plan.
(1) Any modifications that decrease the building or use elements in the Master Plan (e.g. reduction of building size, reduction in the number of units) shall follow the Site Plan Procedures in Section 9.6.
(2) Any modifications that increase the dimensional elements in the Master Plan (e.g. expansion of building size) shall follow the Special Exception Procedures in Section 9.8.
(3) Any modifications to the use elements in the Master Plan (e.g. increase in the number of units) shall follow the Zoning Map Amendment Procedures in Section 9.10.
5.5.D Site Plan.
1. As part of, or after Master Plan approval for districts established after June 1, 2011 a site plan application must be submitted for approval in accordance with Section 9.6 and including all the information required by the approved Master Plans.
2. Site Plans may be submitted in stages provided that such stages encompass not less than the minimum required tract size and include all those public amenities and features used as a public protection for the surrounding area. Such stages shall be capable of complete and self-sufficient existence without the completion of the remaining stages.
3. Changes to the Site Plan. Planning staff can review and approve minor modifications to plans for individual lots. All other changes shall follow the Changes to the Master Plan Process in Section 5.5.C.
4. Site Plans must be submitted within 24 months of Master Plan Adoption. The Master Plan shall become null and void if the Site Plan is not approved within that timeframe.
SECTION 5.5
68 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.5.E Overall Lot Bulk Requirements.
1. Maximum Building/Structure Height: Thirty-five (35) feet. Accessory structures should not exceed fifteen (15) feet or the height of the main structure, whichever is less.
2. Maximum Lot Coverage: Twenty-five (25) percent of lot area.
3. Maximum Floor Area: Fifty (50) percent of lot area.
4. Minimum Floor Area for Each Building: Eight hundred forty (840) square feet.
5. Minimum Lot Area Per Unit: Four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. Only one dwelling unit per lot is permitted.
5.5.F Uses Permitted in the Affordable Housing District.
Only single-family detached houses and their customary accessory uses (listed in Section 3.3.B), as well as club houses and other passive and active, common recreational facilities for such houses, shall be permitted.
5.5.G Informal Consideration.
1. The Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of a formal application for approval of an Affordable Housing District, the applicant review with the Commission and its staff in a preliminary and informal manner any proposal for a Planned Development District.
2. The Commission recommends that the preliminary plans meet the requirements for a Master Plan. The Commission or its staff may request that the applicant submit such additional information as may lead to a rendering of a nonbinding opinion by the Commission.
5.5.H Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
1. Prior to the issuance of any Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance to permit any occupancy of the development, the developer shall file with the Commission a financial guarantee, in form, amount and surety approved by the Commission in accordance with Section 10.3, to guarantee the provision of all facilities common to the entire development, including but not limited to private roads, buffer strips, walkways, recreational facilities, club houses and other common areas.
2. Said guarantee shall be conditioned upon completion of said common facilities within one (1) year of the date of approval of the first such Certificate of Zoning Compliance, except that the Commission may extend the time for completion for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year after public hearing for a good cause shown.
SECTION 5.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|69
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.5.I Affordability Requirement.
1. Not less than 30 percent of the dwelling units in the development shall be conveyed by deeds containing covenants or restrictions requiring that such dwelling units be sold at or below prices that will preserve the units as affordable housing, as defined at CGS Section 8-39a. At least 15 percent or more of the dwelling units will be by deeds containing covenants or restrictions requiring those units to be sold or rented , for at least forty (40) years after the initial occupation of the development at prices deemed affordable to persons and families having an income no greater than 80 percent of the area median income or 80 percent of the state median income, whichever is less; and another 15 percent or more of the units will be conveyed under the same terms to persons and families having an income no greater than 60 percent of the area median income or 60 percent of the state median income, whichever is less.
2. Such restrictions shall remain in effect for at least 40 years after the initial occupation of the proposed development.
3. Those units to which deed restrictions will apply must be designated with the submission of the Master Plan.
4. Deed-restricted affordable units should be integrated with the balance of the development and may not be unnecessarily grouped together.
5.5.J Common Interest Ownership Community Declarations.
1. Draft common interest ownership community declaration provisions covering continued compliance with the Site Plan shall be submitted to the Commission prior to approval of the Site Plan.
2. Common Interest Ownership Community: In order to assure proper maintenance of common areas, only common interest ownership communities, as submitted to the Town Attorney (to confirm the format of the document is appropriate) qualify as AHD. Single-family units are to be owned individually. An endorsed record subdivision map and an endorsed Site Plan must be filed in the office of the Town Clerk prior to commencement of sales, and common interest ownership documents are to be recorded on the land records prior to conveyance of title of any unit in the phase.
5.5.K Standards for Affordable Housing Development Plans.
1. Affordability Deed Restrictions. In order to ensure affordability, the applicant must, before any conveyance of lots within an approved AHD:
(1) File in the Branford Land Records an approved Site Plan and subdivision plan on which no fewer than 30 percent of the residential lots are explicitly designated to be reserved as “affordable housing,” as defined in CGS Section 8-39a.
(2) Present to the Commission for its review and approval the language to be inserted as “affordable housing” restrictions in the deeds to the lots to be reserved as affordable housing. Such language shall be forwarded to the Town Attorney for review and comment. The Commission shall not endorse its approval on the subdivision plan unless it has first approved the language to be used as “affordable housing” deed restrictions. Such language must assure that the units on these lots will remain affordable, as herein defined, for a period of not less than 40 years.
SECTION 5.5
70 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
2. Buffer Areas.
(1) No building or other structure, internal road, or parking area shall extend within 40 feet of the perimeter of the AHD.
(2) Along and adjacent to each project line, there shall be provided a greenbelt having a minimum depth of 25 feet, planted with trees and shrubs, at least 50 percent of which should be evergreens.
(3) Suitable existing trees may be preserved and/or supplemented by plantings so as to provide the required greenbelt with an overall minimum height of at least five (5) feet.
(4) The Commission may increase the width and density of the required buffer if it finds that such increase is warranted to protect nearby critical coastal resources.
(5) The Commission may reduce the buffer area if it finds that existing natural features provide a level of screening similar to such buffer. The buffer area may be occupied by roads, utility rights of way, trails and fences.
3. Open Space and Recreation Land.
(1) 10 percent of the total land area of the site shall be set aside as open space or designated recreation area, at least half of which (but not less than one-half acre), shall be suitably prepared, protected and equipped with facilities for active recreational use, such as tennis courts, tot lots or athletic fields.
(2) Alternatively, 20 percent of the total land area of the site may be set aside as passive recreation area and landscaped with yard furniture, gardens, and formal landscape features.
(3) Recreational land must be of a shape and size compatible with a recreational use. Such recreational land shall not include land in required buffer areas, streets, service areas, parking areas, walks, wetlands or watercourses.
4. Site Landscaping.
(1) All common areas of the development not used for buildings, driveways, and parking areas shall be landscaped and maintained with lawn and trees or shrubs or, where appropriate, shall be left undisturbed as natural terrain.
(2) Common parking areas shall contain evenly distributed landscaped areas protected by solid curbing every sixth (6th) space in a row of parking spaces.
(3) Fences, walls, landscaped earth berms, and/or closely planted evergreens, trees, hedges or shrubs shall be used to screen parking areas to a height of four (4) feet from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties and recreation areas. The Site Plan shall also include a plan for tree preservation and protection.
(4) Modification. The Commission may modify specific site landscaping standards if the applicant provides a plan of comparable quality prepared by a registered landscape architect.
5. Siting of Units. Only multi-section manufactured homes or conventional site-built homes may be sited at the perimeter (i.e., all lots bordering public rights-of-way or property not owned by the common interest ownership community) of an Affordable Housing District (AHD).
6. Lot Plan. Units shall be located as shown on the Site Plan.
SECTION 5.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|71
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7. Unit Landscaping: Each dwelling unit lot shall be completely and permanently landscaped and maintained to (a) provide for appropriate screening, (b) help conserve energy by shading buildings, (c) enhance privacy, and (d) lend overall visual order to the development. All required landscaping for an individual unit shall be planted or installed or a financial guarantee posted to insure same prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for that unit. Minimum standards for each lot or exclusive use area are as follows:
(1) One (1) shade tree in the front setback and one in the rear setback. Each shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in caliper.
(2) A privacy area adjacent to each unit should be screened by evergreen trees, hedges or wood or masonry fencing.
(3) Front setback foundation planting of six (6) shrubs. Plant materials should be varied at different units on the same street.
(4) Modification: The Commission may modify specific site landscaping standards if the applicant provides a plan of comparable quality prepared by a registered landscape architect.
8. Backyard Area: Each unit must have a useable outdoor area containing at least 500 square feet.
5.5.L Dwelling Unit Design Standards.
1. Overall Design. Architectural designs and site development plans should make advantageous use of natural topography and site features, provide privacy between dwelling units and harmonize with the surrounding neighborhood through scale and design, protecting property values and preserving and enhancing the appearance and beauty of the community. A variety of architectural styles, types and sizes of dwelling units shall be encouraged. For developments built in phases, architectural styles and project and unit amenities must remain the same in all phases of development.
2. Exterior Building Materials Permitted. The following building materials may be used as siding for dwelling units: wood, brick, stone, stucco, plaster, and glass. The Commission may approve the use of other materials commonly used on housing units.
3. Roofing Materials Permitted. The following roofing materials may be used: wood, shakes, asphalt, composition or wood shingles. The Commission may approve the use of similar materials commonly used on dwelling units.
4. Roof Design. All main and accessory structures must have a roof pitch of no less than three (3) vertical inches for every twelve (12) horizontal inches. The roof overhang shall be no less than six (6) inches at the eave line.
5. Foundation. All dwelling units, including all types of manufactured housing, must be built or placed on permanent foundations, with insulation to conserve energy. The bases of manufactured housing units must be totally enclosed by perimeter walls of masonry construction. All hitches, wheels and axles for such units must be completely removed.
6. Driveways. At a minimum, driveways shall be covered with a surface of crushed stone or equal material compacted to a depth of four (4) inches and shall conform to the driveway specifications of Section 6.12 of these Regulations.
7. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on at least one (1) side of the street and at other locations as needed for the safety and convenience of pedestrian traffic.
SECTION 5.6
72 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.6 AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING DISTRICT.
5.6.A Purpose.
An Age-Restricted Housing District (“ARHD”) shall be a form of Planned Development District (floating zone) that may be established by the Commission in accordance with the procedures hereinafter specified. The provisions of this Section are designed to permit modification of the strict application of the standards and provisions of these Regulations to accomplish the purposes set forth below. An ARHD may be established by the Commission when found necessary and appropriate for the following purposes:
1. To advance the goal of the Town Plan of Conservation and Development to respond to changing demographics by providing additional housing opportunities close to the Branford Town Center for persons who are 55 years and older.
2. To allow the use of flexible design techniques on parcels of land on which development under conventional zoning standards would be constrained by difficult topography, soils, rock, wetlands or other limiting features.
3. To allow the preservation of significant areas of open space on tracts on which more conventional forms of development would cause the loss of natural features or resources the Commission deems important to the Town.
5.6.B Parcel Location.
In order to assure the desired accessibility of an Age-Restricted Housing District to the Town Center, any parcel proposed for an ARHD must be located within 2,500 feet of the lot on which is located the Branford Town Hall (1019 Main Street).
5.6.C Size, Dwelling Density and Open Space.
The tract or adjoining tracts, of land for which application is made for the establishment of an Age-Restricted Housing District must contain a contiguous area of not less than ten acres. No less than seven (7) acres, or 50 percent of the tract, whichever is greater, shall be set aside for open space. In the event all or a portion of the area proposed for open-space preservation is to be conveyed to the Town, that portion to be so conveyed shall be excluded from the proposed ARHD, but the area of such portion shall be included in the calculation of the ten (10) acres required by this Section 5.6.C. The maximum residential density shall be nine-and-one-half (9.5) units per acre, and shall be based upon the total area of land to be included in the ARHD plus any additional area of land to be conveyed to the Town as open space in connection with the adoption of the ARHD. No building permits may be issued for any structure approved in connection with an ARHD application unless and until any such conveyance of land to the Town has been made. Such conveyance must be made by warranty deed and must be free of any encumbrances.
5.6.D Age Restrictions.
Each dwelling unit must be occupied by at least one (1) person who is 55 years of age or older.
SECTION 5.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|73
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.6.E Application.
A formal application for the establishment of an Age-Restricted Housing District must be submitted to the Commission in writing, and must be signed by the owner or owners of all parcels within the proposed District. The Commission may deem any applications for a zone text amendment, zone change and site plan to accommodate age-restricted housing, including any such applications filed prior to the effective date of this Section, as an application for the establishment of an ARHD, provided (i) the application would otherwise comply with the standards set forth in this Section; and (ii) the applicant agrees to such designation of its application. An application for an Age-Restricted Housing District shall be accompanied by the following:
1. Statement: A written statement specifying in detail any special provisions which are proposed to be applicable to the use of land, buildings and other structures in the Age-Restricted Housing District; the location and bulk of buildings and other structures; and the area, shape and frontage of lots within the District. In lieu of proposing special regulatory text provisions to be applicable within the ARHD, the applicant may request that the Basic or Detailed Site Plans submitted with such application be treated as special regulatory dimensional provisions to the extent such plans are different, in any respect, from the dimensional requirements applicable to the Multifamily District.
2. Basic Site Plans: Basic Site Plans for the proposed development, including property maps, topographic plans, architectural plans and other drawings as relevant, in sufficient detail to show the existing conditions and improvements proposed to be erected on the site, the open spaces to be provided, the nature and location of the proposed use or uses, the relationship of the proposed development to surrounding properties and other pertinent information. Plans where applicable shall be prepared and certified by an architect and / or professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. Basic Site Plans should generally include the following information; however, the Commission shall retain the right to waive any of the following informational requirements if it finds that such information is not needed to properly evaluate the application in accordance with the standards of this Section:
(1) Location and size of property, including a boundary map with an accuracy meeting or exceeding standards for a "Class A-2 Transit Survey" as defined by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. which map is to show the precise boundaries of the proposed District, as well as existing zoning boundaries and the boundaries of any officially designated wetland areas;
(2) Present and proposed land uses and the acreage of each use, as well as existing and future land uses in the surrounding area;
(3) Present and proposed buildings and structures including use, dimensions and locations of each;
(4) Proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns including locations and dimensions of private and public streets and common drives, pedestrian walkways, malls and other public and private paths;
(5) Location of proposed off-street parking facilities with dimensions, including location, size and number of parking spaces, access drives and walkways;
(6) Proposed open areas such as parks, lawn area, and recreational facilities;
(7) Existing and proposed landscaping treatment, including major tree areas, water bodies and related treatment of open space areas, screening, and existing and proposed topography;
SECTION 5.6
74 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(8) Utility information including water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, including capacity of water courses and the additional flow being produced, electrical service and exterior lighting;
(9) A location map showing the site's situation within the Town's circulation system and all streets and intersections within 1,000 feet of the site;
(10) Preliminary architectural plans including generalized floor plans, exterior elevations, perspective drawings and descriptive information on types of building materials and exterior finishes;
(11) Any additional information which the Commission may reasonably require or the applicant may wish to submit, including such items as a traffic study, storm drainage and flooding report, soils and geology map, marketability study, project model, covenants and/or easements related to public access rights, legal information related to disposition, ownership and maintenance of community facilities and open space, financial guarantees to insure completion of community elements, and schedules of development phases.
5.6.F Detailed Site Plans.
An applicant for the establishment of an Age-Restricted Housing District may submit Detailed Site Plans, as described in Section 9.6, in lieu of Basic Site Plans, with the application. Such plans shall contain the information required under Section 9.6.C of these Regulations.
5.6.G Procedures.
1. After receipt of a complete application for the establishment of an Age-Restricted Housing District, the Commission shall review the application and during this review may hold meetings with the applicant and request additional information. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application in the same manner and with the same notice as required for amendment of these Regulations. The Commission may request the following information for presentation prior to or at the public hearing:
(1) Evidence from the Sewer Authority that sewers are available to the project for tie-in and that the sewer lines, sewage treatment plant and related appurtenances have the capacity for the projected volumes;
(2) A statement from the Town Sanitarian on the adequacy of solid waste disposal and, if no public sewers are available, the adequacy of private sewage disposal systems;
(3) A statement from the Police Commission that the proposal will not cause any undue traffic hazards;
(4) A statement from the Fire Marshal that the proposal meets fire safety standards and concerning the fire fighting feasibility of the proposed plan;
(5) A statement from the Town Engineer in reference to the adequacy of the basic drainage, public street design and the design of elements to be served by the Public Works Department of the Town;
(6) A statement from any other municipal department or advisory committee whose opinion is deemed appropriate by the Commission.
SECTION 5.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|75
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
2. After the public hearing, the Commission may either give approval to the Basic or Detailed Site Plans or approval subject to modifications, but only after the Commission makes the findings set forth under Section 5.6.I below, in addition to other findings necessary for amendment of these Regulations. Approval of Basic Site Plans shall not constitute final approval of the Age-Restricted Housing District and shall simply authorize the submission of Detailed Site Plans setting forth in detail the specifics of the proposed development in accordance with Section 9.6.C of these Regulations and showing any modifications specified by the Commission. If Detailed Site Plans are approved by the Commission, the ARHD shall be considered established and these Zoning Regulations and the Zoning Map shall be considered to be modified to permit the establishment of the development as approved. The approved ARHD shall be shown on the Zoning Map with a reference to the records of the Commission where the approved standards and plans may be seen. If the application is approved, the Commission shall give notice of such approval in the same manner as required for the amendment of these Regulations.
5.6.H Detailed Site Plans.
1. If Detailed Site Plans were not submitted and approved as part of the application to establish the Age-Restricted Housing District, such plans shall be submitted in conformance with the Basic Site Plans, as those may have been modified by the Commission, and shall include all required information. Such Detailed Site Plans may be submitted in stages provided that such stages encompass not less than the minimum required tract size and include all those public amenities and features used as a public protection for the surrounding area. Such stages shall be capable of complete and self-sufficient existence without the completion of the remaining stages. Six (6) copies of all Detailed Site Plans shall be submitted and shall include at least the following:
(1) Site Plan containing detailed layout information related to all site plan proposals contained in the Basic Site Plans, plus an additional, schematic layout of buildings, drives and parking areas at a scale of 1" = 100';
(2) Building Plans encompassing the architectural information developed in the Basic Site Plans;
(3) Landscaping Plans presenting in detail the landscaping treatments and open space proposals contained in the Basic Site Plans;
(4) Engineering Plans presenting the detail designs and information supporting all the engineering elements of the Basic Site Plans.
2. Approval of the Detailed Site Plans shall be noted on said Plans which shall then be signed by the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission with the date of approval indicated on the plans.
SECTION 5.6
76 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.6.I Findings Required.
The Commission may adopt the Age-Restricted Housing District, thereby amending these Regulations and the Zoning Map, only after the Commission makes the following findings in addition to other findings necessary for the amendment of these Regulations:
1. The ARHD and the standards and Basic Development Plans applicable therein will accomplish the purposes set forth in Section 5.6.A;
2. The applicant has provided, where appropriate, for the continued maintenance of the development in general, including those open space and recreational areas not dedicated for general public use;
3. The streets and drives will be suitable and adequate to accommodate anticipated traffic and projected development intensity will not generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street system in the area;
4. The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed development and the utilities and drainage have been so arranged as to not overburden the capacity of the facilities connected therewith.
5.6.J Financial Guarantees.
1. The petitioner shall file with the Commission a financial guarantee, in form, amount and surety approved by the Commission, to guarantee the faithful performance of the site improvements work to be undertaken within the public rights-of-way, unless said improvements are subject to a financial guarantee under the provisions of the Branford Subdivision Regulations.
2. Prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Zoning Compliance to permit any occupancy of the development, the developer shall file with the Commission a financial guarantee, in form, amount and surety approved by the Commission, to guarantee the provision of all facilities common to the entire development, including but not limited to private roads, buffer strips, walkways, recreational facilities, club houses and other common areas. Said financial guarantee shall be conditioned upon completion of said common facilities within one (1) year of the date of approval of the first such Certificate of Zoning Compliance, except that the Commission may extend the time for completion for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year for good cause shown.
SECTION 5.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|77
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.6.K Additional Limitations.
1. Effect of Adoption of District: Adoption of an Age-Restricted Housing District by the Commission shall constitute authorization to establish the uses, buildings, structures and site development in accordance with the standards and Detailed Development Plans adopted by the Commission for the District and in accordance with detailed specifications approved by the Commission.
2. Completion of Construction: The development authorized by the Commission shall be completed within five (5) years from the effective date of the District, except that the Commission may extend the time for completion for one (1) year periods after public hearing for good cause demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission; otherwise the Commission shall be deemed authorized by the owner or owners of land within the District to amend these Regulations and the Zoning Map, deleting the Age-Restricted Housing District and establishing for such land the provisions of another zoning district.
3. Enforcement of Age Restrictions: In order to assure compliance with the age restrictions required by Section 5.6.D of these Regulations, the Commission or its enforcement agent may make reasonable requests for documentation of compliance with such restrictions, including, but not limited to, the following: (1) if the dwelling units are rented, an affidavit from the owner indicating the methods used by the owner to assure compliance with the age restrictions, as well as copies of any written documentation of age provided to the owner; (2) affidavits or other proof of age from the occupants of any dwelling unit.
5.6.L Modification of Detailed Site Plans.
In the event any application is submitted to modify the Detailed Site Plans, such application shall be processed as follows:
1. Except as provided in subsection 2.(2) of this Section 5.6.L, if any of the proposed modifications would create additional structures or dwelling units, or would not comply with either (i) the dimensional standards applicable to the Multifamily District, or (ii) any special regulatory text standards adopted in connection with the establishment of the Age-Restricted Housing District, such proposed modifications shall be treated as an application to amend the Regulations applicable to the ARHD, and the procedure for the Commission to review and act upon such application shall be the same as the procedure to establish an ARHD.
2. Such proposed modifications shall be treated as an application to modify a Site Plan pursuant to Section 9.6 of these Regulations if none of the proposed modifications would create additional structures or dwelling units, and all of the proposed modifications would either:
(1) comply with either (A) the dimensional standards applicable to the Multifamily District, or (B) any special regulatory text standards adopted in connection with the establishment of the Age-Restricted Housing District; or
(2) reduce the extent of any noncompliance with the dimensional standards applicable to the Affordable Housing District.
SECTION 5.7
78 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.7 INCENTIVE HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT (IHOD)
5.7.A Purpose
1. The primary purpose of the Incentive Housing Overlay District (IHOD) is to encourage the development and maintenance of affordable housing in both residential and business districts that have the transportation connections, nearby access to amenities and services, and infrastructure necessary to support more concentrated levels of development.
2. The IHOD seeks to avoid sprawl and traffic congestion by encouraging a more vibrant residential component to business or mixed-use areas in order to sustain a lifestyle in which residents can walk or use public transportation to reach jobs, services, and recreational or cultural opportunities.
3. The IHOD is also intended to enable infill development that is sensitive to the characteristics of the surrounding, existing uses, and to facilitate the adaptive reuse of existing, historic or underutilized buildings or properties in Branford that may otherwise be lost to redevelopment.
4. The name “Incentive Housing Overlay District” is intended to reflect the Commission’s interest in participating in the financial incentive program created pursuant to CGS Chapter 124b, should a proper opportunity arise. However, this Section 5.7 is also designed to provide additional opportunities for the development of affordable housing in Branford, regardless of whether such development is eligible for approval for such incentives.
5.7.B General Requirements
1. IHOD zones may, but are not required to, be proposed in compliance with the requirements of CGS Chapter 124b. When an application is made for approval of an IHOD that would be eligible for financial incentives under CGS Chapter 124b, the application must comply with all applicable provisions of those statutes, as well as to the provisions of Section 5.7 of these Regulations. For such applications, any conflict between the statutory provisions and the provisions of Section 5.7 shall be resolved in favor of the statutory provisions. At the time of filing such application, the applicant shall provide a list of all provisions of Section 5.7 that the applicant believes to be superseded by the provisions of CGS Chapter 124b. Applications for approval of any IHOD that is not eligible for state financing pursuant to CGS Chapter 124b must comply with all of the provisions of Section 5.7 of these Regulations.
2. Subzones. Each IHOD may consist of one or more subzones, which may overlay each other as well as the underlying district. The permissible types of subzones are designated as:
(1) Multi-family (MF) subzone, in which only residential uses shall be permitted; and
(2) Mixed-use (MU) subzone, in which residential and nonresidential uses may be permitted as set forth in Section 5.7.E.
If the underlying zone is a residence district, then only the MF subzone may be utilized. On a site where the underlying zone is a business district and no subzone is designated, then both types of subzone may be utilized. In establishing a subzone, the Commission will have the discretion to exclude one or more uses that would otherwise be permitted in an incentive housing development in that subzone, including uses permitted in the underlying district, which exclusions, if any, will be stated in the resolution creating or amending the subzone and will become part of the text describing the incentive housing zone.
SECTION 5.7
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|79
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
3. Location Criteria. In determining whether to approve an IHOD, the Commission shall consider the ability of the proposal to satisfy the purposes set forth in Section 5.7.A. Factors that shall generally be deemed necessary for an IHOD include:
(1) Proximity to public transportation. The land should be near a regularly scheduled route or hub of public transportation, such as a bus route, transit station (including rapid transit), commuter rail facility, bus terminal, bus shelter, or ferry terminal; and
(2) Location within or near areas of concentrated development. The land should be within or near an area of existing, concentrated development, such as a commercial center, existing residential or commercial district, or village district established pursuant to CGS Section 8-2j.
4. Conceptual Plan. An applicant for approval of an IHOD must submit, with the application, a Conceptual Plan showing the proposed layout of structures and uses. The Conceptual Site Plan shall, at a minimum, include the information requested in Section 9.10.F.3 and 9.10.F.4 of these regulations. The Conceptual Plan shall not be binding on the applicant or Commission when Special Exception and/or Site Plan approval is sought after approval of an IHOD, but the applicant may be required to explain and justify any significant inconsistencies between the Conceptual Plan and the proposed final Site Plan.
5.7.C Bulk Requirements
The following Bulk Requirements apply when an IHOD project is proposed. The requirements in the Underlying Zone remain in effect when noted UZ.
MINIMUM 1. LOT AREA
UZ 2. FRONTAGE
UZ 3. SQUARE
UZ 4. SETBACKS (1) FRONT (2) SIDE (3) REAR
UZ
UZ
UZ 5. SETBACK FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE
UZ MAXIMUM 6. HEIGHT
40 7. FLOOR AREA
Not Applicable 8. LOT COVERAGE
Not Applicable 9. MAXIMUM NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITY
20 units per Acre 10. MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
0.70
UZ = Underlying zone requirements apply
SECTION 5.7
80 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
Note regarding Residential Density:
(1) Residential Density is calculated by the number of units allowed per net lot area. See minimum lot area definition for determining net lot area.
(2) Where an incentive housing development contains a mix of uses, residential densities will be calculated by dividing the total acreage of the incentive housing development by the total number of dwelling units, regardless of how much land is devoted to non-residential uses.
(3) For any incentive housing development to be developed in phases, each phase must comply with the incentive housing restrictions set forth in this section.
5.7.D Special Exception and Site Plan Requirement
Except as set forth below, the Commission must approve a Special Exception and Site Plan for any principal and accessory uses proposed, in accordance with Section 5.7, to be established in an approved IHOD. The Special Exception requirement shall not apply to residential uses within any IHOD that is approved for financial incentive payments pursuant to CGS Chapter 124b.
5.7.E Mixed-use (MU) subzone.
1. For any incentive housing development in a mixed-use subzone, the Commission may allow by Special Exception the inclusion of uses otherwise permitted by Site Plan or Special Exception in the underlying district.
2. In any mixed-use incentive housing development, at least 50 percent of the gross floor area of the first floor must be non-residential uses. Bulk requirements for stand-alone non-residential uses in an incentive housing development shall be in accordance with the requirements of the underlying district.
5.7.F Accessory Uses.
Any accessory use is allowed in an IHOD as permitted in the underlying district and subject to the requirements and approval procedures as may be applicable to such uses.
5.7.G Additional Criteria for Approval.
1. At least 20 percent of all dwelling units constructed in a development approved under this Section of the Regulations shall be deed-restricted to be affordable to and occupied by households earning 80 percent or less of the area median income for Branford, as determined and reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
2. When a calculation performed under this subsection results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
SECTION 5.7
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|81
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
3. Each such affordable unit shall be subject to a housing restriction acceptable to the Town Attorney and the Commission, which restriction shall be recorded on the Branford Land Records and shall, at a minimum, include the following:
(1) An identification of the affordable housing units within the development.
(2) A requirement that such affordable unit shall be occupied only by a household earning 80 percent or less of the area median income for Branford, as determined and reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
(3) A statement of whether the affordable units will, at the time of initial occupancy, be rented or owner-occupied.
(4) A statement of the method for determining the rental rate or sale price or resale price of an affordable housing unit at any point in time.
(5) A statement that the term of the deed restriction for each affordable unit shall be a minimum of forty (40) years from the date of first occupancy of that affordable unit.
4. The applicant shall also prepare and submit a final “Housing Affordability Plan” in accordance with CGS § 8-30g, Section 8-30g-1 et seq. of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies and the “Housing Affordability Plan Requirements” as adopted by the policy of the Commission and as the same may be amended from time to time, including:
(1) The name and address of the proposed administrator of the deed restricted affordable units.
(2) Provision that the proposed administrator shall file an annual report to the Commission, in a form specified by the Commission, certifying compliance with the provisions of this Section.
5.7.H Design Standards.
Applicable Standards. Incentive Housing Overlay Zone applications shall apply the design criteria identified in the Branford IHOD Design Guidelines below or the “Branford Town Center Design Guidelines” if the property is located in the Town Center Overlay District.
1. Building Placement.
(1) In general, new buildings shall be placed near to the public street and shall be oriented with the main façade parallel to the public street in order to strengthen the overall streetscape. For lots with frontage on more than one (1) public street, new buildings should be oriented to the street that will provide the highest pedestrian value, specifically that the building will contribute to the overall streetscape (existing and proposed) and the design of the area.
(2) The Commission may modify the requirements of subsection (1) when the applicant demonstrates that a greater setback or alternative orientation will enhance the overall flavor of a historic New England mill village and / or allow for the creation of a public amenity (such as a wider sidewalk, a public seating area, etc.), or otherwise improve the quality of site design.
2. Building Mass. Monolithic building forms shall be avoided through the use of variations in wall placement, color, texture and/or material and variations in the height of buildings or use of architectural features such as balconies, cornices, step-backs, or other articulating features.
SECTION 5.7
82 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
3. Exterior Materials and Colors. Exterior building materials and their placement on a building shall be consistent with the overall flavor of a historic New England mill village.
4. Doorways and Windows.
(1) Recessed doorways are preferred. Where a recessed doorway is not used, an awning or similar architectural overhang shall be used.
(2) Adequate lighting for the doorway shall be incorporated into the design of the doorway.
(3) Windows should be taller than they are wide and windows on upper floors should not be larger than windows on lower floors.
(4) Windows should be inset from the exterior wall surface and shall have visually prominent sills, lintels, or other forms of architectural detailing to add visual relief to the wall.
5. Roofs and Mechanical Equipment.
(1) Roof forms should complement the principal building in terms of style, detailing, and materials.
(2) Roof overhangs (eaves and cornices) should be a minimum of two (2) feet.
(3) Any mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view using landscaping, walls, fencing, parapets or other architectural elements, or combination thereof.
6. Covered Parking. Covered parking may be provided in detached garages or as parking located beneath habitable floor area. Covered parking areas, when not fully enclosed, shall be screened with ornamental grillwork, artwork or similar architectural features.
5.7.I Method of Ownership
Dwelling units. Dwelling units may be offered for sale or for rental in individual, public, cooperative or condominium ownership. Documentation as to management, organization and incorporation of applicable ownership associations shall be submitted to the Commission at the time of filing of the application for incentive housing development.
SECTION 5.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|83
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
5.8 STONY CREEK VILLAGE DISTRICT
5.8.A Purpose
The purpose of the Stony Creek Village District (SCVD), which includes all properties within the boundaries of the Stony Creek Association, is to protect and enhance the unique character of Stony Creek and to ensure that the character of the Village is maintained for future generations in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-2j Village Districts. The provisions of this district are intended to encourage the preservation of sites and buildings of unique historical and architectural value and to ensure that new structures and uses will be compatible with the established character of the Village of Stony Creek as follows:
1. that proposed form of buildings or modifications to existing buildings be harmoniously related to their surroundings;
2. that the architectural character of retail, service, office, marine, food/hospitality, and recreation/amusement structures be harmoniously integrated into the community where appropriate;
3. that the removal or disruption of distinct structures and architectural elements is minimized;
4. that buildings, the layout of buildings, and other site improvements reinforce existing lot size, building placement, building form, and streetscape patterns to assure there is no adverse impact on the existing patterns of Stony Creek;
5. that locally significant features of distinctive buildings and/or sight lines of vistas from within the Stony Creek Village District are integrated into the site design of new construction or enlargement, extension, reconstruction, or structural alteration of existing structures;
6. that building additions and attachments, exterior signs, site lighting, and accessory structures be compatible with their surroundings and support a consistent architectural theme on the site, where such a theme exists; and
7. that the scale, proportions, massing, and detailing of any new construction, substantial reconstruction or rehabilitation of properties within such district and in view from public roadways be in proportion to the scale, proportion, massing, and detailing of existing structures within the Stony Creek Village District. Wherever used in Section 5.7 or Section 9.15, “substantial reconstruction or rehabilitation” shall mean: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a structure taking place during a five-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be:
(1) The market value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
(2) In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
SECTION 5.8
84 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.8.B General
All properties located in the Stony Creek Village District as shown on the Branford Zoning Map shall be subject to the procedures specified in these Regulations.
1. The SCVD is in addition to, and overlays, other districts for the purpose of defining Stony Creek Village, where it is necessary to insure that the development, preservation, or use of land proceeds in a manner that focuses on design principles and results in creative solutions that preserve the village and existing character of the district and protects coastal resources, public health, safety, convenience, and property values.
2. The use of land, buildings, and other structures within the Stony Creek Village District shall be established and conducted in conformance with the underlying zoning classification, subject to the additional requirements of this Section.
5.8.C Procedures
1. No building or land shall be occupied or used, no use of an existing building or land shall be changed, and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended, or enlarged in whole or in part for any purpose until a Zoning Permit has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifying that such activity either conforms with these Regulations or is exempt under the terms specified herein.
2. No application for a Zoning Permit shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer nor shall any Certificate of Zoning Compliance be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer until such structure has been reviewed according to the procedures specified in these Regulations.
3. All site plan and Special Exception applications for new construction; substantial reconstruction or rehabilitation of properties within such district and in view from public roadways within the Stony Creek Village District shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board under the special provisions of this Section.
4. Applicants shall submit a copy of all application materials to the Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board no later than the date upon which the same application is submitted to the Commission.
5.8.D The Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board
1. The Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board shall be appointed by the Commission following the submission of a written recommendation by the Stony Creek Association Board of Directors.
2. The Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board will consist of not less than three appointees, at least one of whom shall be a registered architect, landscape architect or a planner certified by the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP) and 2/3 of these appointees must be residents of Stony Creek.
5.8.E Village District Design Standards
The following design standards shall apply to Site Plan and Special Exception applications and are in addition to Section 6 “Basic Standards” of these Regulations and are intended to provide guidance to an applicant in support of the companion Stony Creek Village District Design Guidelines when preparing an application for a property within the Stony Creek Village District. The Stony Creek Village District
SECTION 5.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|85
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
SECTION
5
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
Design Guidelines are available at the Planning and Zoning Department or on the Town’s web page:
1. When a new use or change in use includes new structures or changes to the exterior of a structure, or the physical layout of a property, such changes shall:
(1) Support the mixed-use and commercial character of properties along Thimble Island Road.
(2) Support the marine, recreational, and tourism based character of properties along the shoreline of Stony Creek.
(3) Support the cultural character of community institutions along Thimble Island Road.
(4) Support owner-operated, live-work enterprises throughout the village.
2. Architectural Design
(1) Use bays, wings, and secondary attached buildings to accommodate the needs of property owners while minimizing the visual impact of large floor plans.
(2) Incorporate existing architectural features of neighboring buildings into new structures.
(3) Reflect the massing and scale of neighboring buildings into new construction.
(4) Incorporate roof lines of neighboring buildings in the design of new buildings.
(5) Encourage structures with pitched roofs to reinforce the pattern of existing buildings.
(6) Use building materials that are compatible with neighboring structures.
(7) Promote a made-by-hand craftsman appearance for all buildings.
(8) Visually break up cladding materials by including appropriate architectural trim and detailing at corners, windows, doors, bays, and similar building components.
(9) Orient principal building entrances toward and maintain the visibility of entrances from the street.
(10) Consider the location of mechanical equipment that is neighbor friendly as well as street friendly. Conceal views of equipment from the street with features that are incorporated into the architectural design of the building.
SECTION 5.8
86 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
5.8.F Modified Permit Requirements
The following shall supersede the requirements for the stated Principal Uses and Activities in the Residence R-2, Residence R-3, Residence R -4, and R-5 districts, as applicable (see Section 3.3.A). All other requirements of Section 3.3.A not specifically modified by the following shall apply.
1. Requires Zoning Permit and are exempt from the requirements of Section 5.8. See Section 9.2 HOUSING USES.
(1) Single-family dwelling < 3,500 sq. ft. floor area (one (1) per lot).
(2) Two-family dwelling < 3,500 sq. ft. floor area total (one (1) per lot).
2. Requires Site Plan Approval. See Section 9.6 HOUSING USES.
(1) Single-family dwelling between 3,501 -5,000 sq. ft .floor area (one (1) per lot).
(2) Two-family dwelling between 3,501 -5,000 sq. ft. floor area total (one (1) per lot).
3. Requires Special Exception Approval. See Section 9.8 HOUSING USES.
(1) Dwellings containing three (3) to four (4) dwelling units.
(2) Single-family dwelling > 5,000 sq. ft. floor area (one (1) per lot)
(3) Two-family dwelling > 5,000 sq. ft. floor area total (one (1) per lot).
5.8.G Effective Date
No approval under this section shall be effective until a copy thereof, certified by the commission, containing the name of the owner of record, a description of the premises to which it relates and specifying the reasons for its decision, is recorded in the Branford land records. The town clerk shall index the same in the grantor’s index under the name of the then record owner and the record owner shall pay for such recording
5.8.H Application Materials
Projects qualifying for the Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board should follow the list of procedures and documentation noted in Section 9.15 of these Regulations.
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|87
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exception s
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 6 BASIC STANDARDS
6.1 BUILDING LOTS.
6.1.A Purpose.
The purpose of this Section is to clarify what is required for a parcel of land to be considered a building lot.
6.1.B Applicability.
These standards shall apply to the use of all parcels of land in Branford.
6.1.C Standards.
A parcel of land may be used for building purposes if it is a “lot”, as defined in Section 2.2 of these Regulations, and if it meets one or more of the following descriptions:
1. The lot was created by subdivision, is shown on a subdivision map approved by the Commission and filed in the office of the Branford Town Clerk, and was approved for building purposes by the Commission in connection with such subdivision approval (i.e., it met all necessary subdivision and zoning criteria for building purposes that were applicable when the subdivision was approved);
2. The lot is a parcel of land that was created by the first division occurring after June 16, 1954 (the date of first enactment of subdivision regulations in Branford) of a larger parcel of land and that conforms to the current area, shape, frontage and other geometric requirements of these Regulations for the establishment of a principal use;
3. The lot is a parcel of land that, since December 3, 1956 (the date of first enactment of zoning regulations in Branford) has been owned separately from any adjoining parcel or parcels as evidenced by deed or deeds recorded in the land records of the Town of Branford and that satisfies the requirements of Section 8.1.F of these Regulations.
SECTION 6.2
88 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
6.2.A Purpose.
The purpose of these standards is to establish a uniformity of scale for development within each zoning district.
6.2.B Applicability.
Dimensional standards for lot area, square and frontage apply to building lots. Setbacks and height, as well as floor area, coverage and impervious surface ratios, apply to development and other activities that require a zoning permit.
6.2.C Lot Area, Square and Frontage.
1. Each building lot shall have at least the minimum area required for the zone in which it is located.
2. Each lot shall be of such shape that a square with the minimum dimensions specified for the zone in which it is located will fit on the lot. In Residence Districts a portion of such square shall lie within less than the required building setback distance from a street line.
3. Each lot shall have the minimum frontage on a street required for the zone in which it is located. See also “Lot-Related Terms,” in Section 2, “Definitions.”
6.2.D Height.
No structure shall exceed the maximum height as specified by the dimensional standards for the zone in which it is located. This limitation, however, shall not apply to the following when not for human occupancy: spires, ornamental cupolas, towers, chimneys, flagpoles and silos, as well as features such as tanks and heating, ventilating, air conditioning, railings, and elevator equipment, that are located on the roof of a building and do not occupy more than 25 percent of the area of the roof. See also “Height-Related Terms,” in Section 2, “Definitions.”
6.2.E Setbacks.
No structure shall extend within less than the minimum distances from any street line, rear or side property line, or any other property line or Residence District boundary line as specified by the setback distances for the zone in which it is located, subject to the following exceptions and additional limitations:
(1) Signs: Certain permitted signs, as specified in Section 6.6, may extend within lesser distances from a property or street line.
(2) Boats and Boat-Trailers: Boats and boat-trailers exceeding 14 feet in length shall meet the streetline and side setback requirements for buildings and other structures as specified for the zone in which they are located. Also see Section 6.4.E.
(3) Projections: Pilasters, belt courses, sills, cornices, marquees, canopies, eaves and similar architectural features and fire escapes may project two (2) feet into the area required for setback from a property or street line.
(4) Narrow Streets: The required setback from a street line of a street having a width of less than 50 feet shall be increased by one half (½) of the difference between 50 feet and the actual width of the street.
(5) Railroads, Bulkheads and Pierheads: In Business, Commerce Park and Industrial Districts, no setback is required from a railroad right-of-way or an established waterfront bulkhead or pier-head line.
SECTION 6.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|89
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
(6) Boat Docks, Piers, and Moorings: No setback from any property line or Residence District Line is required for any boat dock, pier, or mooring.
(7) Guard Houses: In Commerce Park and Industrial Districts, a building not exceeding 150 square feet in floor area and a height of 15 feet and used solely as a guard house, gate house or security building may extend to within 10 feet of any street line.
(8) Fences, Walls and Terraces: No setback from any property line or Residence District shall apply to fences or freestanding walls six (6) feet or less in height or to unroofed terraces, but no fence, wall or terrace shall be located within the right-of-way of any street. Setback requirements for retaining walls are set forth in Section 6.13.
(9) Critical Coastal Resources: No parking area, building or other structure shall extend within less than 25 feet of any critical coastal resource except for walkways, drainage facilities and other utilities, raised boardwalks, piers, docks, and similar facilities.
(10) Setback from Route 1: For the purpose of providing for future widening of Route 1, the “street line setback” shall be measured from the centerline of Route 1. The required setback distance shall be 80 feet from the centerline, or the minimum setback for the district, whichever is greater. The “centerline” is defined as a line equidistant from the face of curb or edge of pavement on each side of the road.
6.2.F Coverage and Floor Area.
The aggregate lot coverage of all structures on any lot shall not exceed the ratio of coverage to the lot area as specified for the zone in which the structures are located. The total floor area of all structures on any lot, excluding basements, shall not exceed the ratio of floor area to lot area as specified for the zone in which the structures are located. The limitation on total floor area shall not apply to floor area in or on a structure used for off-street parking or loading spaces. See also “Coverage-Related Terms” in Section 2, “Definitions.”
6.2.G Impervious Surface.
The impervious surface on any lot shall not exceed the ratio of impervious surface to lot area as specified for the zone in which the lot is located.
6.2.H Outside Storage.
Outside storage is hereby defined to be the outside storage or display of merchandise, supplies, machinery and other materials and/or the outside manufacture, processing or assembling of goods. Note, however, that vehicles parked in parking spaces approved as such by the Planning and Zoning Commission are not considered outdoor storage. Outdoor storage shall be limited as follows:
1. Outside storage in business and industrial districts shall not extend into the area required for setback from a street line or Residence District boundary line.
2. No outside storage except for boats shall be located within 25 feet of any critical coastal resource.
SECTION 6.3
90 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.3 LANDSCAPING.
6.3.A Purpose.
The purpose of these landscaping regulations is to enhance property values, to minimize soil erosion, and improve the quality of environment and aesthetic appearance of Branford.
6.3.B Applicability.
These landscaping standards shall apply to any development in Branford that requires Site Plan Approval or Special Exception Approval.
6.3.C Existing Vegetation.
1. Existing plant materials may be used to meet all or part of the landscape Regulations.
2. Significant trees (meaning, for purposes of this Section, trees having a diameter of 12 inches or more at a height of four (4) feet from the ground) shall be preserved to the extent feasible and any significant tree which is proposed for removal shall be clearly designated on the site plan. Unless clearly designated for removal, significant trees shall be considered to be designated for preservation.
3. Unless otherwise authorized by the Commission, any significant tree designated for preservation shall:
(1) Have no construction operations carried on within the drip-line of the significant tree;
(2) Have no material stored within the drip-line of the significant tree;
(3) If at risk of damage from construction, be protected by a four (4) foot high fence offset at least ten (10) feet from the tree’s trunk(s) except that, if the Commission so designates, the fence shall be installed at the drip-line of the tree;
(4) Shall have tree protection installed in advance when any construction activity will occur within 40 feet of the affected tree(s); and
(5) Remain in place and be maintained in good repair during the construction period.
(6) Replacement Trees. When possible, to preserve the replacement tree, the Commission should take into account any previous conditions that might have caused the removal of the tree(s) including site conditions, disease, spacing and other tree stressors (pavement, car or pedestrian traffic.)
4. Damage to any significant tree shall be repaired by a Connecticut licensed arborist.
5. Any significant tree marked for preservation that is removed or damaged beyond satisfactory repair shall be replaced with a sufficient number of trees of the same or similar species as approved by the Commission so that the combined caliper measurements of the replacement trees shall equal or exceed the caliper measurement of the significant tree that was removed or damaged.
SECTION 6.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|91
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.3.D Landscaping Plan Requirements.
1. Landscaping plans shall show, at the same scale as the site development plan, the location of all proposed planting and existing planting to be retained.
2. A planting list showing the number, size and species of plants is required.
3. Landscape professionals required. Unless waived by the Commission due to the minimal impact of a proposed activity, a landscape architect licensed in Connecticut and when existing trees will remain, a Licensed Connecticut Arborist shall prepare the plans illustrating compliance with the requirements of this Section.
6.3.E Landscaping Requirements.
Planting Standards:
1. Canopy trees shall be deciduous shade trees with a mature height of at least 35 feet that at the time of planting are at least two and one-half (2½) to three (3) inches in caliper. Tree selection must be matched with the site, including considerations of the tree(s) requirement for light, water, soil conditions, growing space, temperature extremes and function in the landscape. The highest priorities are those that will affect the survival of the tree(s). Tree selection should be native trees with an emphasis on diversity. Conditions at the site and unique morphological ability of the tree(s) must also be considered.
2. Understory and ornamental trees shall be deciduous shade or fruit trees with a mature height of at least 12 feet that at the time of planting are at least one and one-half (1½) to two (2) inches in caliper.
3. Evergreens shall be coniferous species at least six (6) feet in height at planting.
4. Shrubs shall be at least 18 inches in height at planting.
6.3.F Front Yard Landscaping Requirements.
1. In Business Zones (Section 4) a landscaped strip having a width of at least one-half of the required streetline setback shall be provided adjacent to the street.
2. For Special Exception uses in Residential Zones (Section 3) a landscaped strip at least 20 feet wide shall be provided adjacent to the street.
3. In Business Zones, one (1) canopy tree shall be planted in the front yard for each 50 feet of frontage or fraction thereof.
6.3.G Side and Rear Landscaping Requirements.
1. In Business Zones except the BC zone, a landscaped strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided adjacent to each side and rear property line.
2. Special Exception Uses in Residential Zones shall provide a landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide adjacent to each side property line.
6.3.H Planting Bed Requirements.
1. Where lots are to be developed in Business Zones, planting beds shall be provided adjacent to any building(s) on the lot.
2. The length of such planting beds shall be at least equal to 25 percent of the circumference of the building(s) on the lot.
3. Special Exception Uses in Residential Zones shall have planting beds the length of which shall be at least 40 percent of the circumference of any building(s) on the lot to be developed.
6.3.I Residential District Green Belt Buffer.
1. Where Business Zones abut Residential Zones, a green belt buffer at least one-half of the required depth of the residential district setback shall be provided and maintained by the owner of the property in the Business District.
SECTION 6.3
92 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
2. This buffer area shall not be used for storage of materials or parking of vehicles.
3. Trees and shrubs shall be planted along the side and rear property lines to give a screen at least 10 feet deep using approved, hardy indigenous plant materials of which at least 30 percent shall be evergreen and at least 60 percent shall be not less than six (6) feet in height at planting.
4. The rest of the depth of the buffer strip shall be planted and maintained as lawn. Existing natural growth shall be preserved where practicable and supplemented with new planting according to the foregoing Regulations in order to give the required screening.
5. Permanent structures such as fences, walls, and existing and proposed grading, etc. may be approved in lieu of landscaping where in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission the intent of these Regulations will be served.
6.3.J Stormwater Structure Landscaping.
1. Stormwater management systems shall be visually compatible with the surrounding landscape and should have sufficient vegetation to screen adjacent properties.
2. Basin landscaping shall provide for stormwater quality remediation.
6.3.K Parking Area Landscaped Area Requirements.
1. Parking areas shall be planted with trees that at the time of planting are at least two and one-half (2½) to three (3) inches in caliper so that there is at least one (1) tree per ten (10) parking spaces within the parking lot.
2. Such trees must be staked with three (3) three (3)-inch diameter stakes and protected by curbing against damage by vehicles.
3. A minimum planting area, equivalent to 150 square feet per tree shall be provided.
4. Required parking areas shall have a landscaped island at the end of each row of vehicle spaces and an intermediate island for every 15 vehicle spaces. The Commission may require more landscaped area based on the size of the parking lot.
5. Such planting islands shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide in the direction parallel to the row and not less than 18 feet long in the direction perpendicular to the row.
6. Each such island shall have a suitable curb of stone or poured-in-place concrete, and shall be planted with grass or ground cover, or have pedestrian pavers where approved by the Commission or Staff, unless it is part of a drainage system.
6.3.L Modification of Landscaping Requirements.
1. These requirements are intended as a minimum guide for the landscaping to be developed.
2. The Commission may modify certain specific requirements when warranted by excellence in landscape design.
3. Existing vegetation may be used to meet all or part of the landscaping requirements.
6.3.M Completion of Landscaping.
1. For new construction, all landscaping shown on the approved plan shall be completed before a Certificate of Occupancy can be issued. A financial guarantee in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission assuring completion of landscaping and other approved site improvements within a specific time period (not to exceed one year) shall be filed with the Commission.
2. Such financial guarantee shall be forfeited if the work is not completed within the specified time period.
3. The Commission may require a financial guarantee to ensure survival of plant materials for up to two years after planting.
SECTION 6.4
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|93
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.4 TRAILERS AND STORAGE CONTAINERS.
Trailers shall be permitted only under the following circumstances:
6.4.A Construction Trailer or Construction Field Office Trailer.
Construction trailers are allowed on construction sites subject to issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such trailers must be located on the lot where construction is taking place, and must be removed within 30 days after completion of the project.
6.4.B Storage Trailer or Storage Container.
Storage Trailers or Storage Containers are allowed in commercial and industrial zones only by Special Exception and only for a period not to exceed two years. See Section 7.10.
6.4.C Portable Storage Unit or Portable on Demand (“POD”) Container.
Portable Storage Units or “PODs” are allowed in all zones subject to issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. A container may be placed on a lot for a time period not to exceed 60 days and must be located so that it does not obstruct sight lines, displace required parking, or otherwise cause safety or congestion hazards in the neighborhood. No more than one container may be placed on a lot at any one time.
6.4.D Travel Trailers.
Travel Trailers are allowed in all zones and require no zoning permit provided that no more than one (1) travel trailer is stored on any lot. Occupancy of a travel trailer as a dwelling is prohibited. Each travel trailer must be located so as to meet all setback requirements for the zone in which it is located or stored inside a garage, barn, or other permanent structure. Also See Section 6.2.E(2).
6.4.E Boat Trailers and Boats.
Boat Trailers and Boats are allowed in all zones and require no zoning permit provided that no more than one (1) boat and / or one (1) boat trailer is stored on any lot. In Residential Zones, boats and boat trailers exceeding 14 feet in length must meet the streetline setback requirements for the zone in which they are located or stored inside a garage, barn, or other permanent structure.
SECTION 6.4
94 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(this page intentionally left blank)
SECTION 6.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|95
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.5 OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
6.5.A Purpose.
1. This Section is intended to provide adequate parking and loading facilities to serve all existing and proposed uses and activities. It is the goal of this Section to assure that parking spaces and loading spaces are provided off the street in such number and location and with suitable design and construction to accommodate the motor vehicles of all persons normally using or visiting a use, building or other structure at any one time.
2. It is the goal of the Branford Planning and Zoning Commission to weigh the need for parking against the potential impact of stormwater from impervious surfaces required for off street parking.
6.5.B Applicability.
These parking standards shall apply to any development in Branford.
6.5.C General Requirements.
1. Except as may otherwise be expressly permitted by these Regulations, every lot must contain adequate space suitably located for parking, and for the loading and unloading of goods and materials required by the use for which the site is approved.
2. All off-street parking and loading spaces hereafter established shall conform to the design and construction standards specified in this Section as well as to any standards and conditions for approval of a site plan or Special Exception under these Regulations.
3. The minimum number of parking spaces and loading facilities required for any property shall be determined by applying the standards of this Section to the actual and proposed uses, and when the requirements result in a fractional number, the minimum requirement shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
4. Where different uses occur on a single parcel of land, the parking and loading spaces to be provided with respect to such parcel shall be the aggregate of the requirements for each such use.
5. Off-street parking and loading spaces required by this Section shall be permanently maintained and made available for occupancy in connection with and for the full duration of the use of land, buildings and other structures for which such spaces are herein required. If any existing use of land, buildings or other structures is changed to a use requiring additional off-street parking or loading spaces to comply with this Section, the additional spaces shall be provided for the new use in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified.
6. Except as may be provided in Sections 6.5.G, 6.5.I, or 6.5.J, all required parking spaces shall be maintained for the exclusive use of residents, patrons, employees or tenants of the building(s) on the site and shall not be used to meet the parking requirements of any other use.
7. Any parking rights acquired from another parcel shall be recorded in the land records in the deed of each parcel involved in such agreement.
SECTION 6.5
96 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.5.D Required Off Street Parking Spaces.
1. Bicycle Parking and Racks.
(1) Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided as part of new multi-family developments of four (4) dwelling units or more, new retail, office and institutional developments greater than 10,000 square feet, and all transit transfer stations and park-and-ride lots.
(2) Bicycle parking requirements shall apply to new construction, changes of use, or substantial improvement.
(3) Bicycle parking spaces shall:
1. Provide a convenient place to lock a bicycle, and shall be at least six (6) feet long, two (2) feet wide, and shall provide at least seven (7) feet of vertical clearance, unless a bicycle locker is provided;
2. Be capable of locking the bicycle and supporting the bicycle in an upright position and
3. Be securely anchored to a supporting surface.
(4) Bicycle parking shall not interfere with pedestrian circulation and shall be separated from automobile parking.
(5) For any use where bicycle parking is required, if the vehicular parking is covered or partly covered the bicycle parking will be covered at the same ratio.
(6) Bicycle racks shall be located at each main building entrance, and placed in an area that is highly visible.
2. Motor Vehicles.
(1) The following chart specifies the minimum parking requirement for each land use. Parking shall be located on the same lot as the use it serves unless the Commission approves off-site parking as part of a site plan or Special Exception application in accordance with these Regulations.
(2) In no case shall parking be located more than 500 feet from the use it serves.
(3) For purposes of measuring required parking spaces, the building area shall be considered the gross floor area of all floors.
TABLE NOTES 1. Other Uses Not Covered in this Section. The Commission shall determine the number of parking spaces required based on the requirements applicable to comparable uses, reliable documentation provided by the applicant or others and/or national standards. 2. Community Shopping Center - The Parking requirements for a Community Shopping Center shall be computed on the basis of the “gross floor area” built therein, without regard to the specific use of each store, bay, or other leasable unit contained therein. 3. sq. ft = square feet 4. Loading Space Size. Each off-street loading space shall be at least 12 feet by 30 feet, with a height clearance of at least 14 feet.
SECTION 6.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|97
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
RESIDENTIAL USES PARKING SPACES REQUIRED LOADING SPACES4
Accessory apartment
1 space per unit, plus spaces required for the principal unit
Elderly housing
1 space per unit
Home-based Business
1 space per visitor/client at peak + 1 space per employee at peak
Multi-family dwellings
Efficiency and 1 bedroom unit: 1 space per unit
2+ bedrooms: 2.5 spaces per unit
one (1) off-street loading space per 40,000 sq. ft. of building area
Rooms for rent (let)/Bed and Breakfast
1 additional space per guest bedroom or rooming unit
Single-family dwelling
2 spaces per unit
Two-family dwelling
2 spaces per unit
OFFICE USES PARKING SPACES REQUIRED LOADING SPACES4
General Office, Medical & Dental Offices, Veterinary Hospitals
1 space per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area
Public Bank Area with Teller Windows
1 space per 165 sq. ft. gross floor area
RETAIL USES PARKING SPACES REQUIRED LOADING SPACES4
Retail & Service Establishments
1 space per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area (Maximum of 1 space per 125 sq. ft. gross floor area)
One (1) off-street loading space for each 40,000 square feet of building area, or fraction thereof, excluding basements
Community Shopping Center
1 space per 300 sq. ft. gross floor area (Maximum of 1 space per 165 sq. ft. gross floor area)
Limited Retail
1 space per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area allocated to retail or display of goods and 1 space per 500 sq. ft. gross floor area allocated to storage, warehousing, shipping and receiving
DINING USES PARKING SPACES REQUIRED LOADING SPACES4
Restaurant excluding Patron Bar Area
1 space per 75 sq. ft. patron floor area
Patron Bar & Cocktail Lounge Area
1 space per 20 sq. ft. patron floor area
SECTION 6.5
98 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
OTHER BUSINESS USES PARKING SPACES REQUIRED LOADING SPACES4
Hotels and Motels
1.2 spaces per sleeping room
One (1) off-street loading space for each 40,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, or fraction thereof, excluding basements
Hospitals and Skilled Nursing Homes
1 space per 3 beds plus 1 per employee on largest shift
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair Garages
10 spaces plus 5 for each garage bay in excess of 2
Motor Vehicle Refueling Station and Car Washing Facilities
2 spaces
One (1) off-street loading space
Undertaker’s Establishments
15 spaces per chapel or viewing room
Bowling Alleys
5 spaces per alley
Marinas and Slip Basins
1 space per occupied boat mooring
Churches and places of worship, Theaters, Assembly Halls, Stadia, and Social Clubs
1 space per 4 seats of total seating capacity
Group day care homes and day care centers
1 space per employee plus 1 space for every 6 children enrolled
Self Storage
1 space per 600 square feet of office space and 2 spaces per 100 units
OTHER BUSINESS USES PARKING SPACES REQUIRED LOADING SPACES4
Warehouse, Wholesale Business, Terminals and Distributors
1 space per 750 sq ft gross floor area or 1.1 space per employee, whichever is greaterO
One (1) off-street loading space for each 40,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, or fraction thereof, excluding basements
Manufacturing, Processing or Assembling Plants, Research Laboratories
1 space per 600 sq ft gross floor area or 1.1 space per employee, whichever is greater
SECTION 6.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|99
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.5.E Area Requirements.
Parking Area Criteria. Except as provided below, off-street parking spaces and aisles shall be installed and maintained as follows: PARKING AREA CRITERIA DIAGRAM
ADDITIONAL PARKING TABLE INFORMATION
1. All residential parking spaces shall have a minimum length of 18 feet.
2. Specifications for Parking Facilities.
a. Except for private residences, every parking facility shall be graded, hard-surfaced, drained, and permanently marked to delineate the individual parking spaces.
b. Every parking facility shall be maintained by the owner of the premises.
c. Where required parking areas abut public streets or sidewalks, permanent barriers or bumpers shall be provided.
d. Completion of the off-street motor vehicle parking facilities and off-street loading spaces required by this Section shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
e. Commission may adjust dimensional requirements to reflect specific site conditions (e.g. space for bumper overhang, garage parking, etc.).
PARKING AREA CRITERIA TABLE A - PARKING ANGLE 0° 30° 45° 60° 90° B – STALL WIDTH
22’-0”
18'-0"
12'-9"
10'-5"
180 square feet
(9’x20’ or 10’x18’) C - STALL DEPTH
10’0”
16'-6"
19'-10"
20'-0" D - VEHICULAR AISLE WIDTH – TWO-WAY CIRCULATION
24’-0”
24'-0"
24'-0"
24'-0"
24'-0" D - VEHICULAR AISLE WIDTH – ONE-WAY CIRCULATION
12’0”
12'-0"
13'-0"
18'-0"
24'-0"
SECTION 6.5
100 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.5.F Handicapped Parking
1. Parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be required in accordance with CGS 14-253a and the Connecticut Building Code, with regard to location, size, marking, signage, and required number of handicapped accessible spaces based on use and size of parking lot.
2. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be as close as possible to a building entrance or walkway leading directly to a building entrance and shall be adjacent to curb cuts or other unobstructed methods permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person.
3. Van Parking. Where handicapped accessibility is required, a minimum of one (1) van parking space shall be provided, and additional van spaces shall be provided at a rate of one (1) van space for every eight (8) handicapped accessible parking spaces required. The van parking space shall be of such size as to accommodate a van designed for wheelchair elevation and transport.
6.5.G Shared Parking Facilities.
The Commission may approve shared-use parking facilities if it determines that such use will not diminish the compliance with the parking requirements for the uses already on the site where such shared-use facility is located.
6.5.H Calculating Parking for Mixed-use Development.
The applicant shall calculate the peak parking space requirement by following these steps:
1. Determine the minimum amount of parking required for each land use as though it were a separate use, using the requirements of Section 6.5.D.
2. Multiply each amount by the corresponding percentage for each of the five (5) time periods, shown in the chart below: USE/ACTIVITY SERVED WEEKDAY WEEKEND NIGHTTIME Midnight – 6 pm DAYTIME 9 a.m. – 6 p.m. EVENING 6 pm – Midnight DAYTIME 9 am – 6 pm EVENING 6 pm – Midnight ENTERTAINMENT/ RECREATIONAL
40%
100%
80%
100%
10% OFFICE/ INDUSTRIAL
100%
10%
10%
5%
5% RETAIL
70%
70%
100%
70%
5% HOTEL
75%
100%
75%
100%
10% RESTAURANT
50%
100%
100%
100%
10% RESIDENTIAL
30%
100%
60%
80%
100%
3. Calculate the column total for each time period.
4. The column total with the highest value is the mixed-use parking space requirement.
SECTION 6.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|101
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.5.I Modification of Parking Requirements.
1. The Commission may, by Special Exception, approve the modification of parking requirements if it finds (1) that such modifications are being proposed for sites that, historically, have accommodated uses that do not comply with current parking standards; and (2) that such historical use patterns have not created any unreasonable risk to public health or safety.
2. In making its decision, the Commission shall consider, in addition to the general Special Exception evaluation standards, the impact of the following factors in meeting parking needs:
(1) Reduction of peak parking demand by:
(1) Development of a land use mix with non-overlapping peak demand periods,
(2) Provision of facilities to encourage pedestrian, bicycle and public modes of transportation,
(3) Implementation of measures to reduce on-site employee parking such as carpool incentives, provision of off-site employee parking, and designation of time-limited parking areas for customers/clients in the more convenient locations.
(2) Improvement of circulation by:
(1) Provision for vehicular access and/or shared parking among adjacent properties by public easement or other means,
(2) Provision for pedestrian access to sidewalks, streets, and building entry ways.
(3) Enhancement of neighborhood aesthetic quality in terms of:
(1) Landscaping
(2) Architectural features of rear entries
(3) Streetscape amenities
(4) Availability of public parking.
6.5.J Deferral of Immediate Installation.
With respect to the installation of parking spaces required by this Section, the Commission may, upon request by any property owner or other applicant, defer the immediate installation of a portion of the required number of parking spaces upon the following conditions:
1. That the parking plan submitted to the Commission show the layout for the full parking requirement and identify those spaces for which deferral of immediate installation is requested;
2. That the Commission find the reduced number of parking proposed to be installed will adequately serve the proposed development;
3. That the owner file with the Commission and note on the parking plan an agreement obligating the owner, his heirs or successors and assigns to install such remaining parking spaces within six (6) months after the date of any request by the Commission to do so; and that such agreement be incorporated by reference as a condition of any Special Exception, the parking for which is affected by this subparagraph, and be so recited in the document evidencing such Special Exception recorded on the land records.
SECTION 6.5
102 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.5.K Parking Lot Construction.
Parking layout construction shall be in accordance with the following parking specifications:
1. Parking Surface. The parking surface shall be treated with bituminous pavement products unless the Commission approves an alternative surface.
2. Alternative Parking Surface.
(1) The Commission may allow an alternate surface if the use is a low traffic generator and the Commission is satisfied with the maintenance provisions.
(2) Use of porous pavement, specially designed brick or block should be considered to increase on-site water retention for plant material and groundwater recharge and to reduce problems related to runoff.
6.5.L Location of Parking Spaces.
1. The off-street motor vehicle parking facilities and off-street loading spaces required by this Section in any Business (Section 4)or Special (Section 5) Zone shall be located on the same lot as the use or building served thereby except that:
(1) The Commission may permit two (2) or more abutting properties to be served by a common facility situated on one (1) or more of said properties.
(2) The Commission may permit parking facilities to be on land within 500 feet of a building or use if it determines that it is impractical to provide parking facilities on the same land where the building or use is located.
2. Whenever feasible, parking areas in Business Zones and Special Zones shall be located behind the principal structures on the site.
3. Parking lots in any Business or Special Zone shall be located at least five (5) feet from a building, except as may be required for loading facilities.
4. Underground parking shall be permitted as a substitute for surface parking to allow the area normally occupied by surface parking to remain undisturbed or to provide open space, landscaping and similar amenities, provided the parking:
(1) Shall be screened from abutting properties, and street-level views of underground parking access shall be minimized, and
(2) Shall be designed such that any first-floor level above such parking shall not exceed the curb level of any adjacent street by more than two (2) feet.
5. Parking Garages. A parking garage is subject to the same dimensional standards as all other buildings and structures in the zone in which it is located. .
SECTION 6.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|103
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.6 SIGNS.
6.6.A Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this Section to accommodate the establishment of signs necessary for identification, direction and reasonable commercial promotion while avoiding signs of a character, as well as a proliferation and extension of signs, that would be detrimental to the public health and safety, property values and the appearance and beauty of the community.
6.6.B General Requirements.
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Section, no sign shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered until a Zoning Permit Application therefore has been approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
2. All signs shall conform to the provisions hereinafter specified.
3. No flashing, revolving or moving signs are permitted.
4. All lighting of signs in Residence Districts shall be indirect with the source of illumination not visible from any street or from any lot other than the lot on which the sign is located. The lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare and/or light trespass. The lighting must also be, as much as physically possible, contained within the target area.
5. Obstructions. No sign shall be located or maintained so as to be a hazard to traffic or pedestrians, to obstruct any door, window, ventilation system or fire escape or exit, or to cause any other hazard to the public health or safety.
6. Internally lighted signs are prohibited within the Town Center Village District (TCVD) and Restricted Business (BR) zoning districts.
7. Any sign may be double facing and when a sign is attached to the ground only one face shall be counted in determining conformity to sign area limitations.
8. All dimensions for signs shall be based on measurements to the outside edge of the sign excluding any structure necessary to support the sign.
9. The area of the sign shall be the entire area encompassed by the perimeter of the sign, which perimeter shall be a polygon formed by connecting all of the outermost edges or points of the sign.
SIGN ILLUSTRATIONS Sign with Background Panel Sign With Multiple Faces
Sign With No background or Panel (letters on building wall) Sign with No Background or Panel (letters on stone wall)
SECTION 6.6
104 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
SIGN ILLUSTRATIONS Sign With No background or Panel (letters on building wall) Sign with No Background or Panel (letters on stone wall)
6.6.C Signs Allowed in All Zones No Permit Required SIGN TYPE DESCRIPTION PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION
A name sign providing only the name of the premises and of the occupant, or an announcement sign for a lawful activity located on the premises.
On any lot only two (2) such signs, each not over three (3) square feet in area.
HOME IMPROVEMENT
A name sign or announcement sign for home improvement activity conducted on the premises may be installed for a limited duration.
Shall not exceed 60 square feet in area per side and shall be removed within 30 days of project completion. BULLETIN BOARD
Bulletin boards on the premises of churches, educational institutions and similar uses not over 16 square feet in sign area.
CONSTRUCTION
On a tract of land for which a site plan application, Special Exception Application or Subdivision Application has been approved by the Commission, one (1) sign not to exceed 60 square feet in sign area, for a period of one (1) year, subject to renewal annually, during the term of construction. FARM
A sign identifying the name of a farm or agricultural activity, not to exceed 16 square feet in sign area, or be higher than eight (8) feet. PUBLIC PURPOSE
Incidental signs, generally informational, that have a purpose secondary to the use of the property on which it is located, such as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading” and other similar directives, on any lot provided no such sign shall be larger than two (2) square feet in sign area nor exceed a height of six (6) feet. In addition, any sign may be located within the right-of-way of any public street when authorized by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Branford in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. REAL ESTATE
One (1) freestanding real estate sign announcing the availability of a use or parcel provided such sign may not exceed five (5) square feet and an overall height of six (6) feet.
TRAFFIC CONTROL
Traffic control signs and devices.
6.6.D Reserved
SECTION 6.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|105
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.6.E Signs Allowed in Business Zones SIGN TYPE REQUIREMENTS TCVD, BC and BR MU, BL, CP, IG-1 and IG-2 FREE-STANDING
Permitted Number
1 for each 30,000 square feet of lot area
Maximum Size
40 square feet
40 square feet within street line setback
Outside street line setback up to 300 square feet
Maximum Height Above Ground
8 feet
21 feet BUILDING MOUNTED
Size Determination
1.5 sq. ft, per linear foot of wall
Maximum Extension from Wall
12 inches
8 feet of vertical clearance from the sidewalk
12 inches
Maximum Height
4 feet above top of wall of a building
Setback from property line
Signs mounted flush to the wall may project into the area required for setbacks provided the sign does not project more than 12 inches from the wall of the building it is mounted on
Notes:
? No sign may be located less than ten (10) feet from the streetline (See definition of “streetline” in Section 2.2)
? No more than one (1) sign per lot may be located within the streetline setback area
? Signs attached to a wall of a building plus signs mounted to the roof of a building and designed to viewed from the same side of the building as such wall sign shall not have an aggregate area greater than 1.5 square feet for each horizontal foot of such wall.
? There are no restrictions on the number of wall signs.
SIGN TYPE REQUIREMENTS TCVD, BC and BR MU, BL, CP, IG-1 and IG-2 PROJECTING
Permitted Number
1.5 square feet per linear foot of wall
Maximum Size
6 square feet
12 square feet
Maximum Projection from Wall
Not more than 4 feet provided the projection does not occur within 8 feet of vertical clearance of the ground
Setback from Property line
Projecting signs may project into the area required for setbacks provided the sign does not project more than 12 inches from the wall of the building it is mounted on
SECTION 6.6
106 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.6.F Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited in the Town of Branford: SIGN TYPE DESCRIPTION PORTABLE
Sandwich Board, A-Frame signs and mobile reader board signs which are moveable and not permanently attached to a structure or ground. BANNERS, PENNANTS, BALLOONS, AERIAL AND INFLATABLE
A temporary sign (banner) made of material that can be easily folded or rolled.
A balloon or other airborne flotation device which is tethered to the ground or to a building or other structure.
A sign (pennant) with or without a logo made of flexible materials suspended from one or two corners, used in combination with other such signs to create the impression of a line.
A sign (inflatable) that is either expanded to its full dimensions or supported by gases contained within the sign, or sign parts, at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. VARIABLE MESSAGE AND ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE BOARDS
A sign on which message copy is changed manually in the field through the utilization of attachable letters, symbols and other similar characters.
A sign (electronic message board) with a fixed or changing display where the message changes. Animated functions are considered electronic message boards. FREE STANDING INCIDENTAL SIGN WITH COMMERCIAL MESSAGE
Directional or drive through signs with commercial logos.
SECTION 6.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|107
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.6.G Special Events.
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the Commission may by resolution authorize the establishment of temporary signs for periods not exceeding 10 consecutive days, and totaling not more than 30 days in any calendar year, for the purpose of announcing special events.
2. In a Residence District, any such sign shall pertain only to a use permitted in such District.
6.6.H Multi-Tenant Signage Program.
1. Multiple tenant commercial and industrial buildings shall submit a signage program to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission for approval before permits for new signs are issued at the property.
2. Program Scope. Such signage program shall address size, materials, placement, illumination, and other information as may be required for the Commission to evaluate all attached and detached signs which may be installed on a given site.
3. Approved Program. Such approved signage program shall guide the owner, tenants, Commission, and Zoning Enforcement Officer in the application for and issuance of any permits required by these Regulations.
4. Existing Sites. A Multi-Tenant Sign Program is required when a property owner can not demonstrate compliance with the standards listed above.
5. Modifications to existing signs and temporary signs shall be reviewed and approved by the Commission’s staff unless said staff believes the proposal needs to be referred to the Commission for their action.
6. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or altered, except for normal maintenance, without the proper permits being issued by the Commission or its staff.
SECTION 6.7
108 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.7 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
6.7.A Purpose.
These Regulations provide standards for the responsible use of exterior lighting within the community with regard to the effectiveness and energy efficiency of outdoor lighting and its impact on residents, wildlife and to the environment.
6.7.B Applicability.
1. The standards herein shall apply to all new and renovated exterior lighting where a Site Plan or Special Exception application is required. The standards herein will also apply to exterior lighting on town municipal buildings, facilities and structures and public parks.
6.7.C Exterior Lighting Use Standards.
These requirements apply to all exterior light fixtures mounted on: buildings, signs, structures, poles, bollards, and ground surfaces.
1. To Control Glare and Uplight. All exterior light fixtures that use a light source(s) rated at 900 lumens or higher must be 1) a full cutoff type, or 2) provide equivalent performance to full cutoff type through proper shielding, or mounting. Please refer to Appendix A for examples.
2. To Control Light Trespass. All exterior light fixtures shall be mounted, installed or aimed so that no direct light is visible from within the property boundaries of all surrounding properties.
3. To Control Over-Lighting. Refer to Appendix B for illuminance level requirements for site lighting, listed by site size, type and lighting zone.
4. To Limit Sky Glow and Interference with Nocturnal Life and Bird Migration. Decorative uplighting is prohibited. This prohibition includes exterior lighting used to uplight trees, flora, building facades, commercial icons, statues and monuments. Uplighting of small scale signs is permitted with limitations – see Sign Lighting.
5. To Promote Visibility and Boater Safety Along Waterways. All exterior light fixtures installed adjacent to town waterways shall be mounted, installed or aimed so that, to the greatest extent possible, no direct light is visible from the waterway.
6. To Promote Energy Conservation. All non-essential exterior lighting shall be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only lighting deemed essential for building security. (“Non-essential” can apply to: display, aesthetic, parking and sign lighting)
7. Pole-mounted Lighting Requirements. For all exterior light fixtures mounted on poles within a site: the height of the pole shall be limited to the highest elevation where it does not produce direct light into properties adjacent to the site.
SECTION 6.7
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|109
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
LIGHT FIXTURE DIAGRAM
Fixtures Which Might Produce Glare or Light Trespass Fixtures Which Might Not Produce Glare or Light Trespass
SECTION 6.7
110 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.7.D Other Lighting Use Standards.
1. Lighting of Small Scale Sign (less than eight feet in height and less than 40 square feet in size.)
a. For exterior signage illuminated by ground-mounted light fixtures:
(1) Limits: Two fixtures per sign in Zone 1, four fixtures per sign in Zone 2
(2) Each light source shall not exceed 900 lumens
(3) All sign light fixtures must be shielded to:
(4) Prevent direct light from shining into adjacent roadways and properties
(5) Contain the illumination, to the greatest extent possible, onto the sign surface area
b. For internally lighted signs (back-lit signs). To reduce light trespass from the translucent sign surface, the sign shall consist of a dark colored background with light-colored lettering, logos or symbols.
2. Lighting of Large Scale Sign (greater than eight feet in height or greater than 40 square feet in size.)
a. For exterior signage illuminated by light fixtures. The sign surface shall be lit from the top of the sign and shine downward. All sign light fixtures must be shielded to:
(1) Prevent direct light from shining into adjacent roadways and properties
(2) Contain the illumination, to the greatest extent possible, onto the sign surface area
b. For internally lighted signs (back-lit signs). To reduce light trespass from the translucent sign surface, the sign shall consist of a dark colored background with light-colored lettering, logos or symbols
3. Flag Lighting. Lighting to illuminate the American flag at night may be used (American flags only), provided the light fixture meets the following requirements: The light fixture:
(1) Is mounted at, or below ground level within a seven (7) foot radius of the pole,
(2) Is rated at no more than 7,000 lumens,
(3) Is designed to cast a narrow beam focused directly at the flag, and
(4) Is fully shielded to prevent glare or light trespass to surrounding areas.
4. Outdoor Sports Lighting. Lighting used for outdoor sports fields and outdoor playing courts must be, to the greatest extent possible, contained to the field/court property area. All exterior light fixtures shall be shielded, installed or aimed so that no direct light is visible from within the property boundaries of all surrounding properties. All sport field/court lighting shall be turned off after use, or no later than one (1) hour after the end of a sporting event.
SECTION 6.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|111
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.8 GRADING AND EARTH REMOVAL ACTIVITIES.
6.8.A Purposes
This Section is intended to control soil disturbance (including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover), excavation, site grading, and drainage changes associated with building demolition, building construction, and site development in order to:
? protect the public safety and general welfare;
? prevent adverse impacts to other property due to erosion, sedimentation, and increases in storm water runoff;
? prevent sedimentation of public and private streets;
? prevent sedimentation of public storm sewer and drainage systems;
? reduce the risk of flooding caused by increased runoff and sedimentation of drainage channels, wetlands, and watercourses; and
? protect water quality by reducing the risk of sediment pollution of reservoirs.
6.8.B Applicability.
The provisions of this Section shall apply to all subdivision applications and, except as excluded in Section 6.8.D below, to all grading, excavation, removal and depositing of earth materials and related activities within the Town of Branford.
Within the Town of Branford, there shall be no excavation, grading, or other soil disturbance (including removal of trees or vegetative ground cover) except as herein provided. The occurrence of any off-site sedimentation, flooding, or erosion caused by excavation, grading and/or soil disturbance is prohibited and shall be grounds for enforcement action.
6.8.C Exclusions.
Provided that no off-site sedimentation, flooding, or erosion caused by excavation, grading and/or soil disturbance occurs, the following activities are exempt from the requirements of this section unless they are associated with a subdivision application or take place within 100 feet of a critical coastal resource or an inland wetland:
1. Farming.
2. Soil disturbance (including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover) of 5,000 square feet in area or less.
3. On a parcel larger than five (5) acres, the movement of less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of earth material.
4. On a parcel between one-half (0.5) acre and five (5) acres, the movement of less than two hundred (200) cubic yards of earth material per acre of land (rounded to the nearest half-acre).
5. On a parcel smaller than one-half (0.5) acre, the movement of more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of earth material.
6. The normal maintenance and repair of roads and driveways.
7. A sanitary landfill operation conducted by the Town of Branford.
8. Stockpiling of street maintenance and landscaping material by the Town of Branford.
9. Installation or repair of a septic system, approved by East Shore District Health Department.
SECTION 6.8
112 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.8.D Other Approvals.
Any approval or exemption under this Section does not relieve any person from having to obtain any other approvals that may be required. Where applicable, written approvals from the following agencies shall be submitted:
1. Branford Inland Wetlands Commission;
2. Branford Fire Marshal (for a blasting permit);
3. Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection; and
4. Army Corps of Engineers.
6.8.E Removal of Trees or Vegetative Ground Cover
1. The Commission finds that trees and other vegetative ground cover play an important role in controlling erosion by:
(1) protecting the soil surface from the impact of falling rain;
(2) holding soil particles in place;
(3) enhancing the soil’s capacity to absorb water;
(4) slowing the velocity of runoff;
(5) removing subsurface water between rain falls through the process of evapo-transpiration; and
(6) improving infiltration rates.
2. Therefore, for purposes of this Section, clear-cutting or removal of trees and other vegetative ground cover, regardless of whether stumps and root systems are removed, shall be considered an erosion factor equivalent to grading and other forms of soil disturbance, and references in this Section to soil disturbance and/or grading shall include clear-cutting or removal of trees and vegetative ground cover.
3. Applicants are reminded of the close interconnection between this section on grading and earth removal activities and other sections related to landscaping (Section 6.3), drainage (section 6.9), and erosion and sediment control (Section 6.10).
4. Applicants shall make concerted efforts to preserve existing trees and other existing vegetation and shall demonstrate consideration for natural drainage, infiltration, and low impact development techniques as part of any development proposal or activity.
6.8.F General Requirements.
All proposed activities covered by these Regulations shall comply with the following standards:
1. Erosion and Sediment Control. All applications submitted under this Section 6.8 shall include a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as described in Section 6.10 of these Regulations. The Commission may require as a condition of approval that the applicant/developer post an erosion and sediment control financial guarantee in favor of the Town in form, content and amount satisfactory to the Commission or its agent.
2. Earth Slopes. Except as provided hereafter, finished earth slopes resulting from excavation, removal, or deposit shall not exceed one foot of rise for three feet of horizontal distance or such lesser slope as the Commission may specify as necessary for the public health and safety, soil stability, and for the reasonable use of the property after completion of the excavation or deposit. The Town Engineer may approve slopes of one foot rise for two feet of horizontal distance within the right-of-way of an existing or proposed road when necessary to provide sufficient sight distances or to match existing grades.
3. Rock Slopes. The Commission may approve finished rock slopes, at slopes no greater than five feet rise for one foot of horizontal distance, provided that the following conditions are met:
SECTION 6.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|113
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
(1) Evidence provided that the material to be exposed is solid rock.
(2) A registered Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut certifies the stability of the slope at completion.
(3) The top of any slope greater than four (4) feet in height is protected by a fence at least five (5) feet in height of a quality acceptable to the Commission, to prevent injury to the general public;
(4) No excavation or blasting of a rock slope shall be permitted within 50 feet of any side or rear property line. (The Commission may specify a greater distance if necessary).
(5) All blasting shall be conducted in a manner acceptable to the Branford Fire Marshall.
4. Site Access. Truck access to the site shall be so arranged as to minimize traffic hazards and nuisance to surrounding properties. Such access on the site shall be maintained so as to prevent wind and water erosion. Appropriate measures shall be shown on the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
5. Hours of Operation. Within and adjacent to residential areas no blasting or operation of heavy vehicles or machinery shall take place before 7:30 a.m. or after 7:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sundays.
6. Condition of Site During Activity. Slopes shall be maintained during construction so as not to exceed one foot rise for two feet of horizontal distance whenever construction is suspended for more than two weeks. There shall be no sharp declivities, slopes, pits, or depressions and proper drainage shall be provided to avoid stagnant water, soil erosion and water pollution. The Commission may require that the entire construction area be fenced if it finds that it is necessary to ensure public safety.
7. Restoration of Site. Topsoil removed shall be stockpiled on the site and upon completion of excavation or filling activities shall be spread uniformly to a depth of at least four inches over all disturbed surface. All debris shall be removed from the site and all disturbed areas shall be planted with State Conservation Mix or equivalent ground cover. Excess topsoil may be removed from the site upon submission of a statement from a Connecticut-licensed professional engineer or landscape architect that sufficient topsoil remains to accomplish the requirements of this Section.
8. Drainage. No drainage from the site shall cause flooding, erosion or other damage to adjacent properties, roadways, and/or storm drainage systems. The Commission may require the applicant to obtain a drainage easement prior to discharge of water to any adjacent property and the submission of a stormwater management plan.
9. Grading and Excavation on Islands. Grading and excavation on islands shall be to the least amount necessary to accommodate site development. Existing topography shall be retained as much as possible.
10. Blasting. The amount of blasting and the location of blasting shall be included in the application.
11. Any material used for fill shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Tree stumps, logs, shrubs, other decomposable material or building debris shall not be used as fill material and the burial of such materials is prohibited;
(2) When rocks or boulders are used for fill, they shall be located only in areas of the lot where they cannot adversely affect foundations, septic systems, drainage facilities, water supply systems, fire protection systems, or underground utilities and shall be deposited so that voids likely to cause undue soil settling will not be created.;
12. The total volume of earth materials to be removed from the site and the destination of such materials, if known, shall be stated in the application.
SECTION 6.8
114 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
13. The provisions of this Section shall in no way be construed to authorize any activity regulated under CGS 446d or Chapter 213 of the Branford Town Ordinances.
6.8.G Fixed Machinery.
1. When located in a residential or mixed-use district, stone-crushing and loam-screening machinery shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any property line.
2. When located in a commercial or industrial district, such machinery shall be located 200 feet from any boundary of a residential district or a lot used for residential purposes and 100 feet from all other property lines.
3. The Commission may require such fencing, shielding, dust control, and/or other measures as necessary to protect nearby properties from hazards and nuisance.
6.8.H Stockpiles.
1. Additional permits shall be required if earth materials are proposed to be stockpiled:
(1) In a floodway (designated on the National Flood Insurance Rate Map);
(2) Within 100 feet of any critical coastal resource; or
(3) Within 100 feet of an inland wetland.
2. Appropriate dust and erosion controls shall be clearly described and shall be maintained for the entire duration of the stockpile. Stockpiling of a variety of earth materials on a continuing basis as part of a business may be approved by the Commission as part of a site plan or Special Exception application for the primary use on the site (e.g. contractors yard or landscaping business), provided that:
(1) The maximum volume (or footprint and height), location on the site, and type(s) of materials to be stockpiled are explicitly described in the application; and
(2) All other standards and requirements of these Regulations are met.
3. The Commission reserves the right to review continuing stockpiles on a yearly basis and require submission of a new site plan or Special Exception application if the actual circumstances differ from and/or the volume of material stockpiled exceeds what was depicted on the original application.
6.8.I Alteration of Conditions.
1. The Commission may establish such conditions of approval as it deems necessary to protect nearby properties and persons from nuisance, danger and pollution, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Limitations on the day of the week or the hours of the day during which any work, including any blasting, may be performed on the lot;
(2) Limitations as to size and type of machinery to be used on the lot;
(3) Limitations on the place and manner of disposal of excavated material on the lot;
(4) Requirements as to the control of dust, noise, and lighting; and
(5) Limitations on the type of fill material permitted for deposit.
6.8.J Maintenance of Ponds.
When it is found necessary to maintain existing ponds, lakes, or other bodies of fresh water to prevent eutrophication or to remove silting, and said maintenance will not change the original basic contours, depth, or periphery of the body of water, such work may be done without a Special Exception provided:
1. Approval is granted by the Branford Inland Wetlands Commission.
2. The applicant submits a written report to the Commission stating:
(1) The area to be maintained;
(2) The reason for the maintenance;
SECTION 6.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|115
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
(3) The total amount and type of material to be removed and where it is to be placed;
(4) The proposed dates of the operation;
(5) The name of the contractor responsible; and
(6) The hours of operation.
3. If the Commission, upon review of the above report, finds that the work is necessary and does not fall within the purview of an earth removal operation, then the Commission shall approve the above report and so notify the applicant in writing.
4. If the Commission finds that said maintenance is an earth removal operation, a Special Exception application is required and said work shall only be performed in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations.
6.8.K Dredge Spoils.
The Commission may approve land disposal of dredge spoils, provided that all requisite State and Federal permits have been approved. All methods for retainage of dredged materials shall be designed by a Connecticut-licensed professional engineer. After completion, a statement from the design engineer that the retainage structures have been completed in substantial conformance with submitted plans shall be submitted to the Commission prior to release of any financial guarantee.
6.8.L Permit Compliance.
1. The Commission may grant a Special Exception for a period of time not exceeding one (1) year if it finds that such activity is in conformance with these Regulations.
2. The Commission may require the permittee to submit periodic reports prepared by and bearing the seal of a design professional licensed in the State of Connecticut showing the status and progress of the permitted activity.
3. A Special Exception may be renewed by the Commission for a period not to exceed one (1) year in accordance with the procedures and standards of these Regulations. Non-compliance with the conditions of the original approval shall be deemed sufficient cause for denial of a renewal.
6.8.M Final As-Built Plan.
1. Upon completion of any earth moving activity approved by the Commission, a final as-built plan, prepared and sealed by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor and in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with the approved permit, shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for approval.
2. No financial guarantee shall be returned until such as-built plan has been approved.
SECTION 6.9
116 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.9 DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER CONTROL.
6.9.A Purpose.
1. The Purpose of this Section is to encourage development proposals to address drainage and stormwater issues related to new development and to incorporate Low Impact Development (LID) planning and design approaches in Branford. This Section seeks to guide land use decisions and does not replace any Federal, State or local stormwater flow control and water quality treatment regulations.
2. Low Impact Development (LID) is an approach to land-use planning and project design that seeks to:
(1) Increase the ability of a developed site to effectively emulate pre-development hydrologic conditions, including without limitation, stormwater retention and detention, water quality treatment, and infiltration functions;
(2) Minimize overland stormwater runoff from a developed site;
(3) Maximize the retention of trees, native vegetation, understory plants, and native soils;
(4) Minimize soil disturbance;
(5) Minimize the conversion of site surfaces from vegetated to non-vegetated surfaces; and
(6) Maximize the quantity and use of appropriate native plants onsite.
6.9.B Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all uses requiring Site Plan approval and/or a Special Exception.
6.9.C Site Plans.
1. Site plans shall be accompanied by plans, prepared by a registered Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut, providing measures for management of stormwater runoff when at least one (1) of the following is met:
(1) Commercial or Industrial Developments are proposed;
(2) Residential developments of (3) acres or more are proposed (excluding single-family, or two-family residential construction, as part of a previously approved building lot); or
(3) The proposed impervious surface area is 50 percent or greater.
2. Site plans for other developments may be required to provide such drainage and stormwater control if deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, by the Commission
6.9.D Infiltration.
1. Maximum infiltration to the groundwater is encouraged.
2. Design of the stormwater management system shall consider reducing runoff by use of such techniques as minimizing impervious areas and maximizing travel times by using grass or rock-lined channels in lieu of storm sewers, and the use of rain gardens, dry wells or similar approaches to address roof surface drainage.
3. Systems should be designed to remove or address floatable materials and any other debris which may affect system performance.
4. Consideration shall be given to the need for providing for a drainage outlet in the event of system failure.
SECTION 6.9
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|117
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.9.E General Requirements.
When required, measures for the detention and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall meet the following standards, and shall be designed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended:
1. The Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual shall be used as a source of analysis.
2. Peak discharge from the two (2) year, ten (10) year, 25-year, and 100-year frequency, 24-hour duration, type iii distribution of New Haven County storms shall be analyzed.
3. No increases in peak flow from these storms shall be allowed to leave the site. This may be accomplished through the use of, but not limited to, the following design elements:
(1) Detention basins,
(2) Retention ponds,
(3) Roof or parking lot storage, or
(4) Other acceptable means.
4. The required stormwater detention volume shall be that necessary to handle the routed stormwater runoff from the drainage area of a 25-year frequency, twenty-four (24) hour, type iii distribution rainfall in New Haven County, as published by the National Weather Service or other recognized agency.
5. Runoff shall be computed in accordance with one of the following methods:
(1) US Army Corps of Engineers, Hydraulic Engineering Center – Hydrologic Modeling System (HEC-HMS or HEC-1),
(2) US Department of Agriculture, Natural Resource Conservation Service, Technical Release 55 (TR-55) or TR-20,
(3) The Rational Method, or
(4) An alternative methodology if presented by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the Commission.
6. Culvert design shall conform to the Connecticut Department of Transportation standards.
7. Stormwater systems should be designed to trap floatable materials separately from sediment and be accessible for cleaning and maintenance.
6.9.F Performance Standards.
Land uses and developments shall conform to the following performance standards for stormwater management:
1. No development shall result in a direct discharge of untreated stormwater, either on or offsite.
2. Post-development peak flow discharge rates shall not be greater than predevelopment peak flow discharge rates.
3. New development shall maximize recharge to groundwater.
4. New development shall be required to remove, onsite, no less than 80 percent of the annual total suspended solids generated from development runoff.
SECTION 6.9
118 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.9.G Shared Stormwater Management Facilities.
When the Commission determines that engineering, aesthetics, and economic factors make combined retention or other drainage facilities more practical, the Commission may permit several developers to construct joint facilities, provided that a maintenance agreement is filed on the land records for each property involved. The Commission may require a financial guarantee or the creation of a maintenance fund for combined retention areas.
6.9.H Maintenance.
1. All projects shall have a Stormwater Management/Best Management Practice (BMP) Plan.
2. All on-site facilities shall be properly maintained by the owner of such, so that they do not become nuisances. The owner shall submit a yearly record to the Commission of all maintenance activities in compliance with the maintenance plan.
3. All stormwater control structures located on private property, whether dedicated to the Town or not, shall be accessible at all times for Town inspection. Where runoff control structures have been accepted by the Town for maintenance, access easements shall be provided.
6.9.I Other Permit Requirements.
1. Permits for Stormwater Management Systems may also be required from the Town of Branford Inland Wetland and Watercourses Commission where such systems may have an impact on inland wetlands and watercourses, and from the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, where a dam is to be constructed or water diverted, see CGS 22a-365 and CGS 22a-409.
2. No private drain shall be connected to the Town storm water drainage system without prior approval by the Town Engineer
SECTION 6.10
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|119
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.10 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
6.10.A Purpose.
This Section is intended to provide standards for earth-disturbing activities in order to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation and to avoid unnecessary damage to land features, bodies of water and public works, both on-site and offsite.
6.10.B Activities Requiring a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development:
1. Is cumulatively more than one-half (½) acre;
2. Would result in excavation or filling involving 50 cubic yards or more of earth materials;
3. Is within 100 feet of critical coastal resources; or
4. Involves slopes greater than 15 percent.
5. This plan may be incorporated into other documents associated with Site Plan and Special Exception applications.
6.10.C Overall Requirements.
Any person conducting, or planning to conduct, any earth-disturbing activity, including grading and grubbing, shall consider the potential problem of accelerated erosion and sedimentation and shall address such potential problem in accordance with the standards outlined in a publication prepared and distributed by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) entitled “Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002),” as may be amended.
6.10.D Plan Requirements.
1. When required, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall consist of a map, a narrative, and such other materials as may be necessary to fully describe the techniques that will be utilized to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and earth-disturbing activities.
2. Such soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sediment and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology and the guidelines specified in the “Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002),” as amended.
3. Alternative design criteria, principles, methods and practices may be used with the approval of the Commission or its designated agent.
6.10.E Plan Review and Approval.
1. Any soil erosion and sediment control plan submitted pursuant to this Section may be reviewed by a technical expert retained by the Commission at the expense of the applicant.
2. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as extending the time limits for actions on any application under CGS Chapter 124 or CGS Chapter 126.
3. The Commission or its designated agent may approve, modify and approve, condition or deny any proposed soil erosion or sediment control plan.
4. The Commission may require as a condition of approval that the applicant/developer post a separate erosion and sediment control financial guarantee in favor of the Town in form, content and amount satisfactory to the Commission or its agent.
SECTION 6.11
120 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.10.F Implementation.
It shall be the responsibility of the developer or permittee to:
1. Implement the approved plan or any revision thereto;
2. Install the erosion and sediment control measures and facilities as scheduled and as shown on the approved plan, prior to the commencement of any site development activity except as may be required to implement the plan; and
3. Maintain the plan measures and facilities in effective condition to ensure compliance with the approved plan.
4. The Commission or its agent may require the permittee to:
(1) Verify through progress reports and “as-built” surveys that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the approved plan and are being operated and properly maintained, or
(2) Retain an inspector who is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) or other qualified professional to inspect the development activity and to file periodic reports with the Planning and Zoning Department.
5. The Commission or its agent may withhold the issuance of Zoning Permits or the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance unless, in its, his or her judgment, the permittee has complied with all erosion and sedimentation control measures required by the approved plan.
6. Inspections may be made by the Commission or its agent during development to ensure compliance with the approved plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained.
6.11 INTERIOR (REAR) LOTS.
6.11.A Purpose.
As land available for development becomes more difficult to find and when more conventional forms of development would cause negative impacts on the land, the creation of interior lots may be desirable.
6.11.B Eligibility.
1. Property located in the R-3, R-4 or R-5 Zones is eligible for the creation of interior lots.
2. An interior lot shall be used only for a single-family dwelling.
3. The creation of any new interior lot shall require a Special Exception.
SECTION 6.11
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|121
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.11.C Special Bulk Requirements.
1. The minimum size of an interior lot shall be equal to one and one half (1½) times the minimum required in the zone in which it is located. The fee strip shall not be included in calculating the lot area.
2. The minimum frontage for an interior lot shall be 25 feet along an accepted Town Road or State Highway.
3. Each interior lot shall have fee strip no less than 25 feet in width as part of the lot. Such accessway shall extend to an accepted public street.
4. The maximum number of lots that can be served by a driveway is four (4).
5. In all other respects, each lot shall conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located.
6.11.D Buffers and Screening.
A landscaped buffer may be required by the Commission along the accessway to ensure that the development of interior lots will be in harmony with surrounding areas.
6.11.E Utilities.
All utilities shall be installed underground and street numbers shall be posted at the intersection of the public street or street contained within a subdivision and the accessway.
6.11.F Site Configuration.
1. In order to approve the creation of an interior lot, the Commission must find that the development of the interior lot will provide the most appropriate use of the land considering such factors as the preservation of the natural character of the land, drainage, configuration, accessibility and topography.
2. If the Commission finds that the established development pattern of a neighborhood would be damaged by the development of an interior lot, it shall deny the application for an interior lot.
FEE STRIP REQUIREMENTS ZONE R3 R4 R5 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN NON-ADJOINING FEE STRIP AS MEASURED IN A STRAIGHT LINE FROM THEIR CLOSEST POINTS
90 feet
110 feet
130 feet MAXIMUM FEE STRIP LENGTH
210 feet
230 feet
390 feet NO BUILDING OR OTHER STRUCTURE ON AN INTERIOR LOT SHALL BE LOCATED CLOSER TO A PROPERTY LINE THAN:
30 feet
50 feet
SECTION 6.12
122 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.12 DRIVEWAYS.
6.12.A Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide for safe vehicular access from the street into all developed properties, minimize disruption of traffic on adjacent roadways, and control drainage and sedimentation into and out of all driveways. For driveways that access Route 1, see also Section 5.3, “Access Management District.”
.
6.12.B Applicability and Permit Requirements
1. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all driveways within the Town of Branford.
2. No driveway shall be established or relocated without issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
3. The application for a zoning permit for a driveway shall provide all information necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this section as well as any other relevant information required for a zoning permit, as described in the Branford Zoning Regulations.
4. If driveway plans are incorporated into a subdivision, site plan, special exception, or Coastal Site Plan Review application, no separate zoning permit application is required for the driveway(s).
5. Note that a road opening permit from the Office of the Town Engineer may be required for any activity within the Town right of way.
6. Note that any curb cut on a State Highway requires approval by the Connecticut Department of Transportation.
6.12.C Minimum Design Standards for All Zoning Districts
1. Driveways shall be constructed to provide year-round access for emergency and service vehicles and shall have an all-weather passable surface not less than ten feet in width when serving one lot and not less than sixteen feet when serving more than one lot. Driveways shall not exceed thirty feet in width at the street line unless a greater width is required by Town Ordinances or by the State of Connecticut.
2. The slope of a driveway shall not exceed eight (8) percent within thirty five (35) feet of its intersection with a Town road. At no point shall the grade of the driveway exceed fifteen (15) percent.
3. The maximum number of driveways permitted from any lot to a street shall be as follows (see Section 6.12.D.3 for an additional limitation regarding business driveways):
Length of Street Frontage
Maximum Number of Driveways
0 to 299 feet
2
300 to 599 feet
3
600 to 899 feet
4
900 feet or more
5
4. Whenever practical, a driveway shall intersect a street at 90 degrees. In no case shall a driveway intersect a street at an angle of less than 60 degrees.
5. Each driveway shall be located so as to ensure adequate sight lines for vehicles to exit the drive with minimum hazard and disruption of traffic. The minimum sight distance shall be determined by AASHTO standards based on the prevailing speed of traffic on and the classification of the intersected roadway.
SECTION 6.12
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|123
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6. No driveway shall intersect a Town roadway within 25 feet of the streetline, or streetline extended, of a State road or another Town roadway.
7. Each driveway shall be designed so as to minimize erosion and migration of sediment and storm water onto adjacent properties and roadways.
8. Each driveway shall be connected to the street by a paved apron extending at least ten feet back from the edge of pavement of such street.
9. Each apron shall be designed, graded and paved to match the surface of the Town roadway, avoid obstruction of the flow of water in the gutter line of the town roadway, and prevent the flow of roadway drainage onto any adjacent lot.
10. Any public infrastructure (e.g. roadways, sidewalks, survey monuments, guardrails, or culverts) that is damaged or removed in the course of driveway construction must be reconstructed to current Town standards.
11. Where grading for a driveway curb cut is required in a Town road right-of-way, slopes shall be no steeper than 2:1 (i.e. two feet horizontal to one foot vertical) and shall be stabilized with grass or other groundcover appropriate to the site conditions and shall be covered with a minimum of six inches of topsoil, limed, fertilized, seeded and mulched.
6.12.D Additional Standards for Business and Special Districts.
1. No exit from or entrance to an off-street parking facility or off-street loading space shall be so laid out as to constitute or create a traffic hazard or nuisance.
2. Driveways to the street from any one lot in any Business or Special Zone shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide for one-way traffic and 24 feet wide for two-way traffic.
3. Lots containing less than 150 feet of street frontage in any Business Zone shall be limited to one driveway to the street.
4. Internal driveway access between parking lots on adjacent properties is encouraged and may be permitted subject to Planning and Zoning Commission approval.
5. No part of a lot located in a Residence District shall be used for access to a use not permitted in such District.
6.12.E Emergency Access.
1. In order to provide adequate room for emergency vehicles to turn into driveways and access all buildings and parcels within the Town of Branford, all new driveways (including alleys, private roads, and other accessways) shall provide minimum horizontal clearance of fourteen feet, (free of tree branches, walls, fences and other impediments) regardless of the paved width of the driveways.
2. Where there are automatic gates at driveways, an emergency means of opening the gates shall be provided to the Fire Department.
3. If all buildings on the parcel are within 50 feet from the traveled portion of the road and can be easily accessed from the road, the Commission may exempt the parcel from the requirements of this Section.
SECTION 6.12
124 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
6.12.F Additional Standards for Common Driveways.
1. Common driveways shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length.
2. A common driveway may serve no more than two lots without a Special Exception. The Commission may increase the number of lots served by a common driveway to four by Special Exception, provided the following additional standards are met:
(1) Construction plans and profiles signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut must be submitted. Said plans shall address all requirements of this section and provide stormwater control measures as necessary to ensure that no drainage problems arise from the driveway installation.
(2) The common portion of the driveway shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length.
(3) A hammerhead or equivalent turnaround area is required at the termination of the common drive. The design of the turnaround area shall be of sufficient size and shape to accommodate projected traffic and specific site conditions. Since this turnaround is for maintenance and emergency vehicle use, it is not to be used for parking and must be kept clear of snow in the winter.
(4) Where a common access drive intersects with a town road, a sign post shall be installed indicating the house numbers for all properties served by the common access drive.
SECTION 6.13
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|125
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.13 FENCES AND WALLS.
6.13.A Purpose.
1. This Section is intended to control the size, location, and type of perimeter fences, freestanding walls, and retaining walls in all zoning districts in order to provide for protection of private property while not infringing on the public safety and general welfare.
2. In addition, this Section is specifically intended to allow such structures to be located within setbacks to the extent authorized by this Section.
6.13.B Fences and Freestanding Walls
1. No fence, post, column, freestanding wall, or portion thereof shall be constructed in a way so as to obstruct the visibility at intersections, as required by Section 6.12 at intersections of roads, driveways, accessways, or other travel ways.
2. Any fence or freestanding wall that exceeds six (6) feet in height requires a zoning permit and must meet the setback requirements for the zone in which it is located.
6.13.C Retaining Walls
1. A zoning permit is required for:
(1) any retaining walls over three (3) feet in height as measured from the finished grade at the bottom of the wall to the finished grade at the top of the wall and
(2) alternative structures such as “living walls” designed to hold back earthen slopes or embankments.
2. No retaining wall shall exceed eight (8) feet in height as measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall unless modified by the Commission after consultation with the Town Engineer.
3. All retaining walls shall be set back a minimum of six (6) feet from any parking space and a distance at least equal to the height of the wall from all property lines except when a lesser setback is necessary to provide for adequate sight lines or for transitions in grade at intersections of roads and driveways.
4. No retaining wall shall be constructed in a way that obstructs visibility of oncoming traffic at intersections of roads, driveways, or other access-ways.
5. All drainage at the base of the wall, including flow from weep holes, shall be properly managed and not allowed to flow onto adjacent properties or traverse parking areas, drives or adjacent roadways.
6. The design of any such retaining wall shall be prepared by a registered Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut.
7. Plans of retaining walls shall include top of wall and bottom of wall elevations at intervals along the length of the wall, drainage and construction details and calculations.
SECTION 6.13
126 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
8. When used to create terraces, retaining walls should be a minimum of four (4) feet apart.
9. Guard rails or railings are required at the top of the retaining wall in locations where an unprotected wall would pose a safety hazard for pedestrians or vehicles. The top of any retaining wall greater than three (3) feet in height shall be protected by a railing or guide rail consistent with the Connecticut Building Code.
10. The exposed face of a retaining wall should be of a design and material that will enhance the attractiveness of the site. Smooth faced concrete is not permitted.
11. Landscaping shall be provided at the top and base of walls and on terraces to blend the wall with the surrounding site.
SECTION 6.14
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|127
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.14 TOWN-WIDE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS.
6.14.A Purpose.
This Section is intended to aid applicants proposing development outside the Town Center Village District. The guidelines have been developed to ensure that their designs are in harmony with the character of the community, encourage high quality building and site design, and result in development that is compatible with the character of the community.
6.14.B Applicability.
The following types of applications shall be reviewed as indicated below:
1. Any proposed development, construction, or use in any Business, Industrial or Special Zone shall be reviewed in relation to these design guidelines.
2. A principal use or activity permitted by Special Exception in any Residential Zone, except for a Bed and Breakfast, shall be reviewed in relation to these design guidelines.
3. Properties in the Town Center Village District shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 9.5.
6.14.C Procedure.
1. The Commission shall review an application in relation to the design guidelines of this Section and may request the assistance of a Design Professional(s) in evaluating such plans.
2. Any recommendations or suggestions so received from the Design Professional(s) shall not be binding upon the Commission.
6.14.D Guidelines.
1. Relationship of Buildings to Site and Adjoining Areas.
(1) Buildings should be organized in a coordinated and functional manner that is compatible with site features and the desirable characteristics of adjoining areas.
(2) A unified design theme for building massing, exterior treatments and signage should be established where harmony in textures, lines, and masses is provided and monotony is avoided.
(3) Parking areas should be treated appropriately in relation to the building, the neighborhood, and the community.
(4) The height and scale of each building should be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.
(5) Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, should be underground.
(6) A desirable streetscape and attractive landscape transitions to adjoining properties shall be provided.
2. Landscape and Site Treatment.
(1) Landscape treatment should be provided to enhance architectural features, shield unsightly areas, provide shade, and relate to the natural environment and topography.
(2) Plant material that is indigenous to the area should be selected for its ultimate growth and for interest in its shape, texture, and color.
(3) Pedestrian walkways should provide safe and convenient connections within the site and between adjacent sites and shall be constructed of all-weather materials appropriate for the location (such as brick, concrete, or paving blocks, not earth, gravel, or loose stone).
SECTION 6.14
128 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(4) Existing trees at four (4) inches or greater caliper should be incorporated into the site plan.
3. Building Design.
(1) Architectural features should be evaluated based on the scale of the building(s), the quality of the design, and the relationship to surroundings.
(2) Facades and rooflines should be articulated and/or varied to reduce the appearance of bulk and provide architectural interest.
(3) Building materials should have good architectural character and durable quality and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.
(4) Building textures, colors, and components should be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.
(5) Utility and service equipment areas shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building.
4. Signs and Lighting.
(1) Signs should be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates and shall be coordinated with the building architecture.
(2) Exterior lighting, where used, should enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape.
(3) Lighting should be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided.
SECTION 6.15
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|129
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
SECTION
6
BASIC STANDARDS
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
6.15 TRAFFIC
6.15.A Purpose
The purpose of this section is to ensure that all proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall be safely designed, adequately provided and conveniently arranged to meet the needs of the proposed uses, avoid hazards, and prevent congestion within the site and on the street.
6.15.B Applicability
These standards shall apply to all activities that require a site plan or special exception approval.
6.15.C General Requirements
The following aspects of all site plans shall be evaluated to determine conformity with the above stated purpose:
1. The number, location and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives and walkways;
2. The width, grade and alignment of entrances and exits;
3. The distance of entrances and exits from street corners, places of public assembly and other accessways;
4. The visibility in both directions at all exit points of the site and the visibility of a vehicle entering or exiting the site to the driver of a vehicle traveling on the street;
5. Adequacy of emergency access;
6. The effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on abutting streets in terms of roadway capacity, traffic accidents, traffic volumes, volume capacity ratios, and sightlines;
7. The patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation both within the boundaries of the development and in relation to the adjoining street and sidewalk systems;
8. The adequacy of traffic signalization, traffic channelization, left turn lanes, and roadway width on the adjoining streets;
9. The interconnection of parking areas via access drives within and between adjacent lots or uses, in order to maximize efficiency, minimize curb cuts and encourage safe and convenient circulation;
10. The adequacy of vehicular stacking lanes;
11. The adequacy of pedestrian drop-off areas for visitors, car pools and transit buses;
12. The location, arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking and loading facilities;
13. The location, arrangement and adequacy of handicap facilities such as ramps, depressed curbs and reserved handicap parking spaces;
14. The location and design of vehicle maneuvering areas, backaround areas and fire lanes;
15. The physical identification of entrances, exits, one-way drives, small car spaces, handicapped spaces and fire lanes;
16. The provision of bumper guards, guard rails, wheel stops, speed bumps, traffic signs, islands, crosswalks and similar safety devices necessary to protect life and property.
6.15.D Pedestrian Facilities
Sidewalks shall be required along all major roadways and in other locations with high pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development Transportation Plan – Pedestrian & Bicycle elements, as amended.
SECTION 6.15
130 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(this page intentionally left blank)
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|131
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 7 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
7.1 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
7.1.A Applicability.
The regulations in this section apply to any multi-family residential development within the MF zoning district.
7.1.B Utilities.
Each building and all dwelling units shall be served by public water supply and connected to the Town sanitary sewer system. All utilities in the residential development shall be located underground.
7.1.C Buffer Areas.
1. Along and adjacent to each property line of such residential development other than a street line, there shall be provided a greenbelt having a minimum width of 15 feet, planted with trees and shrubs, at least 50 percent of which shall be evergreens.
2. Suitable existing trees and shrubs may be preserved and/or supplemented by additional plantings so as to provide the required greenbelt with an effective minimum height of at least five (5) feet.
3. The Commission may increase this greenbelt requirement if it finds that such increase is necessary to protect tidal marsh areas, coastal bluffs and escarpments and beaches and dunes.
4. The entire area of the lot not used for buildings, driveways, and parking areas shall be landscaped with lawn and with trees and/or shrubs or shall be left undisturbed as natural terrain.
5. Fences, walls, earth berms, and/or closely planted evergreens, trees, hedges or shrubs shall be used to screen parking areas to a height of four (4) feet from streets, adjoining properties, recreation areas or maintenance areas.
7.1.D Outdoor Living Space.
1. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a private, exclusive outdoor living space of at least 100 square feet, in the form of a patio, deck, terrace, balcony, open air or screened-in porch.
7.1.E Recreation.
1. Designated recreation areas for the use of all residents shall be provided at the ratio of 200 square feet per dwelling unit.
132 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
7.2 AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING.
7.2.A Appropriateness.
In determining the appropriateness of an Age-restricted Housing development, the Commission shall consider the following factors:
1. The need within the Town for an Age-restricted Housing development,
2. Accessibility to major roads and proximity to community services,
3. The physical characteristics of the lot,
4. The availability of a public water system as defined by the Connecticut Department of Public Health and a public sanitary wastewater system,
5. The appropriateness of the design and site layout for the property, and
6. Its compatibility with adjacent residential areas.
7.2.B Occupancy Standards.
Where permitted by Special Exception approval, Age-restricted Housing shall comply with the following standards:
1. The provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act and Connecticut General Statutes Section 46a - 64b, as it pertains to "Housing for older persons." This includes compliance with any and all applicable rules promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2. One-hundred percent of the units shall be occupied by at least one (1) person who is 55 years of age or older. In addition to the above resident who is 55 years of age or older, residents may include:
(1) A spouse, companion or relative of the qualifying occupant,
(2) An employee of the qualifying resident unit owner, pursuant to Section 7.2.B1 above, who performs substantial duties related to the care of the owner, or
(3) A person who survives his or her qualifying spouse, companion or relative or whose qualifying spouse, companion or relative has entered into a long-term care facility; and
(4) In Subsection (3) above, remaining spouses who remarry or cohabitate must meet all occupancy requirements.
3. Verification. The homeowners association shall verify to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, compliance of the development with state and federal age requirements. Such verification shall be provided in writing annually, or on or before February 1 of each year, and shall relate to the status of occupancy on the first day of January immediately preceding the submission of such verification.
7.2.C Ownership.
1. The proposed development shall be a "Common Interest Ownership Community" as defined in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
2. Nothing herein shall prevent title to a dwelling unit from being held by a person or entity related to a qualifying occupant pursuant to Section 7.2.B for tax or estate planning purposes.
SECTION 7.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|133
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7.2.D Development Standards.
Where permitted by Special Exception approval in a residence district, Age-restricted Housing shall comply with the following standards.
MINIMUM 1. SITE AREA
5 acres 2. LOT FRONTAGE ON A PUBLIC STREET
150 feet 3. SETBACKS
Front; Side; Rear
50 feet 4. SEPARATION BETWEEN BUILDINGS
30 feet 5. CONTIGUOUS OPEN SPACE
25 percent MAXIMUM 6. BUILDING HEIGHT
Same as underlying zone 7. BUILDING COVERAGE
25 percent 8. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
50 percent 9. DENSITY PER ACRE
3 units 10. DWELLING UNITS PER BUILDING
4 units
11. Utility Provisions.
(1) Public sanitary sewers shall be required; and
(2) Public water supply shall be required and fire hydrants shall be provided on site per the Fire Marshal's approval.
12. Circulation Requirements.
(1) All roads shall conform to Town specifications,
(2) Through roads shall be public streets,
(3) Interior roads shall be private streets owned by a homeowners association, and
(4) The Commission may require a walking trail system and/or sidewalks within the development.
13. Parking Requirements.
(1) There shall be two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit, plus one-half (0.5) space per unit for visitors.
(2) At least one (1) parking space per unit must be provided in an attached garage.
14. The maximum number of bedrooms per unit shall be two (2).
15. The master bedroom shall be located on the first floor.
16. Each unit shall have a basement or attic for storage purposes.
134 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
17. The façades of structures containing more than two (2) dwelling units shall be varied substantially in plane along the building's length.
18. 25 percent of the site shall be contiguous open space.
19. Recreational facilities suitable for active and/or passive recreation shall be provided to serve the development.
7.2.E Market Analysis
1. The applicant shall provide the Commission with a written, independent, professional market analysis demonstrating the viability and local need for the proposed Age-restricted Housing based on demographics and the availability of similar housing within the Town.
2. No application for an Age-restricted Housing development shall be approved by the Commission unless it finds that a need exists within the Town of Branford for such housing.
7.3 OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
7.3.A Purpose.
The Commission may approve a Special Exception to permit establishment of an Open Space Residential Development involving modification of lot area, shape and setback requirements if it finds that the Special Exception will accomplish one or more of the following purposes:
1. To permit tracts of considerable size to be designed and developed for single family residential and similar purposes in such manner as to accomplish one or more of the following open space purposes:
2. To preserve land as unsubdivided and undeveloped open space, which preserves or enhances the appearance, character and natural beauty of an area.
3. To preserve land for park and recreation purposes.
4. To preserve land for purposes of conserving natural resources.
5. To preserve and protect particular areas and terrain having qualities of natural beauty or historic interest.
6. To protect streams, rivers and ponds so as to avoid flooding, erosion and water pollution.
SECTION 7.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|135
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7.3.B Development Standards
Open Space Residential Development is subject to the dimensional standards shown in the “Area and Bulk Requirements” table below, with the following provisions: Area and Bulk Requirements R-3 R-4 R-5 MINIMUM 1. OVERALL SITE AREA 1, 2
15 Acres 2. OVERALL SITE SETBACKS
(1) Front
30 feet
30 feet
40 feet (2) Side
15 feet
15 feet
15 feet (3) Rear
30 feet
30 feet
30 feet 3. UNIT LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
10,000 square feet
12,000 square feet
20,000 square feet 4. UNIT LOT FRONTAGE ON A PUBLIC STREET
75 feet
90 feet
100 feet 5. SQUARE
80 feet
100 feet
125 feet 6. SETBACKS (Front, Side and Rear)
15 feet 7. CONTIGUOUS OPEN SPACE PER UNIT
5,000 square feet
8,000 square feet
20,000 square feet MAXIMUM 8. BUILDING HEIGHT
Same As Allowed Under a
Conventional Subdivision 9. BUILDING COVERAGE 10. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA RATIO
(1) The acreage may be less than 15 acres if the open space land proposed consists of five (5) acres or more, is adjunct to existing permanently designated open space land outside the area covered by the application, or would provide especially valuable open space resources.
(2) At least 85 percent of the area covered by the proposed Open Space Residential Development Plan shall be located within the Residence R-3, R-4, or R-5 District. Up to 15 percent of the total area may be located in contiguous R-l or R-2 Districts.
136 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
11. Number of Units. The total number of dwelling units shown on the Open Space Residential Development Plan shall not exceed the number of lots allowed under these Regulations.
12. Types of Units. Units may be single-family or two-family type units.
13. No improvements of any kind other than landscaping shall be permitted in any required setback area except for access drives as approved by the Commission.
14. Water supply and Sewage Disposal: Each building lot and all dwellings shall be served by public water supply; in the Residence R-3 and Residence R-4 Districts, each building lot and all dwellings shall also be served by the Town sanitary sewer system.
7.3.C Determination of Development Yield.
1. The Maximum number of units shall be determined by using a density factor. The requirements in the following table shall be deemed the maximum number of units per acre in an Open Space Residential development. ZONE R-3 R-4 R-5 DENSITY FACTOR
2.10
1.58
0.79
2. The Density Factor is multiplied by the overall site area (area determined by a Class A-2 Survey prepared by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor), after areas classified as Inland Wetlands and Watercourses in CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, as identified by a Certified Soil Scientist and steep slopes (slopes greater than 25 percent) have been subtracted.
3. Development Yield Formula:
(SA – IWW – SS) x DF = Number of Units
SA
Site Area (as determined by a Class A-2 Survey)
IWW
Inland Wetland and Watercourses
SS
Steep Slopes
DF
Density Factor for the zone
7.3.D Preliminary Action.
1. Before taking preliminary action on the application, the Commission may require the applicant to submit such additional information as it deems necessary to make a reasonable decision on the application.
2. The Commission may give preliminary approval to the application if the Commission finds that one (1) or more of the purposes specified in this Section will be accomplished, that all other applicable standards of the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations have been met, and that the proposed Open Space Residential Development Plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety and property values of the neighborhood. Preliminary approval shall not constitute final approval of the application and shall only constitute authorization to the applicant to submit a final Open Space Residential Development Plan as part of the application.
3. Notwithstanding the preliminary approval process as set forth above, the applicant may submit simultaneously with the initial application, and the Commission may approve, a Final Open Space Residential Development Plan in accordance with the provisions and procedures set forth below.
SECTION 7.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|137
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7.3.E Final Action.
1. After preliminary approval, the applicant shall submit final development plans in conformance with and including all the information required by the preliminary approval, all information necessary to document compliance with conditions of preliminary approval, and final plans for Development Option 1 or Development Option 2 as applicable. If Development Option 1 is approved, the applicant must submit a mylar and record subdivision map.
2. Final development plans may be submitted in stages or sections, but any open space land and/or scenic easements proposed and given preliminary approval shall be established in the first stage or section submitted including suitable access to such land.
3. Once Final Plans are approved, the Final Plans must be submitted within 24 months of approval. The Approval shall become null and void if the Final Plans not filed within that timeframe.
7.3.F Development Options.
1. Development Option 1 – Subdivision of Land. The Planning and Zoning Commission may permit an Open Space Residential Development wherein the individual units are subdivided into individual lots.
2. Development Option 2 – Common-Interest Community. The Planning and Zoning Commission may permit an Open Space Residential Development wherein the land and common facilities shall be under single common ownership.
7.3.G Open Space Land.
1. The Open Space Development Plan shall result in the preservation of open space land with suitable access, shape, dimension, character, location and topography to accomplish the purposes of this Section.
2. Disposition. Any open space land shown on an Open Space Residential Development Plan shall be labeled in a manner approved by the Commission to assure that any and all uses of such land are subject to Special Exception approval and that such land is not to be used for building lots. The method of preservation and disposition of the open space land shall accomplish the open space purposes and shall be subject to the approval of the Commission. The method used may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Establishment of a neighborhood association to own and maintain the land for the open space purposes intended. The establishment of a conservation easement in favor of the Town of Branford is required;
(2) Transfer of the land to an institution, person, organization or other entity to own and maintain the land for the open space purposes intended. The establishment of a conservation easement in favor of the Town of Branford is required; or
(3) Offer and transfer of the land to the Town of Branford, Connecticut, subject to agreement by the Town to accept the land.
3. Open Space Land. The open space land shown on an approved Open Space Residential Development Plan may, upon the approval of a Special Exception, be used for buildings and other structures for recreation and other purposes that are consistent with the approved open space purposes and permitted in the district, provided that such buildings and structures comply with all coverage and setback requirements, which shall be determined as though the open space area were a building lot.
138 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
7.4 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS.
7.4.A General Requirements.
The Commission may grant a Special Exception for an accessory apartment provided that in addition to all other applicable requirements of these Regulations, the following conditions are met:
1. No more than one accessory apartment shall be allowed per lot.
2. The accessory apartment may be located either within the principal dwelling unit or within an accessory structure located on the same lot as the principal dwelling unit.
3. The owner(s) of the principal dwelling unit shall occupy at least one (1) of the dwelling units on the premises.
4. If the accessory apartment is located within the principal dwelling unit, the accessory apartment shall be designed so that, to the degree reasonably feasible, the exterior of the building continues to look like a single-family residence. In general, any new entrance shall be located on the side or in the rear of the building.
5. The lot on which the accessory apartment is located shall be of sufficient size and shape to accommodate parking and other normal requirements of residential uses without compromising the character of the neighborhood.
6. At least three off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
7. No accessory apartment shall have a gross floor area of more than 900 square feet or more than 30 percent of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling unit, whichever is less.
8. In order to encourage the development of housing units for persons with disabilities, the Commission may allow reasonable deviation from the stated conditions, where necessary, to install access and/or other facilities for disabled persons.
9. In order to encourage preservation of historic buildings and efficient use of existing housing stock, the Commission may allow reasonable deviation from the stated conditions where necessary to create an accessory apartment with workable proportions, provided that the original structure has been in existence for more than 50 years.
10. The Commission may require additional conditions deemed necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare and the single-family residential character of the neighborhood.
11. The owner of the accessory apartment property must file a deed restriction on the land records requiring that the unit, if rented, be rented at or below prices that would qualify the apartment as “affordable housing,” as defined in CGS Section 8-39a.
SECTION 7.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|139
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7.5 APARTMENT(S) IN A BL ZONE.
7.5.A General Requirements.
The Commission may grant a Special Exception for apartment(s) in a BL zone provided that in addition to all other applicable requirements of these Regulations, the following conditions are met:
1. The apartment(s) is / are located within an existing residential structure that pre-dates the adoption of Zoning Regulations (December 3, 1956) in Branford.
2. No apartment(s) shall be located on the ground floor or basement level.
3. The proposed apartment(s) must preserve the residential character of the existing structure.
4. The Commission may require additional conditions deemed necessary to protect public health, safety, and the welfare and character of the neighborhood.
7.6 GROUP DAY CARE HOMES AND DAY CARE CENTERS.
7.6.A General Requirements.
All Group Day Care Homes and Day Care Centers shall conform to the following additional standards:
1. The use shall be limited to daytime (6 a.m. to 7 p.m.) group care programs for children.
2. The site plan shall demonstrate compliance with all “Facility Requirements” for day care as specified in the Connecticut Public Health Code and shall provide an attractive environment for children by using means such as landscaping, buffers, and screening.
3. The applicant must submit a letter from East Shore District Health Department describing the safety and adequacy of the drinking water supply and sewage disposal system, a letter from the Branford Fire Marshal describing fire safety concerns, and a letter from the Branford Building Official describing any structural safety concerns at the day care site.
4. The site shall be situated and developed so as to create no nuisance or detrimental effect on the privacy, tranquility or value of surrounding properties.
5. Surrounding properties and their uses shall not endanger the well-being of the children through the emission of noxious fumes, noise, traffic, or other hazards.
6. Group day care homes located in residential zoning districts shall also conform to the following requirements:
(1) The day care provider must reside on the premises.
(2) Outdoor lighting, signage, play areas and landscaping shall be designed so as to minimize adverse impacts on the residential character of the neighborhood.
140 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
7.7 BED AND BREAKFAST.
7.7.A General Requirements.
1. The lot must be of sufficient size and shape to accommodate required off-street parking.
2. The business shall be conducted by the resident owner / occupant of the dwelling and no more than one (1) non-resident employee.
3. Where on-site water and sewage disposal systems are proposed, the East Shore District Health Department shall certify that the systems are adequate to serve the proposed use.
4. Such facilities shall not provide for cooking within the rooms, but may include meals served by the owner to the guests. No meals shall be served to non-guests.
5. Rooms shall be provided with access and egress from within the principal residence only.
6. Additions.
(1) Additions to a Bed and Breakfast for the purpose of providing additional guest rooms or bed and breakfast facilities may be permitted where the addition shall be constructed in a manner that is in keeping with the size and scale of the dwelling, maintains the residential appearance of the structure and lot and blends with the existing neighborhood.
(2) In no case shall an addition be permitted which would allow for more than four (4) total guest rooms to be provided.
7.8 HOSPITALS.
7.8.A General Requirements.
Hospitals and skilled nursing facilities shall conform to the following additional standards:
1. Minimum Lot size: two (2) acres.
2. The Application shall be accompanied by a report from the East Shore District Health Department attesting to the adequacy of the proposed location, site plan, buildings and facilities for the intended use.
3. The Application shall be accompanied by a report from the Branford Fire Marshal attesting to the safety of the proposed location, site plan, buildings and facilities.
SECTION 7.9
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|141
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7.9 MARINAS, SLIP BASINS, BOAT STORAGE AND LANDINGS.
7.9.A General Requirements.
Marinas, slip basins and landings shall conform to the following additional standards:
1. A site plan shall show the limits of any area to be filled or dredged, either existing and proposed ground elevations or existing and proposed contours at an interval not exceeding two (2) feet, the layout of any proposed piers or float systems and other off-shore facilities, and the limits of the boat storage area, in addition to site plan requirements established elsewhere in these Regulations or by the Commission.
2. The Application shall be accompanied by detailed drawings for any proposed groin, seawall, jetty, navigation channel, boat basin, pier, dock, wharf, bulkhead, retaining wall, piling, and / or other facilities.
3. The facility shall be served by a public water supply system.
4. In areas not served by sanitary sewers, the Application shall be accompanied by a report from the East Shore District Health Department attesting to the adequacy of the proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities for the intended use.
7.10 STORAGE TRAILERS.
7.10.A General Requirements.
The Commission may grant a Special Exception for temporary use of a storage trailer provided that all applicable requirements of these Regulations are met.
1. The storage trailer must be structurally sound and pose no detriment to public health, safety, convenience or property values.
2. The storage trailer must meet the same setback and coverage requirements as would a conventional structure.
3. The storage trailer shall be located so that it does not take up parking spaces required for other uses on the site and does not obstruct emergency access or other essential circulation patterns.
4. Any landscaping or natural vegetation disturbed by the placement of a storage trailer shall be restored immediately upon removal of the trailer. The Commission may require posting of a financial guarantee sufficient to insure such restoration.
5. The aggregate area covered by storage trailers shall not exceed 10 percent of the total floor area of all buildings on the site.
6. Storage trailers shall be painted in neutral or subdued colors to blend with surroundings. No signage or other lettering shall be placed or painted on any storage trailer.
7. The effective period of a storage trailer Special Exception permit shall be two years. Any request for extension of this time period shall be processed as a new application.
142 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
7.11 CONTRACTOR BUSINESSES AND STORAGE YARDS.
7.11.A Purpose.
1. Because of the nature of these businesses, many contractors’ yards resemble a construction site, with similar impacts, such as erosion, dust, noise, a concentration of heavy vehicle traffic, and substantial outdoor storage of materials and equipment. However, in contrast to a construction site such business has no time limit for completion of all work. The purpose of this Section is to set standards that will allow operation of such yards over a long period of time without causing serious detriment to public health, safety, and the value of surrounding properties.
7.11.B Additional Application Requirements.
In addition to all other Special Exception requirements, the application shall contain the following additional information:
1. Stock-piles and other outdoor storage: Size, location and type of materials.
2. Vehicles and other mobile machinery: Type and size, and number of vehicles entering and exiting the site and stored on the site and location of parking spaces for same,
3. Processing: Size, location and type of equipment used and type and volume of materials processed.
4. Vehicle and equipment maintenance facility: Types of maintenance operations to be performed and provisions for waste disposal.
7.11.C Additional Standards.
1. The Commission shall approve no building contractor’s business and storage yard having outside storage of earth materials, heavy equipment or construction vehicles unless it determines that, in addition to other applicable requirements to these Regulations, all of the following conditions will be met.
2. Minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres.
3. Screening:
(1) All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view from adjacent properties. The applicant shall also provide for on-going dust and erosion controls sufficient to prevent migration of soil beyond the subject property. No outside storage shall be located so as to obstruct drainage facilities or circulation patterns or otherwise impair the functioning of the site. No demolition debris or other waste may be stored or processed on the site.
(2) All vehicle parking areas shall be screened from view from adjacent properties. The volume of traffic entering and exiting the site and the condition of the vehicles shall not cause hazardous conditions or be otherwise detrimental to the appropriate and orderly development or use of the surrounding neighborhood.
SECTION 7.11
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|143
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
4. No processing machinery shall be located between the property line and the building setback lines. Proper buffering, shielding, or other controls shall be provided to the extent necessary to prevent negative impacts from dust, noise and vibration on surrounding properties.
5. No vehicles other than those of the business occupying the site shall be repaired or maintained on the site. All spare parts shall be stored indoors or, if stored outdoors they shall be located in a clearly defined area shielded from view from surrounding properties and shall meet all restrictions on outside storage. All required permits for proper disposal and / or discharge of wastes shall be obtained prior to issuance of final zoning compliance.
6. Trash hauling, retail sales of merchandise to customers at the site, mining of earth materials, and repair of vehicles other than those used by the business are prohibited.
7. The Commission may impose additional limitations, including down-scaling or elimination of specific activities, in order to protect public health, safety, convenience and property values. Failure of the applicant to demonstrate adequate and enforceable controls on negative impacts shall be deemed sufficient grounds for denial of the applications.
144 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
7.12 SELF-STORAGE.
7.12.A General Requirements.
All self-storage facilities shall conform to the following additional standards:
1. The use shall be limited to individual storage compartments which shall be at least 25 square feet and no more than 300 square feet, and shall specifically exclude any commercial use or activity otherwise permitted either by Site Plan or Special Exception in an IG-1, IG-2, BL or CP Zone.
2. No outside storage is allowed.
3. No electrical outlets will be allowed in individual units.
4. Buffer.
(1) The building side and rear yards shall be screened by a landscape buffer strip suitably designed by a licensed landscape architect and permanently maintained with dense evergreen plantings, or an approved substitute, having a minimum height of five (5) feet.
(2) The landscape buffer shall be designed to achieve an aesthetically attractive screened design.
(3) A minimum width of 25 feet is required when the buffer is adjacent to a residential zone.
5. The exterior walls of the building shall be of a masonry finish and/or composite construction materials and give the building the appearance of a commercial facility, that is harmonious with the character of the surrounding area.
6. All storage units of all buildings shall be of neutral tones which harmonize with the surrounding area.
7.12.B Area and Bulk Requirements. SINGLE STORY MULTI-STORY 1. MAXIMUM SITE AREA
5 acres
5 acres 2. MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
1 story
3 stories or 40 feet 3. MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCE FROM LONG ISLAND SOUND
5,000 feet
5,000 feet 4. MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCE FROM ANOTHER SELF-STORAGE FACILITY
5,000 feet
5,000 feet
7.12.C Additional Requirements for Multi-Story Storage Units.
1. The building and all storage units shall be climate controlled and served by an interior and exterior monitored video security system.
2. All second and third story units shall be accessible by an elevator of sufficient capacity to serve all units.
3. Each storage unit shall be directly accessible by either an exterior door or from the interior. No more than 15 percent of the units are allowed access by an exterior door.
4. The building shall be accessible by a vehicle loading area which will be covered and directly accessible to the elevator.
5. All buildings shall be served by a sprinkler system.
SECTION 7.13
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|145
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7.13 COMMERCIAL KENNELS.
7.13.A Additional Application Requirements.
In addition to all other Special Exception requirements, the application shall contain the following additional information:
1. Type of kennel operation (i.e. breeding, rescue, boarding).
2. Number of dogs over six (6) months of age to be permanently housed on property.
3. Number of dogs over six (6) months of age to be temporarily housed on property.
4. Location of kennel buildings and runs on the lot, including any alternate or temporary sites.
5. Setback distances from kennel area to property lines, neighboring homes, wells and any protected public waters.
6. Any existing or proposed vegetative buffer strips.
7. Proposed waste management area (e.g. composting site, spreading area or storage bin)
8. Location of wells and septic system.
9. Location of dwellings on property.
10. Waste management plan.
11. Noise management or mitigation plan.
7.13.B General Requirements.
1. Area and Bulk Requirements.
MINIMUM (1) SITE AREA
5 acres (2) FRONT SETBACK
150 feet (3) SIDE SETBACK
150 feet (4) REAR SETBACK
150 feet
2. All outdoor kennel operations including animal waste management areas shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all wells.
3. All outdoor kennel operation areas shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all adjoining property lines.
4. The Commission may impose additional setbacks on proposed outdoor kennel operation areas if it finds that such setbacks are needed to protect nearby properties from noise or other detrimental impacts.
146 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
7.14 COMMERCIAL HORSE STABLES.
7.14.A Additional Application Requirements.
In addition to all other Special Exception requirements, the application shall contain the following additional information:
1. Type of horse-related operation (e.g. breeding, rescue, racing).
2. Number of horses over six (6) months of age to be permanently housed on property.
3. Number of horses over six (6) months of age to be temporarily housed on property.
4. Location of stables, riding rinks and/or training facilities on the lot, including any alternate or temporary sites.
5. Any existing or proposed vegetative buffer strips.
6. Proposed waste management area (i.e. composting site, spreading area or storage bin)
7. Location of wells and septic system.
8. Location of dwellings on property.
9. Waste management plan.
7.14.B General Requirements.
When allowed by these Regulations, commercial horse stables and riding or training schools shall meet the following requirements:
1. Area and Bulk Requirements. (1) MINIMUM SITE AREA
5 acres (2) INITIAL HORSE ALLOWANCE
9 (3) ACREAGE REQUIRED FOR EACH ADDITIONAL HORSE
½ acre
2. All horse-related operations including animal waste management areas shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all wells.
3. Horses shall not be stabled or corralled in the area of the septic leach field system
4. All horse stables and corrals shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all adjoining property lines.
5. The Commission, at its discretion, may impose additional setbacks if it finds that such setbacks are needed to protect nearby properties from noise or other detrimental impacts.
6. Where the Commission determines that it is necessary to protect neighboring property values and privacy, the Commission may as a condition of approval require additional landscape planting along property lines especially to screen areas of active use.
7. The use of temporary buildings or trailers for the stabling of horses in excess of 15 days is prohibited.
SECTION 7.15
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|147
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7.15 DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOWS.
7.15.A Vehicle Queuing.
1. Minimum queuing spaces: 6 first window or station; 2 additional spaces for each additional window or station
2. Queuing space dimensions: 10 feet wide by 18 feet long
3. Queuing lanes (stacking lanes) shall be separated from parking areas and other circulation lanes and shall be so identified by pavement striping.
4. Queuing lanes shall be designed so as to minimize conflict with pedestrian traffic. Where conflicts are unavoidable, improvements such as pavement markings, signing, internal walkways and speed bumps in queuing lanes should be used to improve safety.
5. The queuing lane must not be located between the building and the public street.
7.15.B Site Access.
1. An exit or entrance for such lanes shall be as far away as possible from a street intersection.
2. The distance from the pick-up window to the exit onto the street shall be sufficient to accommodate vehicles waiting for a break in the stream of traffic on the adjacent street.
7.15.C Pedestrian Access across drive through lane.
1. Walkways must be distinguished from driving surfaces by using varied paving treatments and by raising walkways to curb level.
7.15.D Screening.
1. Drive-through windows or lanes shall be located at least 25 feet from any residential zone. In such instances, a solid wood fence, synthetic wood-like fence, or masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height shall be installed between the queuing lane and the residential zone. The fence, or wall, shall be augmented with suitable landscaping on both sides to soften the visual impact of the fence, or wall. The Commission may allow screening to be located on an adjacent property(ies), provided documentation regarding owner consent can be supplied to the Commission.
148 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
7.16 ADAPTIVE REUSE.
7.16.A General Requirements.
The Commission may allow, by Special Exception, the adaptive-reuse conversion of structures for uses not otherwise permitted in the zoning district, provided the following elements are met:
1. Structure must be located in a Residential Zone (Section 3).
2. Structure must be designated as historically significant by (1) registry in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places or, (2) by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon presentation by the applicant of adequate evidence of historic significance such as an Historic Resources Survey.
3. Architectural integrity of the structure must be preserved, and the proposed use must be in harmony with surrounding uses.
7.16.B Allowed Uses.
1. The Commission may only allow uses that are allowed in other districts in Branford.
2. If proposed uses or activities are not allowed in the Residence Districts, then the uses and all activity must occur within the historically significant structure.
7.16.C Special Procedural Requirement.
1. The applicant shall notify the Branford Historical Society of all adaptive-reuse conversion applications at the time of filing such applications so that the Society may comment on:
(1) The appropriateness of the use, and
(2) Planned restoration / preservation of architectural integrity.
2. If comments are not received from the Historical Society within 30 days after written notice is provided by the applicant, the Commission may assume that the Society has no comment.
SECTION 7.17
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|149
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special districts
Basic Standards
SECTION
7
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special
Requirements
Procedures
Administration
7.17 FARMERS’ MARKETS
7.17.A General Requirements
The Commission may grant a Special Exception for a Farmers’ Market provided that in addition to all other requirements of these Regulations the following conditions are met:
1. Hours of Operation. All Farmers’ Markets shall be limited to one day per week; shall be open for selling to the public no more than four hours; and shall have specific hours of operation totaling no more than 6 hours, to include set up and break down times. No Farmers’ Market vendors may sell before 8:00 am or after 7 pm.
2. Operating rules. All Farmers’ Markets shall have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the Farmers’ Market, hours of operation, maintenance, insurance, security requirements and responsibilities, and appointment of a Market Manager.
3. Market manager. All Farmers’ Markets shall have a Market Manager authorized to direct the operations of all vendors participating in the market on the site of the market during all hours of operation. Current contact information for the Market Manager and at least one other person responsible for the market (for example a board member or assistant Market Manager) must be on file in the Branford Planning and Zoning Department.
7.17.B Parking.
1. All Farmers’ Markets shall provide for a minimum of one vehicle parking space for each vendor stall.
2. All Farmers’ Markets shall provide for 2 parking spaces for shoppers per each vendor stall.
3. All required parking spaces must be provided on-site. For the purposes of Farmers’ Markets only, required on-site parking spaces of the host property may apply towards meeting the number of required parking spaces required for the Farmers’ Market without rendering the host property deficient in its parking requirement so long as a written document, signed by both the property owner and the Market Manager, establishes that there will be no parking demand associated with the use of the host property for the same parking space(s) during the hours of the Farmers’ Market operation.
7.17.C 7.17.C. Waste.
All Farmers’ Markets shall provide for composting, recycling, and waste removal in accordance with all applicable health codes. The Farmers’ Market Manager shall be responsible for ensuring that the site is restored to a neat condition by no later than the end of the Farmers’ Market day.
150 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(this page intentionally left blank)
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|151
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
SECTION
8
SPECIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Procedures
Administration
SECTION 8 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
8.1 NONCONFORMITIES.
8.1.A Purpose.
1. Within the districts established by these Regulations, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures that were lawful before these Regulations were passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of these Regulations of future development.
2. It is the intent of this Section to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
3. Such uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Section that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended if such a change increases the nonconformity, nor shall they be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
4. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Section shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of the adoption or amendment of these Regulations.
8.1.B Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
Any structure or use lawfully existing, or for which a lawful permit was issued under the provisions of the Zoning Regulations previously in effect, may be continued. Any changes to the nonconforming use or structure shall be in compliance with these Regulations.
8.1.C Enlargement.
1. No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged, extended or altered, and no structure or part thereof devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, except where the result of such changes is to reduce or eliminate the nonconformity.
2. No nonconforming use of a structure shall be extended to occupy land outside such structure or space in another structure.
3. No building or other structure that does not conform to the requirements of these regulations regarding the building height limit, area and width of lot, percentage of lot coverage, and required setbacks and parking facilities shall be expanded or enlarged unless such enlarged portion conforms to the regulations applying to the district in which it is located or where such change is made in accordance with Section 8.1.D.
SECTION 8.1
152 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
8.1.D Change.
1. No nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming use unless the Commission approves a Change of Nonconforming Use Application. The Commission may approve such change by Special Exception if the Commission determines that such change will result in a condition that either:
(1) More nearly conforms with existing Regulations than does the existing nonconforming use; or
(2) Would significantly reduce any detrimental impacts the existing nonconforming use may have on the neighborhood; provided, however, that no Change of Use shall be approved for any use that is prohibited under these Regulations throughout the Town of Branford.
2. In making this determination, the Commission must make a finding that the proposed change improves compliance with the intent of the zone in which the nonconformity is located.
3. Except as provided in Section 8.1.D1, no nonconforming use of land, buildings or other structures shall be changed to any use that is substantially different in nature and purpose from the former nonconforming use except for uses that are permitted in the District in which they are to be located.
4. No nonconforming use of land, buildings or other structures if once changed to conform or to more nearly conform to these Regulations, shall thereafter be changed so as to be less conforming again.
5. No nonconforming building or structure, if once changed to conform or more nearly conform to these Regulations, shall thereafter be changed so as to be nonconforming or less conforming again.
6. No building, structure or use in a nonconforming location may be moved to or expanded into a different nonconforming location.
7. The intentional destruction or removal of any nonconforming portion of a building or other structure, regardless of whether the landowner wishes to replace or rebuild such structure in the same location, shall be deemed to be an abandonment of such nonconforming portion. Any rebuilding or replacement of such portion in the same or any other nonconforming location shall not be permitted.
8. Any nonconforming structure that is not fully in compliance with Federal Emergency Management Act (FEMA) regulations, or other federal or state regulations dealing with flood hazards or flood-damage prevention, may be raised or otherwise modified to the extent, but only to the extent, necessary to achieve compliance with such regulations, provided that the height of the modified structure may not exceed the maximum allowed in the district. No permit shall be issued for such alterations unless the applicant submits an affidavit from a Connecticut-licensed civil engineer or other qualified professional that all of the proposed alterations are no greater or more extensive than is reasonably necessary to comply with such flood-related regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may, but shall not be obliged to, refer an application for a zoning permit for any such alterations to the Commission for a final decision.
SECTION 8.1
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|153
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence Zones
Business Zones
Special and
Overlay Zones
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
SECTION
8
SPECIAL
REQUIREMENTS
Procedures
Administration
8.1.E Casualty.
1. If any nonconforming building or other structure is destroyed by fire or other unintended casualty to an extent of more than 75 percent of its fair market value based upon the average of two (2) independent appraisals, such building or other structure shall not be reconstructed or repaired unless the building or structure is made to conform in all respects to these Regulations.
2. Where such unintended destruction is 75 percent or less of the building’s or structure’s fair market value as above determined, the building or other structure may be reconstructed or repaired in its prior nonconforming location and to the same (but no greater) extent of nonconformity, provided that such reconstruction is started within a period of one (1) year from such casualty and is diligently prosecuted to completion. In the event of failure to start such reconstruction or repair within a period of one (1) year from such casualty and to complete the same within 18 months from such casualty, or within such additional period, not exceeding six (6) months, as the Commission may grant upon written application made to it, the right to reconstruct or repair such building or other structure shall be lost and terminated.
8.1.F Lots.
1. A parcel of land that fails to meet the area, shape or frontage or any other applicable requirements of these Regulations pertaining to lots, may be used as a lot, and a building or other structure may be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered thereon, provided that all of the following requirements are met:
(1) The use, building or other structure must conform to all other requirements of these Regulations;
(2) If used for a dwelling, the lot must contain a minimum area of 4,000 square feet; and
(3) Where the lot is not to be served by public water supply and/or sanitary sewers, the lot must have sufficient area and suitable dimensions to provide ample space to accommodate a private water supply system (where adequate public water supply is not available) and/or to accommodate the proper layout, installation and future extension of a private sewage disposal system (where sanitary sewers are not available), as needed by the intended use of the lot and in accordance with good engineering practice and the applicable requirements of the Connecticut State Department of Health and the East Shore District Health Department. The owner shall provide a written report with map(s) prepared by a sanitary or civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, describing the tests taken and the results, and certifying that the lot is satisfactory for a private sewage disposal and/or water supply system. Documentation shall be provided showing approval of the East Shore District Health Department.
(4) If the parcel fails to meet the area requirements of these Regulations, the owner of the parcel must not also have been, at any time since the enactment of the Zoning Regulations on December 3, 1956, the owner of contiguous land which in combination with such parcel that fails to conform would make a parcel that conforms or more nearly conforms to the area, shape or frontage requirements of these Regulations pertaining to lots.
SECTION 8.1
154 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
8.1.G Title.
No change of title, possession or right of possession shall, in itself, be deemed to affect the right to continue a nonconforming use, building or other structure.
8.1.H Signs.
Signs of a size or type not permitted in the district in which they are situated, or which are improperly located or illuminated, or which are nonconforming in any other way, shall be considered nonconforming structures under this Section, and any increase in size, illumination or flashing of such signs shall be deemed to be an enlargement or extension constituting an unlawful increase in nonconformity.
8.1.I Off-Street Parking and Loading.
1. Any lot, use, building or other structure that does not conform to one (1) or more of the parking and loading provisions of Section 6.5 shall continue to conform to such provisions to the extent that it conforms on the effective date of such Section.
2. Any use of land, building or other structures that does not conform to one (1) or more of the provisions of Section 6.5 shall not be changed to a use which would need additional off-street parking or loading spaces to comply with the provisions of Section 6.5 unless such spaces are provided as required for the new use under Section 6.5.D.
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|155
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
SECTION 9 PROCEDURES
9.1 ZONING APPLICATION TYPES.
The following zoning application types have been established for these Regulations: APPLICATION TYPE REVIEW AGENCY STAFF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ZONING PERMIT
X
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
X
CHANGE OF CONFORMING USE OR USER
X
CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE
X
DESIGN REVIEW
X 1
SITE PLAN APPLICATION
X
SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION
X
COASTAL SITE PLAN REVIEW
X
X REGULATION AMENDMENT
X
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT
X
APPEAL OF ORDER OR DECISION 2
X VARIANCE
X MOTOR VEHICLE LOCATION APPROVAL
X
1 With Advisory Report from Design Review Board
2 Certain appeals are filed directly with the Connecticut Superior Court. Consult an attorney for guidance.
SECTION 9.2
156 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.2 ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION. (STAFF APPROVAL)
9.2.A Applicability.
No building or land shall be occupied or used, no use of an existing building or land shall be changed, and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended or enlarged in whole or in part for any purpose until a Zoning Permit has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifying that such activity conforms with these Regulations, and/or conforms to a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals and/or conforms to plans approved by the Commission.
9.2.B Application Required.
An application for a Zoning Permit shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) on a form provided for that purpose before:
1. The erection or alteration of any structure is commenced in any district; or
2. The commencement of any other activity that requires a Zoning Permit or other permit required by these Regulations.
9.2.C Application Requirements.
Such application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by:
1. A completed Zoning Permit application form;
2. The appropriate fee;
3. A Class A-2 boundary survey prepared, stamped with an embossed seal, and signed by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor showing the information required in the Appendix of these Regulations;
4. Building plans (dimensioned floor plans and elevations);
5. Driveway plan;
6. Grading plan;
7. A Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan in accordance with Section 6.10 of these Regulations;
8. Such additional information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of these Regulations; and
9. Other drawings and documentation showing the information required in the Appendix of these Regulations.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer may reduce the application requirements provided there is sufficient documentation to determine compliance with the Regulations.
9.2.D Proceedings.
1. If the submitted application materials document to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Officer that the proposed activity or use is in compliance with these Regulations, the ZEO shall issue a Zoning Permit setting forth the date on which the permit was issued.
2. Other Permits. Approval of an Application for a Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance or the issuance of a Certificate shall not be construed to constitute compliance with any other regulation, ordinance or law nor to relieve the applicant from responsibility to obtain any permit thereunder.
3. If all of the requirements of these Regulations are met, the Zoning Permit shall be issued within 30 days of the receipt of the completed application. Otherwise the permit shall be denied for stated reasons.
4. An application for a Zoning Permit may be withdrawn, in writing, by the applicant at any time prior to final action.
SECTION 9.2
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|157
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.2.E Conditions.
Any maps, plans, documents, statements, and stipulations submitted to and approved by the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals in connection with a site plan, Special Exception, variance or other action of such Commission or Board, shall be conditions for approval of an Application for a Zoning Permit.
9.2.F Notice Provisions.
In accordance with CGS 8-3(f), the applicant may publish notice of the Zoning Permit in order to establish the appeal period under CGS 8-7. Any such notice published by the applicant shall contain:
1. A description of the building, use or structure and its location. If the property does not have a street address assigned, the applicant shall provide additional information to inform residents about the location of the property for which the signoff applies.
2. The identity of the applicant.
9.2.G Foundation Survey Recommended.
The property owner shall notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the completion of the foundation of any new structure or addition thereto within seven days after such completion. It is recommended that a Class A-2 boundary survey prepared by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) showing the foundation location of the new building, structure, or addition. Such filing would be beneficial to the landowner in helping to assure that any errors in location are found at an early time in the construction process.
9.2.H Zoning Permit Expiration.
1. Any Zoning Permit issued by the ZEO under the provisions of these Regulations shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within five (5) years after issuance of the Zoning Permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of five (5) years after the time of commencing the work.
2. A permit may be renewed once for an additional five (5) years upon filing a written request to do so.
9.2.I Inspections.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected any land, building or other structure to determine compliance with these Regulations. No Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued until the Zoning Enforcement Officer has inspected the land, building or other structure involved to determine that the use and / or the buildings or other structures conform to these Regulations.
9.2.J Orders.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue a Cease and Desist Order if in his judgment the excavation of land, use of land, buildings and other structures or the construction, reconstruction, enlargement, extension, moving or structural alteration of a building or other structure are not being carried out in compliance with these Regulations; he shall withdraw such Order when he determines that there is compliance with these Regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to be in violation of these Regulations.
SECTION 9.3
158 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.2.K Records.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall keep records of all fees, all Applications and Certificates of Zoning Compliance, all identifiable complaints of any violation of these Regulations, all inspections made under these Regulations and all notices of violation served by him and the action taken thereon.
9.3 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. (STAFF APPROVAL)
9.3.A Applicability.
1. No structure, land or premises shall be occupied for use or converted to a new use until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or his designee.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine that any use, building, structure or alteration for which a Zoning Permit has been issued conforms in all respects to the zoning Regulations.
9.3.B Procedures.
1. Upon completion of any building, structure or addition for which a Zoning Permit has been issued the applicant shall submit the following information to the ZEO before a Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be issued:
2. A Class A-2 boundary survey prepared, stamped with an embossed seal, and signed by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor showing the information required in the Appendix of these Regulations; and
3. A certification by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor as to the location of the completed building, structure or addition, the lot coverage, and building height, where applicable.
4. As an alternative to full project completion, the applicant may seek the approval of the Commission to post a financial guarantee for completion of any required public infrastructure, sedimentation and erosion controls, and other items for which a financial guarantee may lawfully be required. The amount and form of the financial guarantee shall be determined by the Commission after consultation with the Town Engineer and Town Attorney and shall be based on a breakdown of remaining project elements provided by the applicant. The financial guarantee amount shall include costs incurred for administration should the financial guarantee bond need to be called upon.
5. The Zoning Enforcement Officer, or his designee, shall determine whether the project conforms to the zoning Regulations
6. In the event that any Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued based on incorrect information or the specific conditions of approval are not adhered to strictly, such certificate may, after a hearing, be deemed null and void by the Commission.
7. A certificate of zoning compliance shall remain in effect as long as the specified uses and conditional requirements are properly maintained, but if such conditions and uses are no longer maintained, the Commission may, after a hearing, deem the certificate null and void.
SECTION 0
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|159
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.3.C Notice Provisions.
1. In accordance with CGS 8-3(f), the applicant may publish notice of the Zoning Permit in order to establish the appeal period under CGS 8-7. Any such notice published by the applicant shall contain:
(1) A description of the building, use or structure and its location. If the property does not have a street address assigned, the applicant shall provide additional information to inform residents about the location of the property for which the signoff applies.
(2) The identity of the applicant.
9.4 USE OF PARCELS CREATED BY FIRST CUT OR “FREE SPLIT.”
1. A parcel of land that has not been divided since the adoption of subdivision regulations may be divided into two (2) parcels of land without a subdivision approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. The Commission’s enforcement agent does not have the legal authority to determine whether any proposed or existing division of land constitutes a subdivision that would require the approval of the Commission. The Commission may make such a determination pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Branford.
3. Since the Commission’s enforcement agent cannot legally determine whether a parcel was created by a land division or lot line adjustment requiring the Commission’s approval under the Subdivision Regulations, any approval by the agent of a zoning permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall not be deemed to constitute a finding that no such Commission approval is necessary, nor shall it excuse the landowner from obtaining such Commission approval if legally necessary.
4. Any person who obtains a zoning permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance for any use of a parcel created by a division or lot line modification that has not been reviewed or approved by the Commission does so at his or her own risk.
SECTION 9.5
160 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.5 DESIGN REVIEW FOR THE TOWN CENTER VILLAGE DISTRICT. (TOWN CENTER REVITALIZATION REVIEW BOARD)
9.5.A Purpose.
The Town Center Revitalization Review Board serves as the Village District Consultant for the Town Center Village District in accordance with CGS Section 8-2j. The Town Center Revitalization Review Board may be asked to conduct both formal and informal reviews to determine whether, in their opinion, a proposal meets all of the Town Center design guidelines. Informal reviews may be conducted before the design of the project is completed and required documentation is developed for a formal application.
9.5.B Applicability.
All site plan and Special Exception applications involving properties located in the Town Center Village District shall be subject to this Design Review process.
9.5.C Professional Plans Required.
1. Site plan or building drawings required by these procedures shall be prepared a registered Professional Engineer, architect or landscape architect licensed in the State of Connecticut.
9.5.D Informal Review.
1. In order to facilitate the review and approval process, minimize delay, misunderstanding and cost, all applicants with projects requiring design review are encouraged to submit requests for informal review by the Town Center Revitalization Review Board.
2. An informal review may be scheduled by the Town Center Revitalization Review Board upon a written request by a landowner or prospective developer. Discussion may occur at a regular or special meeting of the Board.
3. To facilitate the informal review, the requesting party should submit, at a minimum, following documentation:
(1) Site plan.
(2) Building and / or sign schematic plan.
(3) Building and /or sign schematic elevations or perspective sketches.
(4) Photographs of the site from principal vantage points.
(5) Material samples and product literature (e.g. paint colors, lighting fixtures, roofing, siding etc.)
4. The Town Center Revitalization Review Board may make specific design recommendations for a subsequent meeting.
SECTION 9.5
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|161
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.5.E Formal Review.
1. The Town Center Revitalization Review Board will conduct a formal review upon the submission of a complete site plan or Special Exception application to the Planning and Zoning Office. The applicant must submit a copy of all application materials to said Board no later than the date upon which the application is submitted to the Commission.
2. This formal review will allow the Town Center Revitalization Review Board to determine if the proposal meets all of the design guidelines for the Branford Town Center Village District, as identified in Section 5.2.D.
3. Formal presentation materials required:
(1) Site photographs from the principal vantage points.
(2) Signage plan and elevations drawn to scale.
(3) Site plan.
(4) Site lighting.
(5) Architectural design.
(6) Material samples.
(7) Landscaping.
(8) Supporting information shall accompany each of the above-mentioned submittals to provide the Town Center Revitalization Review Board with sufficient data to determine compliance with the design Regulations.
9.5.F Town Center Revitalization Review Board Recommendation.
Following a review of the submission, the Town Center Revitalization Review Board will take one of four actions in referring the matter to the Planning and Zoning Commission:
1. Recommend acceptance of the application as submitted,
2. Recommend acceptance of the application with modifications as stated,
3. Recommend not accepting the application for specific reasons and request the matter be revised and resubmitted,
4. Recommend that the Commission take no action pending further discussion or resubmission.
SECTION 9.6
162 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.6 SITE PLAN APPLICATION. (COMMISSION)
9.6.A Objectives.
In reviewing any site plan under this Section, the Commission shall be concerned with the following objectives:
1. To promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, amenity and other aspects of the general welfare.
2. To ensure that the layout of the proposed use shall be in harmony with the surrounding area, and shall contribute to its desirable and orderly development.
3. To ensure that traffic generated by the proposed use will not adversely affect the surrounding area, and will not disrupt the orderly movement of vehicles and pedestrians in the area.
4. To protect and preserve the supply of potable drinking water by protecting and preserving subsurface aquifers.
9.6.B Applicability.
1. A site plan application shall be submitted for any activity designated in these Regulations as requiring a site plan approval.
2. A site plan application shall be submitted for any change in a previously approved Site Plan if such change would alter any feature that is required to be shown on the site plan.
3. Notwithstanding the above, a site plan application shall not be required for interior renovations and modifications for space within a structure previously approved by the Commission as a site plan application provided that:
(1) The uses for which such changes are to be made have received all other permits required by these Regulations,
(2) There are no exterior alterations to the structure or the site,
(3) There is no additional requirement for parking based upon interior layouts submitted by the applicant, and
(4) The site is in compliance with all aspects of a previously approved site plan.
4. All site plan revisions must bring into conformance, to the extent practicable, all aspects of the site that do not conform to current Regulations.
9.6.C Application Requirements.
1. A site plan application shall be accompanied by four (4) full-size (24” x 36”) and 12 reduced-size (11” x 17” or 12” x 18”) copies of detailed Site Development Plans, signed and sealed by an appropriate professional, that comply with the requirements in the Appendix of these Regulations.
2. Waiver of Required Application Documentation. Upon written request by the applicant identifying specific sections of the application requirements from which he requests exemption and reasons justifying such request, the Commission may by resolution waive the required submission of all or part of the information required if the Commission finds that the information is not necessary in order to decide on the application.
3. Request for Additional Documentation. The Commission may, in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations and the Appendix of these Regulations, require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
SECTION 9.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|163
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.6.D Proceedings.
1. Proceedings on site plan applications shall be in accordance with Section 9.6 of these Regulations.
2. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
9.6.E Coordination for Other Agency Review.
1. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses. On a site plan application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall:
(1) Wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission has submitted a report with its final decision, and
(2) Give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission when making its decision.
2. Coastal Area Management. On a site plan application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-90- to 22a-110, inclusive, the Commission shall also review the application in accordance with Section 9.7 of these Regulations.
3. Floodplain. On a site plan application involving an activity in a floodplain pursuant to the Flood-Plain Management Ordinance of the Town of Branford, the Commission shall transmit a copy of the application to the Town Engineer for a report. If the Commission does not receive a report or a request for additional time from the Town Engineer within 35 days after transmitting a copy of the application, the Commission may, but shall not be obliged to, assume that the Town Engineer has no objection to the application. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the Commission from accepting a report from the Town Engineer more than 35 days after a copy of the application was transmitted, regardless of whether the Town Engineer has expressly requested additional time.
4. Design Review. On a site plan application involving business or multi-family residential activities, Design Review will be required in accordance with the following:
(1) Applications involving property(ies) within the Town Center Village District in accordance with Section 9.5.
(2) Applications involving property(ies) outside the Town Center Village District, in accordance with Section 6.14.
5. On a site plan application involving notice to adjoining municipalities 9.14.H or notice to water companies 0, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
9.6.F Decision Considerations.
1. Before the Commission may approve a site plan application, it must determine that the application is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations.
2. Before the Commission may approve a site plan application, it shall evaluate compliance with Section 6, Basic Standards and the Zoning District for which the property is located.
SECTION 9.6
164 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.6.G Procedures and Powers.
1. In any submission under this Section, the Commission may approve or disapprove the proposed plan, or may approve it subject to appropriate modifications, conditions and safeguards designed to further the general purposes of these Regulations and the specific purposes indicated above. Any Certificate of Occupancy issued for such approved uses shall be subject to continued conformity with those modifications, conditions and safeguards.
2. The Commission or Zoning Enforcement Officer may require that a financial guarantee be posted, in an amount and form acceptable to the Town, to ensure:
(1) That adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed and maintained, before any Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued for activities shown on the approved plan, and
(2) That all of the improvements shown on the approved plan are implemented before a Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance related to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy is granted.
3. As an alternative to full project completion prior to issuance of final zoning compliance the applicant may post a financial guarantee for the remaining work. The financial guarantee amount shall be determined by the Town Engineer based on a breakdown of remaining project elements provided by the applicant. Financial guarantees shall be in accordance with Section 10.3. The financial guarantee amount shall include costs incurred for administration should the financial guarantee need to be called upon.
9.6.H Action Documentation.
1. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
2. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of site plans to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Branford within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
3. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15 day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such plan may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
4. On any application for which the period for approval has expired and on which no action has been taken, the Commission shall send a letter of approval to the applicant within 15 days of the date on which the period for approval expired and such letter of approval shall state the date on which the five-year completion period expires.
SECTION 9.6
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|165
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.6.I Post Approval Actions.
1. Following approval of a site plan application, the applicant shall submit:
(1) one (1) paper set of Final Plans (24” x 36”) with:
(1) the raised seal and original signature of the professional who prepared the drawings, and
(2) a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission or Zoning Enforcement Officer can indicate the approval of the Commission.
(2) An electronic copy of the Final Plans.
9.6.J Expiration and Completion.
1. All work in connection with a site plan shall be completed within five (5) years after the date of approval of the plan. Failure to complete all work within such five (5) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such site plan unless the Commission shall have granted an extension of the time to complete work in connection with such site plan.
2. The Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection with the site plan provided the total extension or extensions shall not exceed ten (10) years from the date of approval of such site plan.
The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a determination of the adequacy of any financial guarantee or other surety.
SECTION 9.7
166 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.7 COASTAL SITE PLAN REVIEW. (COMMISSION)
9.7.A Application Requirements.
1. When required, an application for approval of a coastal site plan shall be submitted to the Commission on a form prescribed by the Commission. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Sections 22a-105 and 22a-106, a Coastal Site Plan shall include the following information:
(1) A plan showing the location and spatial relationship of coastal resources on and contiguous to the site;
(2) A description of the entire project with appropriate plans, indicating project location, design, timing, and methods of construction;
(3) An assessment of the suitability of the project for the proposed site;
(4) An evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project; and
(5) A description of proposed methods to mitigate adverse effects on coastal resources.
2. In addition, the applicant shall demonstrate that the adverse impacts of the proposed activity are acceptable and that such activity is consistent with the coastal policies of CGS 22a-92.
9.7.B Statutory Criteria.
In addition to determining compliance with any other applicable standards, requirements or criteria set forth by these Regulations the Commission shall review coastal site plans for compliance with the following criteria established in CGS 22a-106;
1. Consistency of the proposed activity with the applicable coastal policies in CGS 22a-92;
2. The acceptability of potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources, as defined in CGS 22a-93(15);
3. The acceptability of potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on future water dependent development opportunities, as defined in CGS 22a-93(17); and
4. The adequacy of any measures taken to mitigate the adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources and future water dependent development opportunities.
9.7.C Proceedings.
1. If the Coastal Site Plan is part of a Special Exception, Site Plan or Variance application, the hearing notification requirements, time limits for making a decision, and decision publication and notification requirements shall be the same as those set forth in the General Statutes for the type of permit or approval being requested.
2. If the Coastal Site Plan is part of a Zoning Permit application, the procedures for Commission review shall be the same as those for Site Plan review under Section 9.6.
SECTION 9.7
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|167
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.7.D Commission Action.
1. The Commission shall approve, modify, condition or deny the coastal site plan for the proposed activity on the basis of the criteria listed in CGS Section 22a-106 to ensure that the proposed activity is consistent with the coastal policies in CGS Section 22a-92 and that the potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on both coastal resources and future water dependent development opportunities are acceptable. Pursuant to CGS Section 22a-106 the Commission shall state in writing the findings and reasons for its action with respect to any coastal site plan approved, conditioned, modified or denied.
2. Further, in approving any coastal site plan, the Commission shall make a written finding that:
(1) The proposed activity as approved is consistent with the coastal policies CGS Section 22a-92,
(2) The proposed activity incorporates as conditions or modifications all reasonable measures which would mitigate potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources and future water dependent development activities, and
(3) The potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources and future water-dependent development opportunities, with any conditions or modifications imposed by the Commission, are acceptable.
3. A coastal site plan for a shoreline flood and erosion control structure may be modified, conditioned or denied if it fails to comply with the requirements, standards and criteria of CGS Sections 22a-359 to 22a-363, inclusive, and any regulations adopted thereunder.
9.7.E Post Approval Actions.
If a coastal site plan application is the only zoning application required, then the applicant shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Office one (1) set of Final Plans (24” x 36”) bearing a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town regulatory agencies authorizing the activity, and containing a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission or Zoning Enforcement Officer can indicate the approval of the Commission. An electronic copy of the final approved coastal site plans shall also be submitted.
9.7.F Violations.
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-108, any activity undertaken within the Coastal Boundary without the required coastal site plan review and approval, shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be subject to enforcement remedies authorized in that Section.
SECTION 9.8
168 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.8 SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION. (COMMISSION)
9.8.A Applicability.
1. A Special Exception application shall be submitted for any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Special Exception approval.
2. A Special Exception application shall be submitted for any change in a previously approved Special Exception if such change would alter any feature that is required to be shown on the site plan or would significantly or materially change the nature of the approved use.
3. Notwithstanding the above, a Special Exception shall not be required for signage or interior renovations and modifications for space within a structure previously approved by the Commission as a site plan application under Section 9.6, or as a Special Exception under these Regulations, provided that:
(1) The uses for which such changes are to be made have received all other permits required by these Regulations,
(2) There are no exterior alterations to the structure or the site,
(3) There is no additional requirement for parking, and
(4) The site is in compliance with all aspects of a previously approved site plan.
(5) The nature of the approved use would not be significantly or materially changed.
9.8.B Application Requirements.
1. Each application for a Special Exception shall be accompanied by a site plan application unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that there are no physical changes proposed to the site or any building or structure and the submission of a site plan application is not necessary for the Commission to evaluate the proposal.
2. A Special Exception Application shall be accompanied by 12 copies of the following information:
(1) A detailed statement describing the existing and proposed use or uses,
(2) A detailed statement describing how the Special Exception criteria in Section 9.8.F are addressed, and
(3) Any approval that may have been received from any local, regional, State or Federal agency or department having jurisdiction over any aspect of the application.
3. Waiver of Required Application Documentation. Upon written request by the applicant, identifying specific sections of the application requirements from which he requests exemption and reasons justifying such request, the Commission may by resolution waive the required submission of all or part of the information required if the Commission finds that the information is not necessary in order to decide on the application.
4. Request for Additional Documentation. The Commission may in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations and the Appendix of these Regulations, require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a informed review of the application.
5. If a Special Exception Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
SECTION 9.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|169
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
6. Where the Commission determines that, because of the particular size, location or nature of a proposal, the public interest would be best served by a three-dimensional (3D) physical representation or a computer simulation of the project, the Commission may require that the applicant provide a digital model of the proposal or a physical model of the proposal at such appropriate scale as the Commission may require. The Commission may also require that the model include 3D representations of all or portions of the abutting properties where this would significantly aid the Commission and the public to visualize and understand the proposal.
9.8.C Proceedings.
1. Proceedings on Special Exception applications shall be in accordance with Section 9.8 of these Regulations.
2. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application.
3. The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that all applicable Special Exception Criteria in these Regulations are addressed.
9.8.D Coordination for Other Agency Review.
1. Inland Wetlands and Watercourses. On a Special Exception Application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall:
(1) Wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission has submitted a report with its final decision, and
(2) Give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission when making its decision.
2. Coastal Area Management. On a Special Exception Application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS Sections 22a-90- to 22a-110, inclusive, the Commission shall review a coastal site plan application in accordance with Section 9.7 of these Regulations.
3. Floodplain.
(1) On a Special Exception Application involving an activity in a floodplain pursuant to the Flood-Plain Management Ordinance of the Town of Branford, the Commission shall transmit a copy of the application to the Town Engineer for a report. If the Commission does not receive a report or a request for additional time from the Town Engineer within 35 days after transmitting a copy of the application, the Commission may, but shall not be obliged to, assume that the Town Engineer has no objection to the application. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Commission from accepting a report from the Town Engineer more than 35 days after a copy of the application was transmitted, regardless of whether the Town Engineer has expressly requested additional time.
(2) Any Special Exception proposed to be established in any Flood Plain District shall be located and designed to be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area and shall conform to all of the standards and provisions of the Flood-Plain Management Ordinance of the Town of Branford or such legal variance as may be approved thereunder.
SECTION 9.8
170 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
4. Design Review. On a Special Exception Application involving business or multi-family residential activities, Design Review will be required in accordance with the following:
(1) Applications involving property(ies) within the Town Center Village District in accordance with Section 9.5.
(2) Applications involving property(ies) outside the Town Center Village District, in accordance with Section 6.14.
5. On a Special Exception Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities (Section 9.14.H) , notice to water companies (Section 9.14.I), or notice to a regional planning agency (Section 9.14.J), the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
9.8.E Decision Considerations.
1. Before the Commission may approve a Special Exception application, it must determine that the application is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations, including any applicable Special Exception criteria.
2. Before the Commission may grant a Special Exception, it must determine that any accompanying site plan application is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations.
3. In granting a Special Exception, the Commission may stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety or welfare; property values; the environment; sound planning and zoning principles; improved land use, site planning and land development; or better overall neighborhood compatibility. Such conditions may also be imposed as a prerequisite to the issuance of the Zoning Permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
4. Any condition or safeguard attached to the granting of a Special Exception:
(1) Shall remain with the property as long as the Special Exception use is still in operation, and
(2) Shall continue in force and effect regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
9.8.F Special Exception Criteria.
In considering any application for a Special Exception, the Commission shall evaluate the merit of the application with respect to the following factors:
1. The proposed use must be consistent with the current Branford Plan of Conservation and Development.
2. The location and size of the site, the nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in connection with the use, and the location of the site with respect to streets giving access to it must be such that the use will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development in the district in which it is located and will promote the welfare of the Town.
3. The design elements of the proposed development must be attractive and suitable in relation to the site characteristics, the style of other buildings in the immediate area, and the existing and probable future character of the neighborhood in which the use is to be located.
4. The location, nature and height of buildings, walls, and fences, and the nature and extent of planned activities and landscaping on the site must be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.
SECTION 9.8
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|171
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
5. The proposed use or activity must have no adverse effect upon the neighboring area resulting from the use of signs, exposed artificial lights, colored lights of any nature, flashing lights, loudspeakers or other noisemaking devices.
6. In cases where it is proposed to convert a structure designed and built originally for other uses, the structure must be adaptable to the proposed use from the point of view of public health and safety.
7. The design, location and specific details of the proposed use or activity must not adversely affect safety in the streets nor unreasonably increase traffic congestion in the area nor interfere with the pattern of vehicular circulation in such a manner as to create or worsen unsafe traffic conditions.
8. Parking area or areas must be of adequate size for the particular use, and be suitably screened from adjoining residential uses, and entrance and exit drives must be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances.
9. Streets, drives and other rights-of-way must be of such size, condition and capacity (in terms of capacity, width, grade, alignment and visibility) to adequately accommodate the traffic to be generated by the particular proposed use.
10. The provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, and storm water drainage must conform to accepted engineering practices, comply with all standards of the appropriate regulatory authority, and must not unduly burden the capacity of such facilities.
11. The proposed use or activity must provide easy accessibility for fire apparatus and police protection and must be laid out and equipped to further the provision of emergency services.
12. Appropriate consideration shall be given to the protection, preservation, and/or enhancement of natural, scenic, historic, and unique resources including, where appropriate, the use of conservation restrictions to protect and permanently preserve natural, scenic, historic, or unique features which enhance the character and environment of the area.
13. Adequate provision must be made for the sustained maintenance of the proposed development (structures, streets, and other improvements).
9.8.G Commission Decision.
1. Following the public hearing, the Commission may approve, disapprove or approve with modifications and/or conditions the proposed Special Exception use.
2. Because of the variety and peculiarities of each Special Exception use, the Commission may impose conditions and restrictions to any such use which in its judgment are required to protect adjacent uses and the neighborhood in general.
9.8.H Action Documentation.
1. The decision to grant a Special Exception shall:
(1) State the name of the owner of record,
(2) Contain a description of the premises to which it relates,
(3) Identify the Section and/or Section of the Regulations under which the Special Exception was granted or denied, and
(4) Specifically describe the Special Exception issued by the Commission.
2. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
3. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Special Exception Application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Branford within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
4. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15 day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such plan may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
SECTION 9.8
172 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.8.I Post Approval Actions.
1. Following approval of a Special Exception Application, the applicant shall submit a final plan to the Planning and Zoning Department:
(1) Bearing the raised seal and signature of the appropriate professionals who prepared the drawing(s),
(2) Bearing a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town regulatory agencies authorizing the activity, and
(3) Containing a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission.
2. Following signature by the Chairman, the applicant shall file said plans in the office of the Town Clerk before any Certificate of Zoning Compliances are issued for the activities shown on the approved plan. A Special Exception granted by the Commission shall only become effective upon the filing of a certificate, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the Town in accordance with the provisions of CGS 8-3d.
3. The applicant shall also submit application documents in an electronic format in accordance with Planning and Zoning Department requirements.
4. A Special Exception shall authorize only the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's approval.
5. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a violation of these Regulations and the Commission shall have the authority, after a hearing, to revoke the permit at any time the operation is found to be in noncompliance with the original permit.
6. A Special Exception may be amended or modified in like manner as provided above for the granting of a Special Exception except that amendments which shall be found to be of a minor nature or which do not materially alter the Special Exception, as determined by the Commission, may be authorized with Commission approval only, without another public hearing.
7. Modifications.
(1) Any modifications that decrease the dimensional elements (e.g. reduction of building size) or proposes a change of use that requires a Site Plan shall follow the Site Plan Procedures in Section 9.6.
(2) Any modifications that increase the dimensional elements in the Master Plan (e.g. expansion of building size) or propose a change of use that requires a Special Exception shall follow the Special Exception Procedures in Section 9.8.
9.8.J Expiration and Completion.
1. A Special Exception will expire if all work in connection with any accompanying, approved site plan is not completed within five (5) years after the date of approval of the plan, unless the Commission shall have granted an extension of the time to complete such work.
2. The Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection with the site plan provided the total extension or extensions shall not exceed ten (10) years from the date of approval of such site plan.
3. The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a determination of the adequacy of any financial guarantee or other surety.
SECTION 9.9
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|173
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.9 REGULATION AMENDMENT. (COMMISSION)
9.9.A Application Requirements.
1. A Regulation Amendment Application (petition) shall be submitted for any proposal to amend, change, or repeal any Section of these Regulations.
2. Any such application shall be accompanied by 12 copies of the precise wording of the existing and proposed text and any other supporting information.
3. The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the petition.
4. A Regulation Amendment Application shall be submitted only by:
(1) An owner of real property in Branford,
(2) Residents or persons having a legal interest in land in Town, or
(3) By the Commission on its own initiative.
5. The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition or petitions relating to the same changes, or substantially the same changes, more than once in a period of 12 months unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section.
9.9.B Proceedings.
1. Proceedings on petitions to amend the Zoning Regulations shall be in accordance with Section 9.9 of these Regulations.
2. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such petition.
3. These Zoning Regulation(s) shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within 500 feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the Commission.
9.9.C Decision Considerations.
1. The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Regulation Amendment Application.
2. Any report from an adjacent municipality or a regional planning agency shall be made a part of the record of such hearing.
3. On a Regulation Amendment Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities, water companies, or a regional planning agency, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
4. In making its decision the Commission shall take into consideration the Plan of Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS Section 8-23.
5. Before approving any Regulation Amendment Application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed regulation change will aid in:
(1) Protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and
(2) Attaining the purposes of these Regulations.
SECTION 9.9
174 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.9.D Effective Date.
Unless otherwise expressly provided for by the Commission, an Amendment to the Zoning Regulations shall become effective on the sixteenth day after the date upon which the decision was made to approve such Amendment. The Commission may, in its discretion, specify an alternative effective date.
9.9.E Action Documentation.
1. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Regulation Amendment Application to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
2. The Commission shall cause notice of the decision on the Regulation Amendment Application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Branford no later than the earlier of the following dates:
(1) 15 days after the date such decision is rendered; or
(2) The day before the effective date. Any such notice of approval shall identify the effective date established by the Commission.
3. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15 day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
4. A copy of any approved Zoning Regulation Amendment must be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date.
5. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Regulation Amendment Application, it shall state upon the record the reasons for its decision, provided, however, that if the Commission fails to state its reasons, such failure shall not invalidate the decision except as otherwise may be required under state law.
6. In making its decision, the Commission shall state upon the record its findings on consistency of the proposed establishment, change or repeal of such Regulations with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended, provided, however, that if the Commission fails to state its findings, such failure shall not invalidate the decision except as otherwise may be required under state law.
SECTION 9.10
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|175
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.10 MAP AMENDMENT. (COMMISSION)
9.10.A Application Requirements.
1. A petition (application) to amend the Zoning Map (i.e., to amend the boundaries of zoning districts) shall:
(1) Be signed by the affected property owner(s); or
(2) Be initiated by petition, provided that the petitioner(s) shall notify by certificate of mailing all property owners who have not cosigned the petition but whose premises are included within the area proposed for the Zoning Map Amendment (zone change); or
(3) Be commenced by the Commission on its own initiative; or
(4) Be commenced by the Commission in response to a petition, duly signed and acknowledged, requesting change or modification of the official Zoning Map; and
(5) Include maps of existing and proposed zones, scale, parcels, property addresses, where known, and assessors’ map references for each parcel.
2. The following special zoning districts require the submission of a Master Plan at the time of submission of a petition for a Zoning Map Amendment:
(1) Planned Development District – Section 5.4.
3. The Commission shall not be required to hear a petition for a Zoning Map Amendment that has been rejected within one (1) year from the date of rejection unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in circumstances justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in circumstances for the purpose of this Section.
9.10.B Proceedings.
1. Proceedings on petitions to amend the Zoning Map (i.e., to amend boundaries of zoning districts) shall be in accordance with Section 9.10 of these Regulations.
2. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such petition.
3. The boundaries of zoning districts shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within 500 feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the Commission.
4. The Commission shall require that the applicant give notice to nearby property owners in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.14.G of these Regulations. Applications initiated by the Commission are exempt from this requirement.
5. A copy of the proposed Zoning Map Amendment shall be filed by the Commission in the Office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the public hearing.
6. The applicant may withdraw a petition to amend the Zoning Map at any time prior to action by the Commission.
SECTION 9.10
176 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.10.C Decision Considerations.
1. On a Zoning Map Amendment, the Commission shall incorporate into the record, and give due consideration to, any report or testimony received from:
(1) An adjoining municipality,
(2) A regional planning agency, and
(3) The South-central Connecticut Water Authority (public water company) and the Commissioner of Public Health.
2. Whenever it grants or denies a Zoning Map Amendment, the Commission shall state upon its record:
(1) The reason(s) for its decision, and
(2) The findings on consistency of the proposed Zoning Map Amendment with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended.
9.10.D Effective Date.
Unless otherwise expressly provided for by the Commission, such Zoning Map Amendment shall become effective on the sixteenth day after the date upon which the decision was made to approve such amendment. The Commission may, in its discretion, specify an alternative effective date.
9.10.E Action Documentation.
1. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Zoning Map Amendment to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
2. The Commission shall cause notice of the decision on the Zoning Map Amendment to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Branford no later than the earlier of the following dates: (1) 15 days after the date such decision is rendered; or (2) the day before the effective date. Any such notice of approval shall identify the effective date established by the Commission.
3. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15 day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
4. A copy of any approved Zoning Map Amendment must be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date.
9.10.F Adoption of a Master Plan.
1. When a Master Plan is required, the Commission shall act upon the application in accordance with the procedures for a Zoning Map Amendment.
2. The Master Plan shall be established as the district criteria (bulk requirements, and permitted uses) for the subject parcel(s). The specific bulk requirements, total building coverage and square footage, along with proposed uses shall be depicted in a Table that is incorporated into the Master Plan documents.
3. A Master Plan shall be accompanied by schematic drawings and documentation necessary for the Commission to evaluate the proposal. The Master Plan should also include a Table that identifies the following elements:
(1) Proposed uses and amount of land use area (square feet or acres),
(2) Proposed total amount of impervious surface (square feet or acres),
(3) Proposed total amount of building development (coverage and floor area), (square feet or acres), and
(4) Proposed maximum permitted building height and locations where height requirements will be applied.
4. A Master Plan shall be accompanied by 12 copies of the following information:
(1) Location and size of property, including a boundary map with an accuracy meeting or exceeding standards for a “Class A-2 Transit Survey” as defined by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. which map is to show the precise
SECTION 9.10
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|177
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
boundaries of the proposed District, as well as existing zoning boundaries and the boundaries of any officially designated wetland areas;
(2) Present and proposed buildings and structures including use, dimensions and locations of each;
(3) A traffic study including proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
(4) Location of proposed off-street parking facilities with dimensions, including location, size and number of parking spaces, access drives and walkways;
(5) Proposed open areas such as parks, lawn area, and recreational facilities;
(6) Existing and proposed landscaping treatment, including major tree areas, water bodies and related treatment of open space areas, screening, and existing and proposed topography;
(7) Utility information including water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, including capacity of water courses and the additional flow being produced, electrical service and exterior lighting;
(8) A location map showing the site’s situation within the Town’s circulation system and all streets and intersections within 1,000 feet of the site;
(9) A detailed statement describing the existing and proposed use or uses, and
(10) The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
5. Other Agency Review.
The Commission shall request:
(1) A statement from the Town Sanitarian on the adequacy of solid waste disposal and, if no public sewers are available, the adequacy of private sewage disposal systems;
(2) A statement from the Police Commission as to whether the proposal will cause any undue traffic hazards;
(3) A statement from the Fire Marshal as to whether the proposal meets fire safety standards and concerning the fire fighting feasibility of the proposed plan;
(4) A statement from the Town Engineer in reference to the adequacy of the basic drainage, public street design and the design of elements to be served by the Public Works Department of the Town;
(5) A statement from any other municipal department or advisory committee whose opinion is deemed appropriate by the Commission.
6. Master Plan Findings Required. The Commission may adopt a Master Plan only if the Commission makes the following findings in addition to other findings necessary for the amendment of these Regulations:
(1) Another existing zoning district could not be appropriately established to accomplish such purposes;
(2) The petitioner has provided, where appropriate, for the continued maintenance of the development in general, including those open space and recreational areas not dedicated for general public use;
(3) The streets and drives will be suitable and adequate to accommodate anticipated traffic and projected development intensity will not generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street system in the area;
(4) The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed development and the utilities and drainage have been so arranged as to not overburden the capacity of the facilities connected therewith.
7. Following approval of a Master Plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit two (2) fixed-line mylar copies of the approved plan(s) to the Planning and Zoning Department. The mylars must:
(1) Comply with CGS Section 7-31; i.e., by bearing the raised seal and signature of the appropriate professionals who prepared the drawing(s),
SECTION 9.10
178 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(2) Bear a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town regulatory agencies authorizing the activity, and
(3) Contain a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission.
8. The Zoning Map shall be modified to reflect such change and shall contain a notation giving reference to the Master Plan.
9. Following signature by the Chairman, the applicant shall file said plans in the office of the Town Clerk before any Certificate of Zoning Compliances are issued for the activities shown on the approved plan. A Master Plan approved by the Commission shall become effective only upon the filing of a copy, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the Town in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-3d.
10. A Master Plan shall only authorize the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's approval.
11. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a violation of these Regulations and the Commission shall, after a hearing, have the authority to revoke the permit at any time the operation is found to be in noncompliance with the original permit.
SECTION 9.11
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|179
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.11 MOTOR VEHICLE LOCATION APPROVAL. (COMMISSION)
9.11.A Application Requirements Dealing and Repairing Motor Vehicles.
In accordance with CGS Section 14-54, an application for a Certificate of Location Approval shall be submitted to the Commission by any person who desires to obtain a license for dealing in or repairing motor vehicles in Branford except that this requirement shall not apply to:
1. A transfer of ownership to a spouse, child, brother, sister or parent of a licensee;
2. A transfer of ownership to or from a corporation in which a spouse, child, brother, sister, or parent of a licensee has a controlling interest; or
3. A change in ownership involving the withdrawal of one (1) or more partners from a partnership.
9.11.B Application Requirements Sale of Gasoline.
In accordance with CGS Section 14-321, an application for a Certificate of Location Approval shall be submitted to the Commission by any person who desires to obtain a license for the sale of gasoline or any other product, under the provisions of CGS Section 14-319, including the alteration or changing of adjoining physical properties for such purposes, except that this requirement shall not apply:
1. In the case of a renewal of a license by the holder of the license;
2. To the transfer of the last issued license from a licensee to another provided no more than one (1) year has elapsed since the expiration of such license; or
3. In the case of the addition or discontinuance of pumps.
9.11.C Proceedings.
In reviewing a Certificate of Location Approval application, the Commission acts as an agent of the State of Connecticut, not in a zoning capacity, and the notice provisions and other provisions of CGS Chapter 124 shall not apply. As an agent of the State of Connecticut, the Commission serves solely to determine whether a Certificate of Location Approval should be issued.
9.11.D Public Hearing May Be Held.
The Commission may hold a public hearing on the Certificate of Location Approval application and, if such hearing is to be held:
1. Shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.14.F of these Regulations, and
2. May require that the applicant give notice to nearby property owners in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.14.G of these Regulations.
9.11.E Withdrawal of Application.
The applicant may withdraw such Certificate of Location Approval Application at any time prior to action by the Commission.
SECTION 9.12
180 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.12 APPEAL OF AN ORDER. (ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS)
9.12.A Authority.
In accordance with CGS Section 8-7, an appeal may be taken to the Board by any person aggrieved, where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
9.13 VARIANCE. (ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS)
9.13.A Authority.
In accordance with CGS Section 8-6, the Board shall have the power and duty to determine and vary the application of the Regulations solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of these Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
9.13.B Additional Considerations for Use Variances.
1. No use variance shall be granted where a dimensional variance would relieve the exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
2. No use variance for a business use or an industrial use shall be granted in a Residential Zone.
3. No use variance shall be granted for an industrial use in any Business or Special Zone.
4. A use variance shall only be granted where, without the use variance, the private property would be rendered valueless.
5. For any Use Variance application, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall refer the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Zoning Board shall provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with 35 days to review and comment on the application.
SECTION 9.14
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|181
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.14 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL APPLICATIONS.
9.14.A Application Submission Requirements.
1. Applications to the Commission shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department.
2. Applications shall be submitted on forms obtained from the Planning and Zoning Department for the type of application being submitted.
3. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) except that the Commission or the Town shall be exempt from any application fee.
4. Applications shall be submitted with such supporting plans, materials, and other information as required by these Regulations.
5. Applications shall be signed by the applicant and, if applicable, the owner of the property affected or the authorized agent or representative of the owner.
9.14.B Date of Receipt.
For the purposes of calculating the timeframes for processing applications, the date of receipt of an application to the Commission shall be determined in accordance with state law. At the time of adoption of this Section, the relevant statute was CGS Section 8-7d, which provided that the date of receipt shall be the earlier of:
1. The day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Planning and Zoning Department; or
2. Thirty-five days after submission.
9.14.C Incomplete Applications.
1. Each application shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Department to determine whether the application is substantially complete.
2. An application requiring approval from the Commission shall not be considered actually complete until all of the information as required by these Regulations or the Commission, has been received by the Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting.
3. The Commission may deny an incomplete application or any application submitted without the requisite fee.
9.14.D Sequence of Hearings.
Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the Commission may conduct any public hearings simultaneously or in the order it deems appropriate.
9.14.E Consultations.
1. On any application, the Commission may seek the advice and opinion of other officials, boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating applications.
2. On any application, the Commission may retain an architect, landscape architect, professional land use planner, or other consultant to review, comment, and guide its deliberations and, to the extent allowed by Town ordinance, require that the applicant:
(1) Deposit funds with the Commission for the costs of any consulting review fees, or
(2) Reimburse the Commission for the cost of such consulting review.
SECTION 9.14
182 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.14.F Notice by Newspaper.
Notices of public hearings shall be published in accordance with applicable state law. At the time of adoption of this Section, CGS Section 8-7d required publication of notices in the following circumstances and manner:
1. When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled by the Commission, the Planning and Zoning Department shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Branford.
2. Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than 15 days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date of the hearing.
9.14.G Notification of Abutting Property Owners.
1. For all applications that will require the Commission to hold a public hearing, except amendments to these Regulations, the applicant shall mail written notice to the following persons as required by this Section:
(1) The owners of all parcels of land that are the subject of the application.
(2) All persons owning property, any portion of which is within 100 feet of the land that is the subject of the application.
2. Said notice shall include, at a minimum:
(1) The date, time and location (street address) of the public hearing;
(2) The street address of all parcels that are the subject of the application or, if such parcels do not have a street address, adequate geographical information to allow the recipient of the notice to determine the location of the parcels with respect to the nearest street intersection; and
(3) The nature of the application (e.g., site plan, special exception, zone change). The notice shall be sent by mail, at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing. A Certificate of Mailing from the US Post Office of said written notice shall be conclusive evidence of compliance with the provisions of the Section.
3. Property owners, for the purpose of this Section, shall be as they appear on the property street cards in the Town Assessor’s office on the date of application, and distances shall be determined from the Assessor’s tax maps on the date of said application.
4. Failure to mail such notice to any person or persons shall not in any way invalidate the public hearing, but the Commission may deny an application if it finds that such failure has, or may have, caused prejudice to any intended recipient.
SECTION 9.14
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|183
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.14.H Notification of Abutting Municipalities.
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-7d(f), the Commission shall notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application concerning any project on any site in which:
(1) Any portion of the property affected by a decision is within 500 feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality;
(2) A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project shall use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
(3) A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project shall flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or
(4) Water runoff from the improved site shall impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
2. Such notice shall be made by certificate of mailing requested and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the day of the submission to the Planning and Zoning Department of the application, petition, request or plan.
3. No hearing shall be conducted on any application, petition, request or plan unless the adjoining municipality has received the notice required under this Section.
9.14.I Notification of Water Companies.
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3i, an applicant shall provide written notice to the South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority and the Commissioner of Public Health when an application, petition, request or plan is filed with the Commission concerning any project on any site that is within:
(1) An aquifer protection area, provided such area has been delineated in accordance with CGS Section 22a-354c; or
(2) The watershed of the South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority , provided said Authority or said Commissioner has filed a map with the Commission and on the Branford land records showing the boundaries of the watershed.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail; return receipt requested and shall be mailed not later than seven (7) days after the date of the day of the submission to the Planning and Zoning Department.
3. Prior to the scheduled meeting regarding the application, the applicant shall submit the following to the Planning and Zoning Department or the application shall be considered incomplete:
(1) A copy of all notices and other documentation sent to the South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority and/or the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in accordance with this Section; and
(2) Proof of mailing.
SECTION 9.14
184 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
9.14.J Notification of Regional Planning Agency.
In accordance with CGS Section 8-3b, the Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of any land affected by a regulation change is located within 500 feet of the boundary of another municipality and:
1. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested.
2. Such notice shall be made not later than 30 days before the date of the public hearing.
3. The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal.
9.14.K Notification of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
Pursuant to CGS Section 22a-103, the Commission shall give written notice to the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection when any application relates to property within the Coastal Area Management boundary and for any regulation amendment that affects property located within said Boundary.
9.14.L Notification of a Property subject to a Conservation or Preservation Restriction.
In accordance with CGS Section 47-42d, for property subject to a conservation or preservation restriction as defined in CGS Section 47-42a, and where activity is proposed within the restricted area, the applicant must submit either:
1. A notarized statement certifying that the applicant provided written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, not later than 60 days prior to the filing of the application to the party holding the conservation restriction; or
2. A letter from the holder of such restriction or the holder’s authorized agent verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
This Section shall not apply to any proposed activity that involves only interior work in an existing building or exterior work that does not expand or alter the footprint of an existing building.
9.14.M Beneficiaries of a Trust.
Any person who makes an application to the Commission pertaining to real property, the record title to which is held by a trustee of any trust, shall file with said application a sworn statement disclosing the name(s) of the equitable owner (s) of such real property or the beneficiary(ies) of the trust.
SECTION 9.15
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|185
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
SECTION
9
PROCEDURES
Administration
9.15 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGN REVIEW FOR THE STONY CREEK VILLAGE DISTRICT. (Refer to section 5.8 for regulations and guidelines)
9.15.A Professional Plans Required.
Site plan or building drawings required by these procedures shall be prepared an Engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed in the State of Connecticut.
9.15.B Informal Review.
1. In order to facilitate the review and approval process, minimize delay, misunderstanding and costs; all applicants with projects requiring design review are encouraged to submit requests for informal review by the Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board.
2. An informal review may be scheduled by the Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board upon a written request by a landowner or prospective developer. Discussion may occur at a regular or special meeting of the Board.
3. To facilitate the informal review, the requesting party should submit, at a minimum, following documentation:
(1) Site plan.
(2) Building and / or sign schematic plan.
(3) Building and /or sign schematic elevations or perspective sketches.
(4) Photographs of the site from principal vantage points.
(5) Material samples and product literature (e.g. paint colors, lighting fixtures, roofing, siding etc.)
4. The Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board may make specific design recommendations for a subsequent meeting.
9.15.C Formal Review.
1. The Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board shall conduct a formal review upon the submission of a complete site plan or Special Exception application to the Planning and Zoning Office for all new construction, substantial reconstruction or rehabilitation of properties within the Stony Creek Village District and in view from public roadways. Additionally, new uses or changes in use that require changes in exterior design elements are subject to review.
2. This formal review will allow the Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board to determine if the proposal meets all of the design guidelines for the Stony Creek Village District, as identified in Section 5.8.E.
3. Formal presentation materials required:
(1) Site photographs from the principal vantage points.
(2) Signage plan and elevations drawn to scale.
(3) Site plan.
(4) Site lighting.
(5) Architectural design.
(6) Material samples.
(7) Landscaping.
(8) Supporting information shall accompany each of the above-mentioned submittals to provide the Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board with sufficient data to determine compliance with the design guidelines.
SECTION 9.15
186 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
4. The Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board shall report to the Commission within thirty-five days of receipt of the application a written recommendation concerning whether, or not, the configuration, size, height, location, proportion of openings, roof treatments, and building materials of proposed new construction and/or the enlargement, extension, reconstruction, or structural alteration of existing structures is compatible with the local architectural motif and the maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments and landscaping within the Stony Creek Village District. The recommendation shall be for one of the following:
(1) for acceptance of the application as submitted;
(2) for acceptance of the application with modifications as stated;
(3) for denial of the application for specific reasons and request for revision and re-submittal;
(4) that the Commission take no action pending further discussion or resubmission.
5. Such report and recommendation shall be entered into the public record and considered by the Commission in making its decision concerning the approval or denial of the site plan or Special Exception application.
6. Failure of the Stony Creek Village District Architectural Review Board to report within 35 days shall not alter or delay any other time limit imposed by the Branford Zoning Ordinance.
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|187
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
SECTION
10
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 10 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
10.1 ADMINISTRATION
10.1.A Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision or part of these Regulations to be invalid, unconstitutional, or beyond the powers granted to the Commission by law, such action shall not affect the validity of any other provision or part hereof.
10.1.B When Effective.
These Regulations and any amendments hereto shall be effective from and after the effective date established by the Commission. In the event the Commission does not expressly establish an effective date, the effective date shall be the sixteenth day after the date of the decision to adopt the relevant. Regulations or amendments, provided that the publication and filing requirements established by state law have been met. See Sections 9.9.E and 9.10.E of these Regulations.
10.1.C Appointment.
The Commission shall appoint a Zoning Enforcement Officer and may appoint one or more Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer(s) who shall act as its agent(s) for administration of these Regulations. The Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officers shall act only: (1) as directed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or by the Commission; or (2) in the absence of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
10.1.D Duties and Responsibilities.
The Commission hereby delegates the following administrative duties and responsibilities to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and any Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer(s):
1. To issue or withhold Zoning Permits, as herein provided.
2. To issue or withhold certificates of zoning compliance, as herein provided.
3. To enforce these Regulations in accordance with Section 10.2.
4. To maintain a proper record of all applications, Zoning Permits, certificates of zoning compliance, site plans and plot plans, complaints, violations, orders, corrections, correspondence, notices, fees levied and collected and such other data and files as are required by these Regulations.
5. To report regularly to the Commission and carry out its directives in all matters pertaining to these Regulations.
6. Any and all duties referred to in these Regulations.
The Commission shall also retain the power and discretion to delegate other duties or responsibilities to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer(s). All references to the Zoning Enforcement Officer in this Section shall be deemed to refer, also, to the Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer(s), unless the context indicates otherwise.
10.1.E Amendments.
These Regulations may from time to time be amended, changed, or repealed as provided by Chapter 124 of the General Statutes, 1958 revision, as amended.
SECTION 10.2
188 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
10.2 ENFORCEMENT.
10.2.A Authority.
These Regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer who are hereby authorized to cause any building, place, premises or use to be inspected, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of these Regulations.
10.2.B Inspections Authorized.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have authority to cause an inspection to be made of any premises and the building and structures thereon and the use of any land and any kind of work upon any building or structure being erected or altered, whether or not such work is being done under authority of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
10.2.C Enforcement Authorized.
The Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or any official having jurisdiction, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection, alteration, reconstruction, maintenance or use of any building or to correct or abate any unlawful act or to prevent the illegal occupation of buildings or land or to prevent any illegal act in or about such premises.
10.2.D Notice of Violation.
1. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) finds a violation of these Regulations, he or she may serve upon the owner, lessee, tenant, architect, engineer, builder, contractor, manager, or any agent, a violation notice and an order to discontinue such work and violation and to correct or abate the condition complained of within ten (10) days from service of such notice and order, or earlier in the case of earth removal, grading, erosion or sediment control, or other matters requiring more immediate attention.
2. The ZEO shall have the authority to order the removal of any sign erected on, attached to, maintained on or displayed on any property in any district where no permit has been issued in accordance with these Regulations or where such sign is in violation of any provision of these Regulations.
3. The ZEO shall have the authority to remove signs where no sign permit has been issued and where the sign is located within a public road right-of-way or is located on Town property.
10.2.E Further Action.
1. Any person violating any of the provisions of these Regulations shall be subject to the fines, injunctive procedures, and any other penalties prescribed by Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes, including, when warranted, a separate violation for each day that a violation exists.
2. Where it is alleged that there is an error in any enforcement order, requirement or decision made by the ZEO, an aggrieved party may file an Appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
SECTION 10.3
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|189
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special and
Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
SECTION
10
ADMINISTRATION
10.3 BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
10.3.A Applicability.
1. The Commission may require the applicant to post a financial guarantee to assure the completion of: (1) all required public improvements; (2) all improvements required to serve any dwelling units or non-residential establishments sold, rented or occupied on the site; (3) all erosion and sedimentation controls approved or otherwise required during site construction and for site restoration should construction cease prior to attaining compliance with approved plans; and (4) any required site cleanups of debris, abandoned vehicles or any other material that would cause a deterioration of conditions in the area.
2. Where authorized in these Regulations, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require the applicant to post a financial guarantee.
10.3.B Financial Guarantee Format.
Where a financial guarantee is required by any Section of these Regulations, it shall be in one (1) of the following forms, subject to the approval of the Commission or its designated agent or attorney:
1. Cash deposited with the Town.
2. Surety bond or certified check to the order of the Town when the amount of the check is fully insured by the FDIC.
3. Bank deposit assigned irrevocably and solely to the Town when the amount of the deposit is fully insured by the FDIC.
4. Irrevocable evergreen letter of credit naming the Town as sole beneficiary provided that:
(1) Such evergreen letter of credit shall be issued by, and drafts thereunder presentable at, a branch of a bank in Connecticut and provided that such bank is included in the most recent list issued by the Securities Valuation Office of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (or any successor office or organization, “NAIC”) as a bank meeting NAIC standards for issuing letters of credit for reinsurance purposes; or
(2) The long-term unsecured debt of such bank (or the long-term unsecured debt of its holding company) is rated BBB or better by Standard & Poor's rating service or Baa or better by Moody's rating service.
(3) The terms and conditions of such letter of credit shall be acceptable in form and substance to the Town and substantially in the form of the model letter of credit provided by the Planning and Zoning Department,
(4) If and when such letter of credit has less than thirty (30) days remaining until its expiration date, and such date shall not have been extended, the Town may draw under said letter of credit the full amount thereof and the proceeds may be retained by the Town as the financial guarantee.
(5) The period to expiration of a Letter of Credit shall be not less than one (1) year, with a provision for automatic renewal at increments of not less than one (1) year. The Town of Branford must be informed of the intention not to renew or the financial guarantee shall automatically be renewed.
10.3.C Financial Guarantee Initiation and Term.
1. The financial guarantee shall be posted prior to the Town’s issuance of a Zoning Permit and a Building Permit.
2. A financial guarantee shall remain in force until all of the terms and conditions of the subject Permit have been successfully met. The suspension of a Permit does not in any way affect the term of any associated Security.
SECTION 10.3
190 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
10.3.D Project Performance.
Any such financial guarantee may be called by the Town when it is deemed by the Town Planner or Zoning Enforcement Officer that:
1. The permittee is, to any extent, not complying with the provisions of the Permit and/or these Regulations,
2. Such non-compliance has caused, is causing, and/or has the reasonable potential to cause conditions that are counter to the purposes of these Regulations,
3. The permittee (being responsible for the regulated development associated with a Permit) has had reasonable opportunity to identify and move to correct such non-compliance, irrespective of the status of notification of such non-compliance, and
4. The permittee is not showing good faith towards remedying the non-compliance and/or the adverse impacts thereof and/or complying with the orders of the Town Engineer, or representatives thereof, associated therewith, and/or the permittee is otherwise not making adequate progress towards the same.
5. In making such determination, the Town Planner and Town Engineer may consider, to varying degrees deemed thereby to be appropriate to the situation, and amongst other factors, in no particular order:
(1) The compliance-related history of the permittee with respect to the subject Permit; for critical situations, a broader scope may be considered;
(2) The scope and magnitude of realized and potential adverse impacts;
(3) Time-critical factors; and,
(4) The status of the project.
6. For purposes of this Section, not adequately progressing on completing work or conducting activities associated with the Permit in a timely manner with respect to various applicable requirements is considered non-compliance with the permit.
7. The term “non-compliance” is to be interpreted as generally or specifically as is most in keeping with the purposes of these Regulations.
8. The permittee shall be given a minimum of ten calendar-days notice of the intent of the Town to call a financial guarantee prior to the Town actually notifying the surety of such Security that the permittee is in default with respect to the commitments covered by the Security and that the Town is calling for the forfeiture of the financial guarantee.
9. The Town Planner and/or Town Engineer, and/or any other Town official and/or administrator acting on behalf of the same, may use the proceeds from the forfeiture of a financial guarantee in any manner deemed thereby to be in keeping with the purposes of these Regulations with respect to the subject default and any potential or realized adverse effects associated therewith, allowing for the consideration of the amount of funds available, as well as to cover any expenses incurred in association with the process of obtaining the forfeiture of the financial guarantee, including without limitation, attorney, bank and other collection fees and expenditures, shall be the responsibility of the applicant (permittee) and may be deducted from the financial guarantee. Proceeds may be applied to events, actions, improvements, and work that are located off-site as well as on-site, are of a temporary as well as a permanent nature, that occur or occurred at any time subsequent to the Town Planner becoming aware of the subject default, and that were incurred by the Town of Branford acting on the Town Planner’s and/or Town Engineer’s behalf, including staff and equipment time.
10. Nothing herein shall be construed to in any way limit or restrict the Town of Branford from pursuing any legal remedy afforded it to recover damages for expenses incurred by it in any way associated with the default of a permittee with respect to the permittee’s obligations and commitments associated with a Permit.
SECTION 10.4
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|191
Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Residence
Districts
Business
Districts
Special and
Districts
Basic Standards
Special
Exceptions
Special
Requirements
Procedures
SECTION
10
ADMINISTRATION
10.3.E Financial Guarantee Reduction.
At the request of the developer, the Town may reduce the required financial guarantee commensurate with the items completed. Said financial guarantee may be reduced to not less than 15 percent of the original financial guarantee until all required improvements are completed and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is granted.
10.3.F Financial Guarantee Release.
Any required financial guarantee shall not be released by the Commission, or agent until:
1. The release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant,
2. The Town Engineer has submitted a letter stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and that all conditions and requirements of the Commission's approval have been satisfied, and
3. The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission, or agent, through submission of a set of detailed "Record" plans or sufficient documentation, that all required improvements and other work are in accordance with submitted site plans.
10.4 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
10.4.A Powers and Duties.
1. The Board of Appeals shall have such powers and duties as may be provided by state law, including but not limited to, CGS Section 8-6.
SECTION 10.4
192 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
(this page intentionally left blank)
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|193
APPENDICES
LIGHTING
____________________________________________________________
Lighting Zones.
Restricted Zone:
Lighting prohibited – preserved/protected natural areas and wetlands.
Zone 1:
Low ambient lighting- rural, suburban residential, abutting natural areas and waterways.
For HID light fixtures, HPS is preferred (see Definitions)
Zone 2:
High ambient lighting- urban, commercial and high traffic zones.
_______________________________________________________________________
Light Levels (Illuminance Levels) • requirements by site type
Small Scale Site Lighting
For proposed Site Lighting using three (3) exterior light fixtures, or less:
Requirements.
Manufacturer’s cut sheets of the proposed light fixture[s] shall be provided. These cut sheets must clearly indicate: 1) the fixture’s IES cutoff classification, and 2) the lamp type and lumen rating.
For all site types- 3 fixtures, or less:
Zone 1: FCO / 6500 lumens max. / Lamp type restrictions:
Metal Halide [MH] discouraged in Zone 1
For all site types- 3 fixtures, or less:
Zone 2: FCO / 20000 lumens max. / No lamp type restrictions
Medium to Large Scale Site Lighting
For proposed Site Lighting using four [4], or more exterior light fixtures:
Requirements.
1) Manufacturer’s cut sheets of the proposed light fixture[s] shall be provided. These cut sheets must clearly indicate: 1) the fixture’s IES cutoff classification, and 2) the lamp type and lumen rating.
2) Iso-footcandle calculations of the proposed site lighting shall be provided.
The following Tables depict the compliant illuminance levels for each Site Type and lighting Zone. Compliance is determined by meeting maximum horizontal footcandle readings at ground/pavement level. Max/minimum footcandle ratios are offered as recommendations for improved lighting uniformity at the site.
Site Illuminance Level Recommendations [listed by Site Type].
The following recommendations for horizontal illuminance levels are based on standards from the IESNA Handbook and Recommended Practice RP-33-99 & RP-20-98
194 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
______________________________________________________________________
Table 1.
General Public Use Commercial/Municipal Site
Parking Lot [general vehicle area]
Zone 1: • HPS preferred
Max illuminance: 4 footcandles • recommended Max:Min ratio- 20:1
Zone 2:
Max illuminance: 7.5 footcandles • recommended Max:Min ratio- 15:1
Pedestrian Areas / Building Perimeter
Zone 1: • HPS preferred
Max illuminance: 5 footcandles • recommended Max:Min ratio- 15:1
Zone 2:
Max illuminance: 8 footcandles • recommended Max:Min ratio- 10:1
______________________________________________________________________
Table 2.
Automobile Dealership [by area]
Zone 1: disallowed
Zone 2:
Front display area:
Max illuminance: 20 footcandles • recommended Max:Min ratio- 5:1
Other rows area:
Max illuminance: 10 footcandles • recommended Max:Min ratio- 10:1
______________________________________________________________________
Table 3.
Gas/Service Station [by area]
Zone 1: • HPS preferred
Pump Island area:
Max illuminance: 12 footcandles • recommended Max: Min ratio- 5:1
Building surrounds and other areas:
Max illuminance: 5 footcandles • recommended Max: Min ratio- 10:1
Zone 2:
Pump Island area:
Max illuminance: 20 footcandles • recommended Max:Min ratio- 5:1
Building surrounds and other areas:
Max illuminance: 8 footcandles • recommended Max:Min ratio- 10:1
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|195
ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Application Form bearing the original signature(s) of the owner(s) of record, or letter of authorization from the owner to a designated agent.
Application Fee
If applicable, documentation that required notifications have been accomplished, e.g. water companies (CGS 8-3i) and/or conservation easement holders (per CGS 47-42d)
A plot plan at a scale of 1” = 40’, or such other scale as may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent, incorporating a Class A-2 boundary survey of the premises or parcel of land prepared, stamped with an embossed seal and signed by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor showing, where applicable:
All existing and proposed structures on the site;
Existing and proposed ground elevations with contours at two-foot intervals;
The location of the lot in relation to public and/or private streets and accessways;
The zoning district in which the plot is located;
Grading plan for any proposed driveway;
The location of septic system(s) and well(s);
Current and proposed percentage of the lot to be covered by buildings;
Dimensioned building plans, including floor plans and elevations;
All applicable setback lines;
A signed statement from a licensed architect or surveyor stating the existing and proposed building coverage;
The location of any wetlands and/or watercourses or areas of special flood hazard;
A key map showing the location of the property in relation to surrounding areas.
Copy of any relevant variance, stamped to document filing in the Office of the Branford Town Clerk.
Site data chart showing total and net lot area, proposed coverage, impervious surface, floor area, height, setbacks, and parking requirements.
2 copies of an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan in compliance with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection 2002 Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (CTDEP Bulletin 34) for all new construction, and for any other application where determined necessary by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(see requirements for erosion and sediment control)
196 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
4 copies of a soil erosion and sediment control plan containing proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sediment and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology.
4 copies of a narrative describing:
The development;
The schedule for grading and construction activities including:
? Start and completion dates;
? Sequence of grading and construction activities;
? Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures;
? Sequence for final stabilization of the project site;
The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities;
The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities;
The installation and/or application procedure for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities;
The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
4 copies of a plan drawn to an appropriate scale showing:
The location of the proposed development site, its boundaries, its size, and adjacent properties;
The existing and proposed topography shown with contour lines at intervals not greater than two (2) feet and extending for a distance of 200 feet beyond the boundaries of the development site;
The boundaries and location of various soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies and other land subject to periodic flooding on the site and within a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond the site boundaries;
The location and size of any existing and proposed structures, drainage facilities, roadways and other man-made installations on the land as well as drainage structures outside the boundaries for a distance of 200 feet.
The location of and design details for all proposed temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities;
The sequence of grading and construction activities; the sequence for the installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; and the sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
Any other information which in the Commission’s judgment will assist in evaluating the proposal.
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|197
SITE PLAN AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Application Form bearing the original signature(s) of the owner(s) of record, or letter of authorization from the owner to a designated agent;
Application Fee
If applicable, documentation that required notifications have been accomplished, e.g. water companies (CGS 8-3i) and/or conservation easement holders (per CGS 47-42d)
4 copies of a 24” x 36” site plan at a scale of 1” = 40’ and 12 copies of an 11” x 17” or 12” x 18” site plan, incorporating an A-2 boundary survey of the premises or parcel of land prepared, stamped with an embossed seal and signed by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor showing, where applicable:
A key map showing the location of the property in relation to surrounding areas,
Existing and proposed contour elevations with two (2) foot contour intervals;
Existing and/or proposed buildings, structures, and appurtenances thereof,
Existing and/or proposed parking and loading accommodations,
Existing and proposed landscape plan prepared by a Connecticut-licensed landscape architect;
Access and egress details for pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
Location of existing and proposed signs,
Location of adjacent roads, curb cuts, and width of rights-of-way and travel way;
Site drainage plans and details;
Location of municipal sewer lines and water mains;
Site lighting details including an iso-footcandle plan and manufacturer’s cut sheets
Location of soil types, including identified wetlands;
Location of watercourses and flood boundaries;
Provisions for refuse disposal;
Limits of vegetation coverage and location of any significant trees to be retained and/or to be removed;
Location and acreage of all areas excluded from net lot area (e.g. wetlands, steep slopes, vehicular rights-of-way and easements for above-ground transmission lines).
Site data chart showing total and net lot area, proposed coverage, impervious surface, floor are, height, setbacks and parking calculations.
Names of all abutting landowners;
198 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
SITE PLAN AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION CHECKLIST – PAGE 2
Where applicable, a soils report from a Connecticut-licensed soil scientist.
Where applicable, a statement from a Connecticut-licensed soil scientist that the “flagging” of wetland soils and delineation of watercourses on the maps is accurate.
Where applicable, 4 copies of preliminary architectural plans at acceptable scale prepared by a Connecticut-licensed architect showing floor plans and exterior elevations of buildings and indicating building materials, textures and color of all building façades, fenestration, roofs and other appurtenances.
Where applicable, 4 copies of a scale drawing showing the location, size and design of all signs and other graphics.
Where the application involves only a portion of a parcel of land, the proposed plan shall indicate the manner in which the remainder of the land shall properly relate to the development proposed.
A statement describing in detail the proposed use or uses.
Any development proposal in excess of 25,000 square feet of retail, commercial, office or industrial floor space shall be accompanied by a traffic study evaluating the impact of the proposal on thoroughfares serving and/or affected by the development and shall, at a minimum, include data and information on:
Existing average daily traffic and peak hour traffic of principal road(s),
Location of existing and proposed curb cuts, traffic lights and intersections at the development site and within 300 feet from the development site,
Anticipated average daily traffic and peak hour traffic generation,
Traffic impact of proposed development including level of service on the road system before and after development,
Adequacy of right-of-way and travel way;
Recommendations for safe pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
Where applicable, the applicant shall include the written recommendations of the Connecticut Department of Transportation, the Branford Traffic Commission, and the Town Engineer.
If a multi-family development, 3 copies of a report of the proposal including:
Number of dwelling units proposed and breakdown of dwelling unit types;
The density of the proposed development (dwelling units per net acre);
Acreage in buildings and parking and acreage in open space;
Projected dwelling unit floor areas and projected selling price or rentals of dwelling units;
A draft of proposed covenants and restrictions.
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|199
SITE PLAN AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION CHECKLIST – PAGE 3
A statement describing the proposed staging if the development is to be constructed over a period of years.
Reports or approvals, as applicable, from the following:
Branford Town Center Revitalization Review Board on the site plan, landscaping, and architectural design of all buildings and other structures.
Water Pollution Control Authority
Zoning Board of Appeals
Inland Wetlands Commission
Fire Marshal
Town Engineer
East Shore District Health Department
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection
Connecticut Department of Transportation
A narrative describing construction stages and manner in which the application complies with the requirements for erosion and sedimentation control prescribed under these Regulations.
Documentation indicating whether any additional approvals (such as a Certificate of Need from the Connecticut Commission on Hospitals and Health Care) have been issued or a statement that no such approvals are required.
If utilizing on-site septic systems, a report from a Connecticut-licensed professional civil engineer or a Connecticut-licensed soil scientist describing soil characteristics, including wetlands, and based upon on site inspection of soils.
If utilizing on-site septic systems, a sewage disposal report prepared by the applicant including proposed locations of septic systems.
Any other information which in the Commission’s judgment will assist in evaluating the proposal.
(see supplemental requirements for erosion and sediment control and earth removal)
200 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
REGULATION CHANGE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Application Form bearing the original signature(s) of the owner(s) of record, or letter of authorization from the owner to a designated agent;
Application Fee
15 copies of the proposed text amendment identifying by reference to appropriate article, section, Section, or paragraph numbers and to any other designation to be altered and indicating in brackets the text to be deleted and in capital letters the text to be added.
15 copies of a written memorandum stating the reasons for the proposed change and to what extent it would enhance the general health, safety and welfare of the Town of Branford.
Any other information which in the Commission’s judgment will assist in evaluating the proposal.
A digital version of the proposed amendment in a Microsoft Word compatible format.
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|201
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT REQUIREMENTS
Application Form bearing the original signature(s) of the owner(s) of record, or letter of authorization from the owner to a designated agent;
Application Fee
4 copies of a map at an appropriate scale showing:
the property proposed to be rezoned indicating the existing zoning district designation, the proposed boundary line(s), and the proposed zoning district designation.
a key map showing the location of the property in relation to surrounding areas,
properties within 500 feet in all directions of the premises proposed to be rezoned
4 copies of calculations prepared by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor or civil engineer based upon the latest Assessor’s data indicating the area of the lots (or portion thereof) contained within 500 feet in all directions of the premises proposed to be rezoned.
4 copies of a simple metes and bounds description defining in writing the boundaries of the proposed zoning district change.
Any other information which in the Commission’s judgment will assist in evaluating the proposal.
202 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
Original Zoning Regulations Effective December 3, 1956
Additional Amendments adopted on:
November, 1973 (Comprehensive Revision)
May 24, 1985 (Sect. 34, Open Space Res. Dev)
October 18, 1984 (C.A.M. Amendment)
July 30, 1987 (Sect. 6, Elderly Housing)
August 28, 1987 (Sect. 21, 23, 24, 25, 31, 32, 35, 43)
January 15, 1988 (Sect. 42, Parking and Sect. 6, Lot Area and Shape; Sect. 24.6, flood elevations, deleted)
June 1, 1988 (Schedule A, Motor Vehicle Washing)
June 1, 1988 (Schedule A, and Section 36, Day Nurseries)
June 1, 1988 (Sect. 21, 23, And Sect. 37, Town Center Overlay District)
July 1, 1988 (Sect. 6, and Sect. 42, Community Shopping Center)
July 1, 1988 (Sect. 43, Non-Accessory Ground Signs)
March 15, 1989 (Sect 23, and 42, Schedule A and Schedule B Limited Retail Development)
October 15, 1989 (Sect. 6 and 35, and Schedule B, Coverage, Floor Area, Impervious Surface, Height)
February 23, 1990 (Sect. 6 and 25, Accessory Uses; Sect. 25, Streetline Setbacks)
September 1, 1990 (Sect. 6, Lot Area and Shape)
November 16, 1990 (Sect. 24, Uses; Schedule A, Line C-28; Section 31, Site Plan and Special Use Requirements; Section 44, Grading Excavation, Removal or Deposit of Earth Materials and Related Activities; Section 46, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control)
February 1, 1991 (Schedule A, Recreational Facilities)
March 1, 1991 (Sect. 6 and 36 and Schedule A, Accessory Apartments and Day Care)
April 1, 1991 (Schedule A and Sect. 36, Dwellings containing three (3) or more units in a BR Zone)
December 2, 1991 (Sect. 31, Site Plans; Section 32, Special Exceptions; Section 36, Storage Trailers; Storage Trailers; Section 5, Non-conforming Lots; Section 6, Definitions; Section 24, Permitted Uses)
Branford Zoning Regulations | 02.01.2015|203
July 1, 1993 (Section 36, Storage Trailers)
January 3, 1994 (Section 36, Contractor’s Yards)
June 1, 1994 (Schedule A, Line B-3, Educational and Other Institutional Uses In a CP zone)
January 1, 1995 (Section 38, Affordable Housing)
August 1, 1996 (New Section 5.11.3, Non-conforming Lots)
May 1, 1997 (Section 36.12, Communications Towers, Antennae and Telecommunications Facilities)
June 1, 1997 (Section 31, Outdoor Lighting)
June 1, 1997 (Section 31, Peer Review of Traffic Report)
February 11, 1998 (Section 36, Non-profit Cat Shelters)
March 26, 1998 (Section 6, Retaining Walls; Section 25.4.11 Retaining Walls Deleted; Section 32.5, Special Exception Standards for Traffic; Section 44.6, Blasting Deleted and Retaining Walls Added)
February 15, 1999 (New Section 6.40, Steep Slopes; Delete Sections 43.5.1c and 43.5.4, Non-Accessory Ground Signs)
May 1, 2002 (Section 34, Open Space Residential Development Plans - revision)
December 2, 2002 (New Section 36.14, Self Storage)
August 1, 2003 (Section 24, Schedule A, Line A-8, Letting of Rooms)
March 11, 2004 (Sect. 6.33, Lot Area and Shape; Sect. 6.42, Steep Slopes; Sect. 31.4.2, Digital Copy of Site Plan; Sect. 44, Grading Plans for Subdivision, Site Plan and Special Exception Applications)
April 9, 2004 (Sect. 42.2, Parking and Condemnation)
July 1, 2004 (Sect. 6.37 & 25.11, Small Accessory Structures and Rear Yard)
December 1, 2004 (Sect. 6.14 and 25.4.12, Critical Coastal Resources; Sect. 6.49, Tidal Wetlands; Sect. 45.2, Coastal Exemptions, Sect. 45.5, Vegetated Buffers)
April 1, 2005 (Sect. 31.4.2.7 Sanitary Sewers)
April 15, 2007 (Sect. 36.16, Apartments in a BL Zone)
April 15, 2007 (Sect. 36.15, Climate Controlled, Self Storage Facilities)
August 15, 2007 (Sect. 43.3.3, Projecting & Hanging Signs)
204 | 02.01.2015| Branford Zoning Regulations
January 1, 2009 (Sect. 36.9, Accessory Apartments Revision)
January 1, 2009 (Sect. 5.9; 24.1 & 32.2, Non-Conformity)
June 1, 2011 (Comprehensive Revisions / Reorganization)
July 1, 2012 (Sect. 5.7; Incentive Housing Overlay Zone)
February 1, 2013 (Sect. 1; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 2; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 3; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 4; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 5; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 6; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 7; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 8; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 9; Clarifications / Revisions, Sect. 10; Clarifications / Revisions)
February 21, 2014 (Sect. 2.2; Defined Terms relating to Framers’ Markets
Sect. 4.8.N; Added Farmers’ Markets to Agricultural Uses table
Sect 7.17; New Section regarding Farmers’ Markets.)
April 1, 2014 (Section 4.8.B, Line 1; Added Personal Services as permitted use in CP Districts.)
(Section 5.5.K; Modification of Site Landscaping Standards for Affordable Housing Development Plans.
Section 5.7.H; Design Standards for IHOD District
Section 6.3.L; Modification of Landscaping Requirements.
Section 6.5.J; Deferral of Immediate Installation of Parking Spaces.)
(Section 6.5.D; Changes to Required Off Street Parking Spaces for Office Uses)
January 1, 2015 (Section 5.4.E - Height Measurement in Planned Development Districts)
February 1, 2015 (Section 5.8; New Section Establishing Regulations for the Stony Creek Village District.
Section 9.15; Procedures for the Stony Creek Village District)
ZONING REGULATIONS
TOWN OF BRAN FORD, CONNECTICUT
HOW TO USE THESE REGULATIONS
PHILOSOPHY
These Zoning Regulations are intended to guide land use activities in Branford in ways that will:
? protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
? maintain and enhance community character,
? improve the economic value of property and general welfare of residents, and
? protect the environment.
It is recognized that the appearance of property has a direct bearing on the economic value of that property and also the economic value of adjacent and surrounding properties. The appearance of a single property also has a cumulative effect which can enhance or diminish the beauty of the entire Town, and consequently the values of property elsewhere within the Town.
ORGANIZATION
This set of Regulations has been organized around four main thematic elements. Understanding this organization will help users quickly locate the regulatory provisions they seek.
THEME SECTIONS DESCRIPTION BASICS
? Introduction
? Definitions
Background information and description of how the regulations will be used and interpreted ZONES AND USES
? Residential Zones
? Business Zones
? Special and Overlay Zones
Information about the various zoning districts and the standards that apply within them STANDARDS
? Basic Standards
? Special Exceptions
? Special Requirements
Requirements that apply in all or some all zones ADMINISTRATIVE
? Procedures
? Administration
Description of how applications are processed and regulations administered

DRAFT 8.27.2012 | Page i
BRANFORD, CONNECTICUT
Subdivision
Regulations
Adopted 1.3.2013
Effective 2.1.2013
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TOWN OF BRANFORD, CONNECTICUT
These Regulations are the revised Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Branford, Connecticut,
adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission on January 3, 2013, pursuant to the General Statutes of
the State of Connecticut, and effective February 1, 2013.
BRANFORD PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Ellsworth McGuigan, Chairman
Philip Fischer, Secretary
Joseph Vaiuso
Stephen Duhamel
Charles R. Andres
David Perkins
John B. Lust
Marcia Palluzzi
EX OFFICIO
Anthony J. DaRos, First Selectman
TOWN STAFF
Shirley Rasmussen, Town Planner
Richard H. Stoecker, Assistant Town Planner
Janice A. Plaziak, Town Engineer
Laura Magaraci, Zoning Official
Jennifer F. Acquino, Administrative Assistant
Original Subdivision Regulations Effective June 16, 1954
Contents
Section 1 - Introduction ........................................................................................ 1
1.01 Authority. ............................................................................................. 1
1.02 Policy. .................................................................................................... 1
1.03 Purposes. ............................................................................................... 2
1.04 Applicability of Regulations. ............................................................. 3
1.05 Requirements. ...................................................................................... 3
1.06 Enforcement. ........................................................................................ 3
1.07 Modification of Regulations. .............................................................. 4
1.08 Administrative Provisions.................................................................. 4
Section 2 - Interpretation ..................................................................................... 5
2.01 Interpretation of Regulations. ............................................................ 5
2.02 Use of Terms. ........................................................................................ 5
2.03 Defined Terms. ..................................................................................... 6
Section 3 - Parcel Requirements ....................................................................... 13
3.01 Land Character. ................................................................................. 13
3.02 Protection of Important Features. .................................................... 13
3.03 Lot Layout. ......................................................................................... 14
3.04 Open Space. ........................................................................................ 15
3.05 Solar Access. ....................................................................................... 18
3.06 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. ................................................ 18
3.07 Grading and Earth Removal Activities. .......................................... 18
3.08 Tree Planting. ..................................................................................... 19
Section 4 - Infrastructure Requirements ......................................................... 21
4.01 Streets. ................................................................................................. 21
4.02 Driveways. .......................................................................................... 29
4.03 Sidewalks / Pedestrians. .................................................................. 29
4.04 Sewerage. ............................................................................................ 30
4.05 Water. .................................................................................................. 30
4.06 Storm Drainage. ................................................................................. 31
4.07 Wire Utilities. ..................................................................................... 34
4.08 Street Lighting. ................................................................................... 34
4.09 Fire Protection. ................................................................................... 35
Section 5 - Application Procedures .................................................................. 37
5.01 General Requirements. ..................................................................... 37
5.02 Formal Subdivision Application. .................................................... 38
5.03 Receipt and Scheduling. ................................................................... 42
5.04 Notice Provisions. .............................................................................. 43
5.05 Public Hearings. ................................................................................. 45
5.06 Application Processing and Action. ................................................ 46
Section 6 - Post-Approval Procedures ............................................................. 47
6.01 Finalizing Approved Plans............................................................... 47
6.02 Alternative Approval Formats ......................................................... 47
6.03 Submission of Approved Plans And Documents. ........................ 53
6.04 Filing of Approved Plans. ................................................................ 54
6.05 Modification of Approval. ................................................................ 54
6.06 Construction and Inspection. ........................................................... 55
6.07 Period for Completion of Improvements. ...................................... 57
6.08 Monuments and Markers. ................................................................ 58
6.09 Final Acceptance and Maintenance. ............................................... 59
6.10 Modification of Approval. ................................................................ 60
Appendix - Sample Letter of Credit ................................................................. 61
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 1
Section 1 - Introduction
1.01 Authority.
1.01.A These Regulations are adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Branford
under the authority conferred by Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS Section 8-
18 et seq.), as amended.
1.02 Policy.
1.02.A Declaration of Policy: It is declared to be the Policy of the Branford Planning and Zoning
Commission to consider land subdivision as part of a plan for the orderly and coordinated
development and growth of the Town rather than as a mere aggregation of lots. These
Regulations have been adopted in accordance with, and for the purposes set forth in, Section 8-25
of the Connecticut General Statutes, in order that land subdivision may be made in the best
interests of the Town and in accordance with this policy and in order that land subdivided is of
such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health or safety, that
proper provision will be made for water supply, surface drainage and sanitary sewerage, and
open spaces for parks and playgrounds and, in areas contiguous to brooks, rivers or other bodies
of water subject to flooding, including tidal flooding, that proper provision will be made for
protective flood control measures and that the proposed roads are in harmony with existing
roads and existing or proposed principal thoroughfares shown on any plan of development for
the Town especially with regard to safe intersections and so arranged and of such width, as to
provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 2
1.03 Purposes.
These Regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1.03.A Protecting and providing for the public health, safety and welfare in the community and
promoting the general welfare and prosperity of its people;
1.03.B Promoting the coordinated development of the community and guiding future growth and
development in Branford in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development;
1.03.C Ensuring that land to be subdivided is of such character that it can be used for building purposes
without danger to health or public safety;
1.03.D Guiding public and private policy and action in order to provide safe, adequate, and efficient
transportation, drainage, water, sewer, parks, schools and other public facilities;
1.03.E Providing for the circulation of traffic throughout the community so that proposed streets shall
be in harmony with existing and proposed streets, especially as regards safe intersections, and
shall be so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for
present and future traffic needs;
1.03.F Establishing reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions in order to further
the orderly layout and use of land;
1.03.G Ensuring that public facilities are available and have adequate capacities to serve the proposed
subdivision;
1.03.H Preventing the pollution of air, streams, rivers and water bodies; assuring the adequacy of
drainage facilities; providing for protective flood control measures; and encouraging the wise use
and management of natural features throughout the community in order to preserve the
integrity, stability and beauty of Branford and the value of the land;
1.03.I Preserving the natural beauty and topography of the community and to ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features;
1.03.J Encouraging energy efficient patterns of development and land use, use of solar and other
renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation; and
1.03.K Such other purposes as may be described in Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 3
1.04 Applicability of Regulations.
1.04.A Applicability of Regulations. These Regulations shall apply to any subdivision or resubdivision
of land within Branford, Connecticut.
1.04.B Determination of Subdivision or Resubdivision. The Commission shall have the authority to
determine whether the existing or proposed division of any land constitutes a subdivision or
resubdivision under the provisions of these Regulations.
1.05 Requirements.
1.05.A Conformity Required. Any subdivision of land shall be planned, designed, and constructed so
that the subdivision as a whole, any lot or parcel therein, and any improvement required
conforms to:
1. The applicable requirements of these Regulations, and
2. The applicable requirements of the Town of Branford, Short Beach and Pine Orchard
zoning regulations for the zoning district within which the lot or parcel is located.
1.05.B Approval Required. No subdivision of land shall be made and no land in any subdivision shall
be sold or offered for sale until a subdivision plan, prepared in accordance with the requirements
of these Regulations, has been:
1. Approved by the Commission,
2. Signed by the Chairman or other authorized agent to indicate approval by the
Commission, and
3. Filed or recorded in the office of the Town Clerk within the time period specified in
Section 6.4 of these Regulations.
1.05.C Null And Void. Subdivision plans that have been recorded without meeting the requirements of
these Regulations shall be null and void.
1.06 Enforcement.
1.06.A Responsible Agent(s). These Regulations shall be enforced by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and/or its designated agent(s) or representative(s).
1.06.B Fines. Any person making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission may
be fined as provided by CGS Section 8-25 for each lot subdivided, offered for sale, or sold.
1.06.C Penalties. In the case of any violation of the provisions of these Regulations, the Commission
shall retain the right of pursuing any legal action and impose any and all penalties provided by
the Connecticut General Statutes.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 4
1.07 Modification of Regulations.
1.07.A Modification of Subdivision Layout Standards. In accordance with CGS Section 8-26, the
Commission may waive a regulation or standard contained in Section 3 or Section 4 of these
regulations by an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Commission provided that:
1. The Commission has received a specific written request from the subdivider for the
modification,
2. The Commission finds that:
(1) conditions exist which adversely affect the subject property and are not generally
applicable to other property in the area,
(2) the requested modification is the minimum deviation necessary from these
regulations to permit reasonable development of the subject property,
(3) granting of the modification will not have a significant adverse effect on adjacent
property or on public health, safety, or welfare,
(4) granting of the modification will not hinder or discourage the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property or the neighborhood or impair the value
thereof, and
(5) such modification will not hinder implementation of the plan of conservation
and development.
3. Before granting any such modification, the Commission must state upon the record its
reasons for which such a modification is being granted:
1.07.B Modification of Submission Requirement. The Commission may, by simple majority, modify
or eliminate any document submission requirement listed under Section 5.2.A.3 or Section 5.2.B
of these Regulations if it finds that such requirement is not necessary for the Commission
reasonably to determine whether the proposed subdivision complies with the standards set forth
in these Regulations.
1.08 Administrative Provisions.
1.08.A Amendments. The Planning and Zoning Commission may amend or repeal these Regulations
after a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of CGS Chapter 126
1.08.B Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the Commission may appeal as
provided by CGS Sections 8-26 and 8-8.
1.08.C Protection of Approved Plans. Adoption of these regulations or any amendment hereto shall not
invalidate any subdivision or street layout approved by the Commission, or its predecessor, prior
to the effective date hereof.
1.08.D Separability. Should any provision of these Regulations be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or
beyond the powers granted to the Commission by law, such action shall not affect the validity of
any other provision or part hereof.
1.08.E When Effective. These Regulations, and any amendments hereto, shall be effective from and
after the date established by the Commission.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 5
Section 2 - Interpretation
2.01 Interpretation of Regulations.
2.01.A Minimum Requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
Regulations shall e the minimum requirements unless the context clearly indicates that such
provisions are intended to be a maximum limitation.
2.01.B Conflicts. Where any conflict arises between the provisions of these Regulations, the provision
that establishes the greatest restriction or imposes the highest standard shall control. Nothing in
these Regulations shall be deemed to excuse compliance with the applicable provisions of any
other law, ordinance, easement, covenant, rule, regulation, or permit.
2.01.C Difference of Meaning. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of these Regulations and any caption, illustration, summary, table or illustrative table, the text
shall govern.
2.02 Use of Terms.
2.02.A Definitions To Be Applied. In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, the
words and phrases set forth in these Regulations shall be construed as defined in this Article,
unless otherwise clearly qualified by their context.
2.02.B Specific Terms. In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, certain words
contained herein shall be interpreted as follows:
1. When not inconsistent with the context:
(1) Words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa.
(2) Words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa.
(3) Words in the masculine include the feminine and neuter and vice-versa.
2. The word “person” also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation, limited
liability company, or other legal entity.
3. Whenever any reference is made to a Town official or staff member, the reference shall be
deemed to include any authorized agent of such official or staff member or any other
person duly authorized to act in lieu of or on behalf of such official or staff member.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 6
2.03 Defined Terms.
A-2 Survey. Survey information meeting the standards for an "A-2" survey as specified in "Code of
Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Survey and Maps" by the State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut.
AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
Accessway. Land containing a driveway intended to provide access to a rear lot or to land(s) of others.
Acre. A land area equivalent to 43,560 square feet.
Applicant. A person who files an application with the Commission for approval of a subdivision plan,
whether for himself or herself or as an agent or representative of another person. When an
application is filed by an agent or representative, the person being represented shall also be
considered an applicant. Any person who is a successor in legal interest to an applicant shall also
be deemed an applicant with respect to the requirements of these Regulations pertaining to
applicants.
Application. The application form, maps, texts, reports, and supporting data required by these
Regulations for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision.
CGS. Connecticut General Statutes. Unless the context clearly requires a different interpretation, all
references to the Connecticut General Statutes shall be to the statutes as they may have been
amended at the time the provisions of the statute are applied.
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Branford.
Community Resources. Scenic views, scenic areas, open space, recreation areas, greenways, trails,
agricultural lands, prominent hillsides, ridgelines, ridgetops, hill crests, significant trees, and
similar resources. See “Cultural Resources” and “Natural Features.”
Conditional Approval. As authorized by CGS Section 8-25, a form of approval of a subdivision plan
under which the map signed by the Chairman of the Commission may be filed on the land
records but where lots cannot be sold or offered for sale until certain conditions have been met,
such as completion of the public improvements and/or the furnishing of a financial guarantee.
Conservation Restriction. An encumbrance on real property filed on the land records of the Town for
the protection and permanent preservation of fragile, vulnerable or valuable areas such as natural
features, open space, natural habitats, buffer zones, scenic areas, historic sites, riding and walking
trails, and land devoted to other similar purposes.
CTDOT. Connecticut Department of Transportation.
Cul-de-sac. See “Street, Dead End”.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 7
Cultural Resources. Archeological sites, stone walls, historic buildings, historic sites, and similar
resources created by or resulting from human endeavor. See “Community Resources” and “Natural
Features”.
Curb Cut - The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.
Date of Approval. The date an application is considered approved based upon the latest of the following
dates:
? by reason of failure of the Commission to act within the statutory timeframe, or
? by affirmative action of the Commission under any provision of these Regulations.
Date of Receipt. Unless otherwise provided in CGS Section 8-7d, the application shall be considered
received upon the date of the first regularly scheduled Commission meeting after submission of
the application or 35 days after submission of the application, whichever is sooner.
Developer. Same meaning as “Subdivider.”
Development. Any construction or grading activity to improved or unimproved real estate.
Disturbed Area. An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed.
Drainage. The controlled or uncontrolled removal or discharge of surface or ground water from land by
drains, grading or other means which may include runoff controls to minimize erosion, reduce
suspended solids and maximize groundwater recharge during and after construction or
development.
Driveway. A paved or unpaved way providing access from a street or accessway to the premises.
Driveway, Shared. A privately owned and maintained driveway shared by adjacent property owners for
access to more than one (1) lot.
Earth Disturbing Activities. Any use of the land that results in a change in the natural cover or
topography and that may cause or contribute to erosion and sedimentation.
Easement. A recorded interest in land held by a person other than the owner of the fee interest in the
parcel.
Elevation. The height of a point above mean sea level based on the U.S. Coastal & Geodetic survey
datum.
Engineer. A professional engineer as defined in CGS 20-299, licensed in the State of Connecticut,
qualified to design such roadways, utilities and other improvements as may be required by these
Regulations in connection with an application for approval of a subdivision.
Erosion. The process of wearing away and removal of the earth’s surface by natural agents including
weather, running water, waves, currents, ice, wind or gravity.
Erosion and Sediment Control Manual. The “2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control,” as amended, prepared by the Connecticut Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 8
FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Final Approval. As authorized by CGS Section 8-25, a form of approval of a subdivision plan under
which the map signed by the Chairman of the Commission may be filed on the land records and
where lots can be sold or offered for sale upon the filing of the approved plan on the land
records.
Financial Guarantee. A financial guarantee acceptable in amount, form and substance to the Town for
the purpose of ensuring that improvements or obligations required by these Regulations or
pledged by the subdivider will be completed.
Flood Plain. That area designated as subject to periodic flooding by a flood having a one (1) percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (a “100-year-flood”), consisting of the
floodway and the floodway fringe of the 100-year flood as shown on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, as amended.
Grading. Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or
any combination thereof which results in a change of contour or elevation, either permanent or
temporary.
Health Department. The East Shore District Health Department.
Improvement. Any change or alteration to the existing conditions of the subdivision site for the purpose
of complying with these Regulations or rendering the site more suitable for development and/or
habitation.
Inspection. An on-site review of property for the purpose of determining compliance with these
Regulations.
Lot. A parcel of land used or legally capable of use for residential or other lawful purposes.
Natural Resources. Land, water, and biological resources including, but not limited to, steep slopes,
ridgetops, rock outcroppings, watercourses, ponds, rivers, flood plains, wetlands, streambelts,
endangered species, wildlife habitat, prime and important farmland soils, pastures, and other
unique or fragile features. See “Community Resources” and “Cultural Resources”.
NFPA. National Fire Protection Association.
Open Space. Land preserved, usually in perpetuity, for protection of natural resources, natural features,
scenic resources, or community character.
Owner. The person shown by the Land Records of the Town of Branford to be the holder of the fee title.
Parcel. A discrete unit of land defined by a continuous, closed boundary.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 9
Person. A natural person or any other legally recognized entity, including, but not limited to, a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, association, or
governmental agency.
Plan of Conservation and Development. A plan for the future growth, protection and development of
Branford adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission under CGS Section 8-23.
Premises. A parcel for which a subdivision application has been or will be filed.
Recreation Area. Land dedicated for recreation, park, or playground purposes.
Reserve Strip. A privately owned strip of land that controls access to land dedicated, or to be dedicated,
for use as a public street.
Resubdivision. See Subdivision-Terms
Road. See “Street”.
Sale. A conveyance for a consideration.
Sediment. Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is produced by the erosion of other materials.
Sidewalk. An area, often located within the street right-of-way, improved for and dedicated to
pedestrian traffic.
Significant Tree. Live, healthy trees of a native species having a diameter of eighteen inches (18”) or
greater as measured four feet (4’) above grade at the base of the tree.
Slope. An inclined surface, the gradient of which is typically expressed as a percent representing the
number of feet rise or fall in 100 feet of horizontal distance.
Soil. Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material lying at the surface of the earth.
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A scheme that is proposed to be implemented in order to
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not
limited to, a map and narrative.
Soil Scientist. A person who is qualified as a soil scientist in accordance with the standards set by the
United States Civil Service Commission.
Soils Map. Soils classification maps using soil types described in the Soil Survey, New Haven County
Connecticut prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Solar Energy Techniques. Site design techniques that:
? maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and/or provide thermal storage within a building
during the heating season, and/or
? minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season.
Statute. One or more sections or subsections of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 10
STREET RELATED TERMS:
Street. A generally linear area of land that is permanently dedicated to the public for the movement of
vehicles and pedestrians, that provides access to abutting property, and that is shown on a
subdivision plan approved by the Commission or that has been accepted by the State or Town
for public travel. The term “street” shall include highways, parkways, avenues, roads, lanes,
alleys, or other arteries of vehicular traffic, but not private driveways or accessways.
Accepted Street. Any street that has become a public highway by virtue of a legally
recognized acceptance by the Town of Branford.
Approved Street. Any street whose location has been approved by official action of the
Commission.
Arterial Street (Major Street). A through street that generally carries traffic between
communities or major activity centers and includes all State and Federal highways.
Collector Street (Secondary Street). A through street that provides intra-community traffic
service and neighborhood access to arterial streets.
Dead End Street. A street having only one vehicular outlet to another street.
Dead End Street System. A group of connected streets that originates at a single point
of intersection, such that a vehicle traveling from any other street would have to pass
through that point of intersection in order to reach any of the connected streets.
Local Street. A through street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting
property and linkage between properties and collector or arterial streets.
Street Line. The line separating the street right-of-way and adjoining lots or premises.
Traveled Way. That portion of the surface of the street intended to be used by vehicular traffic.
Turnaround. The area at the end of a dead-end street usually circular in shape, provided for the
purpose of enabling vehicular traffic to reverse direction without having to back up.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 11
Subdivider. A person who creates any subdivision or part thereof, or who is an applicant for a
subdivision. Any person who is a successor in legal interest to a subdivider shall also be deemed
a subdivider with respect to the requirements of these Regulations pertaining to subdividers.
SUBDIVISION-RELATED TERMS:
Subdivision. As defined in CGS Section 8-18, a “subdivision” is the division of a tract or parcel of land
into three or more parts or lots, made after the effective date of these Regulations (June 16,
1954), for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development
expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes. The
term “subdivision” includes “resubdivision.”
Resubdivision. As defined in CGS section 8-18, a “resubdivision” is a change in a map of an approved
or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change:
? Affects any street layout shown on such map,
? Affects any area reserved thereon for public use, or
? Diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if
any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of
such map.
Town. The Town of Branford, Connecticut.
Traveled Way. See Street-Related Terms.
Turnaround. See Street-Related Terms.
Walkway. A sidewalk, path, trail, or way, or any other physically distinct corridor that is intended to be
used primarily for the movement of pedestrian or other non-motorized traffic.
Watercourses. The term "watercourses" shall have the meaning set forth in CGS Section 22a-38.
Inland Wetlands. The term "inland wetlands" shall have the meaning set forth in CGS Section 22a-38.
Tidal Wetlands. The term “tidal wetlands” shall have the meaning set forth in CGS Section 22a-29.
Zoning Regulations. The Zoning Regulations of the Town of Branford, Short Beach and Pine Orchard, in
effect and applicable to the premises at the time of application for subdivision or resubdivision.

Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 13
Section 3 - Parcel Requirements
3.01 Land Character.
Land that the Commission finds to be unsuitable in its present condition for building purposes because of
flooding, inadequate drainage, steep slopes, depth to bedrock, erodible soils, utility easements or similar
features that might pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare shall not be approved as a
building lot unless adequate provisions are made by the subdivider to mitigate the unsuitable conditions
in a manner satisfactory to the Commission.
3.02 Protection of Important Features.
3.02.A Natural Resources. Any subdivision shall be designed and arranged and provision shall be
made to avoid unnecessary or unreasonable pollution, impairment or destruction of natural
resources as defined in these Regulations.
3.02.B Community / Cultural Resources. Any subdivision shall be designed and arranged and
provision shall be made to enhance, where possible, and to avoid unnecessary or unreasonable
harm to, community resources and/or cultural resources as defined in these Regulations.
3.02.C Significant Trees. Any subdivision shall be designed and arranged and provision shall be made
to preserve significant trees (as defined in these regulations) as follows:
1. The applicant shall document the location of significant trees on the property within fifty
feet (50’) of any existing or proposed street.
2. Unless clearly designated for removal, any such significant tree shall be considered to be
designated for preservation.
3. Unless otherwise authorized by the Commission, any such significant tree designated for
preservation shall:
(1) Be protected by a four (4) foot high fence offset at least ten (10) feet from the tree
trunk if at risk of damage from construction except that, if the Commission so
designates, the fence shall be installed at the drip-line of the tree; and
(2) Have tree protection installed in advance when any construction activity will
occur and be maintained and remain in place in good repair during the
construction period.
4. Damage to any such significant tree shall be repaired by a Connecticut licensed arborist.
5. Any significant tree marked for preservation that is removed or damaged beyond
satisfactory repair shall be replaced with a sufficient number of trees of the same or
similar species as approved by the Commission so that the combined caliper
measurements of the replacement trees shall equal or exceed the caliper measurement of
the significant tree that was removed or damaged.
3.02.D Project Review. During the review process, the Commission may require:
1. The preservation or enhancement of specific features, and / or
2. The submission of additional information that demonstrates the subdivider’s proposals
(such as a conservation restriction and/or the dedication of open space) for protecting
the types of resource(s) identified in Section 3.2.A of these Regulations.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 14
3.03 Lot Layout.
3.03.A Compliance. Any proposed lot shall comply in all respects with the Zoning Regulations for the
zoning district in which the lot is located.
3.03.B Overall Design.
1. The shape, size, location, topography, character, and arrangement of a lot shall be such
that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other
conditions, in:
(1) Securing necessary permits to develop the lot in compliance with applicable
regulations, codes, and ordinances,
(2) Occupying and using such lot for building purposes without danger to the
health and safety of the occupants or the public,
(3) Providing safe and convenient access to the building or buildings on such lot in
which the primary use of the lot is, or is to be, conducted, and
(4) Providing for grading and drainage without adversely affecting abutting or
downstream properties.
2. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines, unless a variation from this provision would result in a better street
or lot layout.
3. No lot within the Town of Branford shall be deemed to be continuous with a lot lying in
an adjacent municipality. The determination of whether a lot complies with applicable
zoning regulations shall be made entirely on the basis of land within the boundaries of
the Town of Branford.
4. No land or building lot shall be configured in such a way that it could unreasonably limit
or preclude access to other property.
5. Each lot that would not be served by public water supply and/or sanitary sewers shall
have sufficient area and suitable dimensions to provide ample space to accommodate the
proper layout, installation and future extension, as may be necessary, of a private water
supply system and/or a private sewage disposal system in accordance with good
engineering practice and the applicable requirements of the Public Health Code and of
any applicable state and municipal health regulations.
3.03.C Unsuitable Lots.
1. The Commission may determine that any parcel of land, regardless of size, shall be
unsuitable for building if it:
(1) Does not conform to the requirements of these or other applicable codes and
regulations,
(2) Is found unsuitable for occupancy and building by reason of lack of septic
suitability, lack of adequate water supply, topography, water, flooding, or other
conditions, or
(3) Does not meet the minimum zoning requirements.
2. Unless designated and preserved in perpetuity for open space, municipal, conservation,
or agricultural purposes, no parcel, reserve strip, or any other remnant of land unsuitable
for building shall be left in any subdivision. Any such remnants shall be merged with
adjoining suitable lots.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 15
3.04 Open Space.
3.04.A Purpose. In subdivisions proposed for residential development, open spaces for parks,
playgrounds, and/or environmental protection shall be provided in places deemed proper by the
Commission. As provided for in CGS Section 8-25, every subdivision shall provide for open
space in order to:
1. Protect and conserve natural resources,
2. Protect and conserve community resources and/or cultural resources,
3. Establish greenbelts and other linkages that connect open spaces,
4. Provide for parks, playgrounds, and other active and passive recreation areas,
5. Supplement existing open space areas,
6. Provide, protect, or enhance local trails, and/or
7. Implement the open space and other recommendations in the Plan of Conservation and
Development.
3.04.B Open Space Options. The open space requirement may, with approval of the Commission, be
met through:
1. Dedication of land within the subdivision or elsewhere in Branford,
2. Payment of a fee in lieu of open space,
3. Dedication of land and payment of a fee in lieu of open space, or
4. Some other arrangement that shall be found by the Commission to be acceptable (such as
a streetscape protection easement, a trail easement, a conservation easement, or similar
proposal).
3.04.C Evaluation Requirements. So that the Commission can fully evaluate the merits of the open
space preservation method proposed, the subdivider shall submit a map showing where the
open space land is located on the parcel or would be located if payment of a fee in lieu of open
space, or other open space arrangement, is not accepted.
3.04.D Comments from Other Agencies. The Commission may solicit comments from the Parks and
Open Space Authority, the Inland Wetlands Commission, the Conservation and Environment
Commission, the Select Committee on Open Space Acquisition, the Branford Land Trust, or any
other person or entity regarding the best method of preserving open space as part of the
subdivision.
3.04.E Dedication of Land. Where the open space requirement shall be met through the dedication of
land:
1. At least ten (10) percent of the total area of the subdivision shall be set aside for open
space.
2. Such open space shall be shown on the subdivision plan or on another suitable map if
located elsewhere in Branford.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 16
3.04.F Appropriateness of the Open Space. In determining the appropriateness of an area proposed
for open space or other public purposes, the Commission shall consider:
1. The physical character and quality of the open space in terms of its value for active or
passive recreation,
2. Recommendations in the Plan of Conservation and Development,
3. The presence or absence of any existing open spaces in the area,
4. The opportunities to interconnect existing, proposed, and potential future open space
reservations into a comprehensive greenway and trail system,
5. The opportunity to preserve or protect significant natural resources, and
6. Comments from other agencies regarding need, resources, connection to the open space
system of the Town, and preferred ownership.
The Commission reserves the right to reject any proposed open space dedication that it
finds will not adequately address the foregoing criteria and to require other specific land
areas within any proposed subdivision to be dedicated as open space .
3.04.G Developments Abutting Existing Open Space. When a subdivision abuts an existing open
space area, the Commission may require the lot lines of such land to form a continuation of the
existing open space to provide a single, unified area.
3.04.H Ownership of Open Space. The subdivider shall designate which entity is, or entities are,
proposed to own the open space to ensure its permanent protection as provided in these
Regulations. The following is the order of preference for ownership of open space:
1. The Town. If a subdivider transfers land to the Town for municipal purposes other than
for required street widening, such transfer may be considered by the Commission as a
credit toward any open space dedication requirements.
2. A non-profit organization, acceptable to the Commission, legally constituted to accept
and maintain open space for conservation purposes.
3. A neighborhood association or private organization having rules and policies to protect
and preserve the open space area that have been reviewed and approved by the
Commission.
4. Such open spaces deeded to a private organization or to a private association shall
provide in such deed that ownership shall revert to the Town or other conservation
organization for recreational or conservation purposes if such corporation or association
shall cease to exist or shall relinquish ownership.
3.04.I Term of Protection as Open Space. Such open spaces shall be deeded in perpetuity. The
subdivider shall install markers delineating the boundaries of the open space in accordance with
Section 6.08.C.
3.04.J Phased Subdivision Proposals. When a subdivision plan is proposed to be phased (i.e., to be
created in sections of a larger, overall Site Development Plan), the Commission shall generally
require the developer to provide, in every phase, a proportionate part of the total open space area
that has been proposed and approved with respect to the overall Site Development Plan,
including suitable access to such land.
3.04.K Public Access. The Commission may require that any open space land have direct access to a
public street through a right-of-way dedicated to public use and that it be graded and improved
to allow for pedestrian access.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 17
3.04.L Restrictions. Open space areas shall not be used as a depository for brush, stumps, earth,
building materials, or debris. The Commission may allow the use of open space areas for the
purposes of stormwater management and detention facilities, but drainage and detention basins
shall not be counted towards the minimum open space set-aside requirements in these
regulations.
3.04.M Fees in Lieu of Open Space.
1. As provided by CGS Section 8-25, the Commission may authorize the subdivider to pay a
fee to the Town, or pay a fee to the Town and transfer land to the Town in lieu of any
requirement to provide open spaces.
2. The Commission may also request that the subdivider pay a fee to the Town or pay a fee
to the Town and transfer land in lieu of the requirement to provide open space where
dedication of land as open space will not best serve the purposes set forth in Section
3.4.A. If the subdivider declines to do so, the Commission shall require the dedication of
open space.
3. If payment of such a fee is proposed by the subdivider, the Commission may refuse such
fee if it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are acceptable areas on the
subdivision which merit preservation.
4. Any open space payment shall be placed in a fund established by the Town to be used
for acquiring land for open space in accordance with the purposes of this Section 3.4.A.
5. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission and the subdivider, the procedures for
determining the amount of any fee in lieu of open space shall be in accordance with
Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended provided that any required
appraisal shall be performed by a Connecticut-licensed appraiser who has been certified
as a Member of the Appraisal Institute (MAI).
6. The fee in lieu of open space may be paid in one (1) lump sum by the subdivider or may
be made in partial payments at the time of the sale of each approved lot in the
subdivision. Partial payments shall be made in accordance with the formula set forth in
CGS Section 8-25.
7. When fractional payments are to be provided in lieu of open space land, the subdivider
shall execute a lien securing the total amount of the fee for the entire subdivision, and
such lien shall be recorded on the Town of Branford Land Records with a first priority
and a form and substance acceptable to the Town Attorney. A release of lien for each lot
shall be provided by the Town upon the Town’s receipt of the fee for each lot.
3.04.N Modification of Open Space Reservation.
1. To the extent required by CGS Section 8-25, the open space reservation requirement shall
not apply if:
(1) The transfer of all land is in a subdivision of less than five (5) parcels and is to a
parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin
of the transferor for no consideration, or
(2) The subdivision contains affordable housing as defined in CGS Section 8-39a
equal to 20 percent or more of the total housing to be constructed in such
subdivision.
2. The Commission shall require the subdivider to provide sufficient documentation to
assure that any exemption claimed under this section is legally warranted. Such
documentation shall generally include, without limitation, an affidavit by the subdivider
as to the identity of the transferees and adequate language on the final subdivision plans,
indicating that any transfers not protected under CGS Section 8-25 may result in the
revocation of subdivision approval .
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 18
3.05 Solar Access.
3.05.A General. Energy-efficient patterns of development and land use, the use of solar and other
renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation are encouraged.
1. The subdivider shall consider using solar energy techniques and site design techniques
that would not significantly increase the cost of the housing to the buyer, after tax credits,
subsidies and exemptions, and that have the potential to:
(1) Maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss, and provide thermal storage
within a building during the heating season, and
(2) Minimize heat gain and provide for natural cooling during the cooling season.
2. The site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) House orientation,
(2) Street and lot layout,
(3) Vegetation,
(4) Natural and man-made topographic features,
(5) Protection of solar access within the subdivision.
3.05.B Compliance. As part of the application, the subdivider shall demonstrate that these techniques
have been considered and employed, as appropriate.
3.06 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
3.06.A Applicability. Soil erosion and sediment control is required as part of any subdivision or
resubdivision.
3.06.B Requirements.
1. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted as part of any application for
a subdivision or resubdivision.
2. Such soil erosion and sediment control plan shall, in graphic and/or narrative form,
demonstrate adherence to the soil erosion and sediment control standards set forth in:
(1) Section 6.10 of the Branford Zoning Regulations,
(2) The “Connecticut Guidelines For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002)”, as
may be amended, and
(3) the “Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (2004)”, as may be amended.
3. Prior to the start of work, the Commission may require the subdivider to provide a
financial guarantee to ensure installation and maintenance of soil erosion and sediment
controls.
3.07 Grading and Earth Removal Activities.
3.07.A General. All grading, excavation, filling, tree clearing, and other soil disturbance shall be in
accordance with Section 6.8 of the Zoning Regulations.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 19
3.08 Tree Planting.
3.08.A Purpose. This section is intended to preserve and enhance trees and the tree canopy in order to
contribute to community character, decrease storm water run-off and erosion, provide shade, and
reduce air pollution.
3.08.B Requirements.
1. Street trees shall be planted as part of any subdivision unless existing trees meeting the
following requirements are preserved.
2. Trees to be planted shall:
(1) Be deciduous shade trees of a species acceptable to the Commission with a
mature height of 35 feet or greater (the use of Connecticut or New England
native species is encouraged and the use of invasive or potentially invasive
plants, as defined by the Connecticut Invasive Plants Council is prohibited).
(2) Planted on one side of an existing street and on both sides of any new street in
each subdivision unless considered unnecessary by the Commission due to the
preservation of existing healthy trees or inappropriate topographic or geologic
conditions
(3) Be located approximately 50 feet apart, subject to variations made necessary by
existing vegetation, driveways, intersection sight lines, and street corners as well
as by the species of trees planted.
(4) Be located within the Town right-of-way unless modified by the Commission
due to possible interference with wetlands, watercourses, topography, soils,
scenic views, intersection sight lines, solar access, winter conditions, or
underground or overhead utilities.
(5) Be at least two and one-half (2½) inch caliper or larger at the time of planting.
(6) Be planted and protected during street construction using good horticultural
practices.
(7) The lowest branches should be a minimum of six (6) feet above the ground
3. The applicant shall submit a street tree plan at the same scale as the subdivision site
development plan showing the location of all proposed street trees and a planting list
showing the number, size and species of all street trees to be planted and/or retained.
3.08.C Planting And Maintenance.
1. New trees shall be planted, protected, staked, and maintained using good horticultural
practice.
2. Any tree not surviving one (1) year after the completion of all required subdivision
improvements shall be replaced at the developer’s expense.
3. A financial guarantee shall be provided to ensure such replacement.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 20
This page intentionally left blank.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 21
Section 4 - Infrastructure Requirements
4.01 Streets.
4.01.A Overall Layout.
1. Proposed streets shall be planned and designed in harmony with existing and proposed
streets as shown in the Plan of Conservation and Development or by the Commission
through its own deliberations particularly with regard to location, extent, and
classification of streets.
2. Proposed streets shall be designed and constructed to provide a safe and convenient
system for prospective traffic and for continuation onto adjoining properties when
subdivided.
3. Proposed streets shall have at least one (1) intersection with a State Highway, an existing
Town street, or a proposed Town street that has been approved by the Commission and
has a financial guarantee on file with the Town in accordance with these Regulations.
4. In general, proposed streets shall be designed to follow the contour of the land with
consideration given to preserving natural resources, community resources, and cultural
resources.
4.01.B Street Planning.
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-25, the Commission must determine whether any
proposed street or streets in a prospective subdivision plan are in harmony with existing
or proposed principal thoroughfares shown in the plan of conservation and
development, especially in regard to safe intersections with such thoroughfares, and so
arranged and of such width, as to provide an adequate and convenient system for
present and prospective traffic needs. In order properly to discharge this responsibility,
the Commission reserves the right to deny any proposed street layout, or to require a
different street layout, if it finds that such denial or such alternative layout would better
serve those needs.
2. Proposed streets and rights-of-way shall be planned in such a manner as to provide safe
and convenient access to proposed lots and safe and convenient circulation for present
and prospective traffic within the neighborhood in which the subdivision is located.
3. In planning streets, due consideration shall be given to accomplishing an attractive
layout and development of the land.
4. Streets should in general follow the contour of the land and should have a location and
grade which preserves natural terrain, substantial trees, woods and other natural features
and which enhances property values in the subdivision.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 22
5. Dead end streets and dead end street systems are disfavored because of their limited
accessibility. More specifically, such streets and systems present a risk that ingress to
and egress from the lots they serve could be precluded by the blockage of the single
access outlet; for example, by storm-related damage, fallen trees, accidents, the presence
of emergency equipment along the street, or other causes. Although the Commission
recognizes that some landowners prefer dead end streets because they prevent through
traffic, the Commission finds that the safety benefits of through streets generally
outweigh the localized benefit of dead end streets and systems. Therefore, the
Commission shall not approve dead end streets or systems unless the applicant
demonstrates either:
(1) that the street or system could reasonably and conveniently be extended into
adjoining property upon the future development of that property and could later
become a through street; or
(2) that a new street is necessary to allow reasonable development of the property,
and that an alternative through-street layout is not feasible because:
(a) the existing uses or characteristics of adjoining property would prevent the
extension of the street; or
(b) an extension of the street would require an unreasonable amount of
excavation, grading, or filling or would cause unnecessary destruction or
degradation of natural resources.
6. Streets shall be planned in accordance with the following additional standards.
(1) Major Street: Major Streets shall be provided as indicated on any comprehensive
plan of development adopted by the Commission and where necessary to
connect major areas of town or to serve a major commercial or industrial area.
(2) Secondary Street: Secondary streets shall be planned as a logical system of
feeders and collectors connected to the major street system and shall be planned
to accommodate the volume, type and concentration of traffic anticipated in the
commercial, business or industrial areas.
(3) Local Street: Local streets shall provide for continuation of existing streets in
adjoining areas and for projection into adjoining properties when subdivided.
7. Proposed streets which may be projected into adjoining properties shall be carried to the
boundary line.
8. No reserve strips or other property configurations intended or designed to prevent
future road extensions or prevent access to abutting property shall be permitted.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 23
4.01.C Street Design and Construction Standards. Proposed streets shall be laid out, designed and
constructed in accordance with the following standards and specifications and any other
applicable regulations:
1. Right of Way Width: Streets shall have the following minimum width of right-of-way
according to their classification:
Right of Way Width
Arterial Street / Major Street 80 feet
Collector Street / Secondary Street 60 feet
Local Street 50 feet
2. Width of Pavement: Streets shall be designed with the following width of pavement
centered between the street lines:
Pavement Width
Arterial Street / Major Street 40 feet
Collector Street / Secondary Street 36 feet
Local Street (on-street parking not likely) 24 feet
Local Street (on-street parking likely) 30 feet
Turnaround 50 foot radius
3. Alignment: Connecting curves between tangents shall be provided for all deflection
angles in excess of five (5) degrees. Suitable tangents shall be provided between curves. A
minimum tangent length of 300 feet shall be provided between reverse curves. The
minimum radius of curvature at the centerline of streets shall be as follows:
Minimum Radius
Arterial Street / Major Street 600 feet
Collector Street / Secondary Street 300 feet
Local Street 150 feet
4. Grade: The minimum grade for any street shall be 1.0%, except that a minimum grade of
from 0.5% to 1.0% may be established for 100 feet or less and as tangents of vertical
curves. The maximum grade for any street shall not exceed the following according to its
classification:
Maximum Grade
Arterial Street / Major Street 6 percent
Collector Street / Secondary Street 8 percent
Local Street 10 percent
Turnaround 3 percent
5. Vertical Curves: Appropriate vertical curves shall be established on all streets and at
street intersections to insure adequate sight distance in accordance with the classification
of the street and good engineering practice. Where any street approaches an intersection
at a grade of 4% or more, a transition area, having a maximum grade of 2%, shall be
provided for a minimum of 50 feet measured from the right-of-way line of the street
intersected. The following minimum stopping sight distances shall be provided:
Minimum Vertical
Curve
Arterial Street / Major Street 350 feet
Collector Street / Secondary Street 250 feet
Local Street 250 feet
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 24
4.01.D Intersection Design. The following standards shall apply to street intersections:
1. Where a proposed street intersects an existing street in the vicinity of a third street, the
Commission may require that the centerline of the proposed road intersect at the same
point as the third street or require that the intersection be spaced at least 200 feet apart.
2. The Commission may require that the distance between intersections and connecting
streets be not more than 1200 feet to avoid excessively long blocks and unnecessary
circuitous travel on streets.
3. The Commission may limit the number of streets intersecting at any point.
4. Streets shall intersect one another at as near to a right angle as is practical. No
intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Proposed streets shall intersect
other streets such that the centerline of the proposed street shall be a straight line for a
distance of at least 100 feet from the intersecting street lines.
5. At street intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by an arc having a
minimum radius of 25 feet.
6. Proposed streets shall intersect other streets such that the pavement slope on the
proposed street shall not exceed two (2) percent within 50 feet of the intersection.
7. Intersections shall have unobstructed view from a driver’s eye (located at a height of
three and one-half (3½) feet above the surface of the proposed street and a location 20
feet back from the edge of the travel way of the intersected street) along both directions
of the intersected street. Such view shall be in conformance with current CTDOT and
AASHTO standards for the 85th percentile speed. The desirable sight distance shall be
provided whenever possible and no street shall be approved that does not provide for
the minimum sight distance. Such sight distance shall not be impaired by curvature or
slope, except in extreme conditions, in which case adequate alternative safety measures
shall be designated.
4.01.E Street Lines. Street lines on each side of a proposed street shall be parallel or shall be concentric
arcs, except at intersections and turnarounds designed in accordance with these Regulations. No
street right-of-way shall be widened beyond the minimum width specified in these Regulations
for the purpose of securing additional street frontage for proposed lots. The boundary line
between a private street and public street shall be clearly delineated.
4.01.F Existing Streets. Proposed subdivisions abutting an existing Town street or State Highway shall
provide for proper widening of the right-of-way of such street or highway to the width
appropriate for the classification indicted for such street or highway in the Zoning Regulations of
the Town of Branford.
4.01.G Cross Section. Each proposed street shall be designed with a cross section in accordance with the
classification of the street and the standard construction details of the Town of Branford except
that curbing may not be required by the Commission when the application includes an overall
stormwater management program intended to promote infiltration.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 25
4.01.H Permanent Dead-End Street Length Limitation
1. No permanent dead-end street shall be planned except as may be approved by the
Commission such as when topography or physical conditions make it impractical, in the
sole discretion of the Commission, to extend it or connect it with another proposed or
existing street.
2. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, no permanent dead-end street shall be
created that:
(1) Is less than 250 feet in length, or
(2) Results in more than twenty (20) lots being located on a permanent dead-end
street as measured from the nearest intersection, whether inside or outside the
subdivision, which has at least two independent routes of access.
3. In deciding upon the reasonable length of a permanent dead-end street, the Commission
may consider the distance from emergency services, the overall access to the location,
adverse topographic or soil conditions, difficult site configuration, future street
extension, or similar circumstances.
Location where maximum
road length is measured
from
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 26
4.01.I Permanent Turnaround Design.
1. A permanent dead-end street shall terminate in a turnaround area with a right-of-way
having at least a 60 foot radius and a paved turnaround area having at least a 50 foot
radius.
2. At the cul-de-sac end, the right-of-way of such permanent turnaround shall be located at
least 100 feet from the property line of the overall parcel being subdivided.
3. The paved turnaround shall not exceed a slope of three percent (3%) measured from the
start of the turnaround to its end.
4. The Commission may require that pedestrian, drainage and/or utility easements of
appropriate width be provided from the terminus to the abutting property line(s).
5. The Commission may allow alternative turnaround configurations (such as landscaped
center islands) in order to enhance the character of the community when adequate
provision has been made for long-term maintenance by others than the Town of
Branford.
Basic Design of
Permanent Turnaround (Example)
Possible Alternative Design of
Permanent Turnaround (Example)
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 27
4.01.J Street Extensions and Temporary Dead-End Streets.
1. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the extension of existing
streets and for the future extension of proposed streets into abutting property not yet
subdivided, except where the Commission determines that topography, soils or other
conditions make such continuation impractical or undesirable.
2. The Commission may require the subdivider to demonstrate the feasibility and
practicality of extending any proposed street onto or through adjacent property to
another street.
3. Any temporary dead-end street shall have a turnaround installed at a point near the
proposed extension with:
(1) A ten (10) foot paved spur extending along the road centerline from the
turnaround area toward the undeveloped land.
(2) A a temporary easement for the turnaround with a note on the map indicating
“Easement for temporary turnaround which automatically terminates upon
extension of street”.
(3) Adequate grading rights for the future extension of the proposed street.
Basic Design of
Temporary Turnaround (Example)
The 10-foot paved spur:
? Acts as a snow shelf while it is a
temporary end point;
? Provides visual notice that the
road may be extended at a later
date.
4. Any proposed future access to abutting undeveloped property which is perpendicular to
the proposed street shall have:
(1) The right-of-way deeded to the Town,
(2) The future roadway area graded with all slopes made necessary by such street
prepared and stabilized,
(3) No reserve strips left at the end or side of any access which adjoins abutting
property.
5. The subdivider of the adjoining land shall be responsible for:
(1) Preparing drawings showing and including all work required to connect and
complete the improvements and utilities between the existing street and the
proposed subdivision,
(2) Removing all segments of any temporary turnaround or other temporary
improvements outside the normal paved surface and suitably grading and
seeding the ground at such time as the street is extended.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 28
4.01.K Street Names.
1. The developer shall suggest names for all proposed streets, but the Commission shall
have complete discretion to accept, reject or replace any suggested names. Street names
proposed by the subdivider:
(1) Shall be indicated on the subdivision plan,
(2) Shall be selected so as to avoid similarity in spelling or sound with existing
private or public street names, and
(3) May draw upon National, State or Town historical events and personalities, and
natural, aesthetic and historic features of the subdivision area or its immediate
environs.
2. The following street nomenclature is recommended:
(1) Court or Place - a permanent dead-end street,
(2) Circle - a street that forms a loop with a second street by having both ends
intersect the second street at different locations,
(3) Drive or Lane - a local minor street,
(4) Road or Street - a major arterial or collector street or a street in a non-residential
zone.
4.01.L Street Signs and Traffic Controls.
1. Prior to Town acceptance of subdivision streets, the subdivider shall provide and install
at the subdivider’s sole cost and expense:
(1) Suitable traffic control devices and signs in accordance with the standards set
forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and
(2) Suitable permanent street name signs at all street intersections in accordance
with Town standards.
2. During street construction and prior to the issuance of any building permit, temporary
street name signs and suitable traffic control devices of a durable, weatherproof material
shall be installed by the subdivider at street intersections.
4.01.M Street Acceptance.
The Commission’s approval of a street pursuant to these Regulations means that the Commission
will recommend and support the acceptance of the street by the Town of Branford. However,
Town acceptance of streets requires a separate process that is not under the control of the
Commission. Therefore, the Commission cannot and does not guarantee that any proposed
street will be accepted by the Town of Branford, even if such street would comply with the
provisions of these Regulations.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 29
4.02 Driveways.
4.02.A Conformity With Zoning. Any lot proposed as part of a subdivision or resubdivision shall be
served by a driveway that conforms to the requirements of Section 6.12 of the Zoning
Regulations.
4.02.B Design. As part of the subdivision review, the Commission may require the submission of a plan
and profile drawing and construction information in order to determine whether a proposed
driveway will conform to the requirements of Section 6.12 of the Zoning Regulations.
4.03 Sidewalks / Pedestrians.
4.03.A When Required. The Commission may require that sidewalks be provided within any
subdivision or resubdivision. Guidance for the when sidewalks should be provided can be found
in the Plan of Conservation and Development.
4.03.B Design.
1. Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Town Code Section 216-
43.
2. Sidewalks shall be built in compliance with the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA).
4.03.C Pedestrian Easements. In areas where the proposed street system does not conform to a
convenient pattern of pedestrian circulation, particularly in the vicinity of parks, schools,
playgrounds or other public or semipublic places, the Commission may require the provision of
20 foot wide easements for the establishment of pedestrian ways.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 30
4.04 Sewerage.
4.04.A Documentation.
1. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to supply satisfactory evidence to the
Commission and the Health Department that each lot will either be served by the Town
sewer system or that the lot will adequately satisfy the requirements of the State Health
Code for a sewerage system and not endanger public health, safety or general welfare.
2. The Commission shall not approve any lot where insufficient evidence has been
provided with regard to sewerage disposal to satisfy the requirements of the State Health
Code.
4.04.B Design. Where private sewage disposal (such as a septic system) is to be used, approval by the
Health Department for each proposed lot shall be obtained prior to approval of the subdivision.
4.04.C Construction. Where Town sewers will be provided, all sewer mains and laterals within the
street right-of-way shall be installed prior to the final surfacing of the street.
4.05 Water.
4.05.A Compliance. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to supply satisfactory evidence to the
Commission and the Health Department that a potable water supply will be provided for each
lot.
1. The Commission shall not approve any lot where insufficient evidence has been
provided with regard to water supply to satisfy the requirements of the State Health
Code.
2. In accordance with CGS Section 8-25a, any subdivision using water supplied by a water
company incorporated on or after October 1, 1984 shall not be approved unless such
company has been issued a certificate pursuant to CGS Section 16-262m, as amended.
4.05.B Design.
1. In the event the proposed subdivision should or shall be served by a public water supply
system, provision shall be made for the installation of water mains and fire hydrants
within the proposed development (See Section 4.9).
2. Water mains shall be installed parallel to and at a fixed distance from the center line of
the street.
4.05.C Installation. Where public water will be provided, all water lines and supply connections within
the street right-of-way shall be installed prior to the final surfacing of the street.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 31
4.06 Storm Drainage.
4.06.A Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide guidelines for adequate drainage facilities,
whether structural or non-structural, for the control, collection, treatment, conveyance,
infiltration, and disposal of storm water, other surface water and subsurface water, whether
originating in the subdivision or elsewhere.
4.06.B Requirements for All Drainage Facilities.
1. All drainage facilities shall be designed by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer
and shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer and the Commission.
2. Submitted drainage reports shall contain calculations, plans, profiles, and construction
details sufficient to document compliance with the requirements of these regulations.
3. Drainage facilities shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all
buildings and prevent ponding of water after construction of streets, drainage and
buildings are completed. All driveways shall be designed to have appropriate drainage
in order to minimize discharge of water to the Town street, right-of-way, and adjacent
property.
4. The design and construction of storm drainage facilities shall:
(1) Avoid or prevent any increase in the rate of storm water runoff from the
property;
(2) Minimize any increase in the volume of storm water runoff from the property;
(3) Minimize any increase in the concentration of storm water runoff from the
property;
(4) Avoid flooding adjacent property from the headwater and backwater produced
by bridges, culverts, and other structures;
(5) Not result in standing or stagnant water within the limits of the proposed
subdivision unless such condition is specifically approved by the Commission as
part of a stormwater management plan;
(6) Make proper provision (such as easements or manholes) for drainage from
development of adjacent properties; and
5. The design engineer shall prepare a pre-development and post-development analysis of
storm water runoff from the site and shall:
(1) Submit such calculations for a 2-year, a 5-year, a 10-year, a 25-year, a 50-year,
and a 100-year storm to the Town Engineer; and
(2) Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that there will be no increase
in the peak rate of storm water runoff from the development based on a 25-year
storm frequency with a duration of 24 hours.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 32
6. All drainage design formulas and analyses shall adhere to acceptable engineering
practice and the calculations and their method of derivation shall be indicated as part of
the application.
7. Rainfall intensities used for storm drainage design shall be taken from the U.S. Weather
Bureau “Rainfall Intensity - Duration Frequency Curves” for the nearest rain gauge.
8. Drainage structures shall be designed to accommodate the following storm frequency:
(1) A 25-year storm frequency for streets within the subdivision (including catch
basins, inlets, pipes, underdrains and gutters)
(2) A 100-year storm frequency for culverts, bridges over watercourses, and
detention/retention basins.
4.06.C Non-Structural Drainage Facilities.
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission encourages the use of “soft” (non-structural)
stormwater management techniques (such as swales) and other drainage techniques that
reduce impervious surfaces and enable infiltration, where appropriate, provided the
drainage elements conform to Town Standards.
2. The Commission may approve the use of surface retention or detention facilities, swales
or ditches for drainage after review by the Town Engineer, provided such measures are
designed and constructed to minimize soil erosion and danger to public health or safety.
Proposed surface drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the best
engineering practice.
3. Where detention or retention basins are to be provided, hydrographs shall be generated
to document overall flows through the basin.
4.06.D Structural Drainage Facilities.
1. Long, diagonal drainage crossings under the pavement that can cause differential street
settling shall be avoided.
2. Where a development connects to existing streets, the subdivider shall provide
appropriate drainage at the intersections.
3. Spacing between sets of catch basins shall be a maximum of 300 feet. The Commission
may require closer spacing if recommended by the Town Engineer or other qualified
engineer based on a gutter flow analysis.
4. The first set of catch basins in a storm drain system shall be located a maximum of 350
feet from the roadway high point.
5. A drainage structure shall also be placed along a storm drain at each vertical grade
change, at each change in horizontal direction, and at each junction point of two or more
storm drains.
6. The minimum pipe size for all storm drain systems constructed under these Regulations
shall be 12-inch inside diameter.
7. The material for all structural storm drain systems constructed under these Regulations
shall be reinforced concrete or equivalent acceptable to the Commission.
8. A minimum cover of two (2) feet shall be provided for all storm drains.
9. Proper bedding, grading, and cover shall be provided around all drainage structures.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 33
4.06.E Drainage Outlets and Channels.
1. All storm drain system outlets shall be terminated with an approved outlet structure and
stabilized as necessary. Easements for outlet pipes shall extend to a suitable existing
storm drain or a natural watercourse. No storm drain system shall outlet into a natural
watercourse, whether continually flowing or intermittent, so as to exceed the capacity of
the watercourse.
2. A two-stage detention basin may be required by the Commission to prevent silting of
streams, wetlands, or other areas contiguous to the drainage outfall and/or to reduce the
rate of runoff to pre-construction conditions.
3. When drainage outlets or channels are required by the Commission for drainage
purposes, the subdivider shall provide the Town a plan and any required rights-of-way
for long-term maintenance.
4.06.F Drainage Easements.
1. Drainage facilities located outside of the street right-of way shall be located in perpetual,
unobstructed drainage easements deeded to the Town of Branford.
2. Such easements shall be of adequate width to allow convenient access for maintenance.
3. The subdivider must obtain, in writing, permanent drainage rights in favor of the Town
for any required drainage flows across adjacent properties from streets, catch basins,
culverts, or any other facilities or improvements proposed for acceptance by the Town.
4. If any drainage facilities are to be accepted by the Town, the developer must provide, in
writing, easements allowing the Town to access such facilities. Such drainage easements
shall be shown on the subdivision plan and filed on the Land Records.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 34
4.07 Wire Utilities.
4.07.A General. New electric, telephone, television cable and other utility wires shall be installed
underground unless the Commission determines, based on a written report submitted by the
subdivider and reviewed by the Town Engineer, that such underground installation is
inappropriate or infeasible for all or a part of the subdivision or resubdivision after considering:
1. The type of service existing in the area adjacent to the subdivision,
2. Topographic and construction conditions, and
3. The size of the subdivision or resubdivision.
4.07.B Installation.
1. All utility pipes and conduits shall be installed in the side strips of the Town right-of-way
wherever possible and such pipes and conduits shall be installed prior to final surfacing
of the street.
2. All utilities associated with the subdivision shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense
prior to acceptance of the street by the Town. Electric, telephone, cable television, and
any other utilities shall be installed in proposed and existing streets as specified by the
appropriate utility company and shall be subject to the inspection and acceptance of such
company and the Town Engineer.
3. All utilities shall be located and mapped on an as-built drawing prior to acceptance of the
street by the Town.
4.07.C Easements. Any utility located outside of the Town right-of-way shall be located in an easement
adequate in width to allow for present or future connections or extensions of such utilities and
for the maintenance thereof.
4.08 Street Lighting.
4.08.A Purpose. This section is intended to provide for efficient illumination of streets and sidewalks
sufficient to ensure public safety, control hazardous glare, and minimize adverse impacts on
residents and wildlife.
4.08.B Layout. Illumination shall be provided at all road intersections and at additional locations as
determined by the Commission to be necessary to ensure public safety. In general, additional
street lights should be located along sharp curves, near road hazards, at pedestrian crossings, and
at the end of cul-de-sacs. Proposed street light locations shall be shown on site development
plans submitted with the subdivision application..
4.08.C Fixtures. All fixtures must be full cut-off.
4.08.D Installation, Maintenance and Electricity. Prior to acceptance of the street by the Town, all
street lighting associated with the subdivision shall be installed at the developer’s expense. The
developer shall provide for maintenance and electricity for street lights until the subdivision
roads are accepted by the Town.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 35
4.09 Fire Protection.
4.09.A General. Wherever public water service is available, each subdivider shall provide adequate fire
protection to protect public safety.
4.09.B Public Water Supply. Wherever public water service is available, each subdivider shall provide
an adequate number of fire hydrants in appropriate locations to protect public safety.
4.09.C Areas Not Served By Public Water. Where public water service is not available or provided,
each subdivider shall provide supplemental water supply system(s) to protect public safety.
Such supplemental water supply system(s) may, with approval of the Commission, consist of:
1. Hydrant(s) to existing or proposed fire ponds,
2. Hydrant(s) to underground cistern(s),
3. Residential sprinkler systems,
4. Other mechanisms acceptable to the Commission to provide for supplemental fire
protection (such as an easement for future installation of an underground cistern).
4.09.D Design. Facilities for fire protection shall be sized and constructed in accordance with NFPA
Standard 1141 - “Fire Protection in Planned Building Groups” and NFPA Standard 1231 -
“Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Firefighting”, as amended.
1. The Town Engineer shall, in conjunction with the Fire Marshal, make recommendations
to the Commission regarding the proposed location, size, design, construction
specifications, and installation of such supplemental water supply system(s) and access
thereto.
2. The land area containing any supplemental water supply system(s) shall be easily
accessible by emergency personnel and shall, as necessary, be encumbered by easements
approved by the Town Attorney to ensure the Town’s perpetual right to access, maintain,
and or improve any supplemental water supply system(s) and access thereto for
firefighting purposes, and obligate the property owners not to inhibit the use of the fire
protection facility for firefighting purposes without the approval of the Fire Marshal.
3. The Commission may require the use of landscaping or other materials to screen access
routes, pipes, or other structures associated with the installation of supplemental water
supply system(s). Such landscaping or other materials shall be approved by the Fire
Marshal.
4. All fire protection measures required by the Commission and the Fire Department:
(1) May be required to be installed prior to issuance of a building permit for any
dwelling in the subdivision, and
(2) Shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
dwelling in the subdivision.

Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 37
Section 5 - Application Procedures
5.01 General Requirements.
5.01.A Overall. Any subdivision application shall be accompanied by forms, fees, maps, plans, profiles
and all additional documentation, information and reports as prescribed in these Regulations.
5.01.B Professional Assistance Requirements. Plans submitted under these Regulations shall be
prepared by the following person or persons:
TYPE OF DESIGN DESIGN PROFESSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Delineation of the boundary lines of the outside
perimeter of a parcel as well as the interior lots and
streets.
Sealed by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor
Design of streets, drainage systems, sanitary sewer
systems, sewage disposal systems, and water
supply and distribution.
Sealed by a properly qualified, Connecticutlicensed
professional engineer
5.01.C Authorization.
1. Each application shall be signed by the owner of record or his/her duly authorized agent
or representative. If the application is signed by an agent or representative, a written
instrument evidencing the agent's authority to apply shall accompany the application.
2. It is often necessary for the Commission to conduct an on-site inspection of parcels
proposed for subdivision in order for the Commission to understand the physical and
locational characteristics of the parcel that may influence subdivision design and
feasibility. Therefore, the subdivider must be prepared to grant permission for the
Commission or its agents, consultants or representatives to enter the property at
reasonable times for such purposes. As a condition of any subdivision approval, the
subdivider must also allow Commission and Town representatives, agents, and
consultants reasonable entry onto the premises for the purpose of:
(1) Reviewing the proposed subdivision,
(2) Inspecting the property and any proposed improvements,
(3) Installing the proposed and required improvements in the event of failure of the
subdivider to make such improvements or properly maintain them until the
Town has assumed responsibility for them.
5.01.D Submission. All applications shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office during
regular working hours. The application shall be dated as of the actual date submitted.
5.01.E Review by Town. The Commission retains the right to have any information submitted with
regard to an application reviewed by Town staff or officials, and to consult with any other
qualified agency or person as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be advisable for their
information, review and recommendations. In accordance with CGS Section 8-1c and any
municipal land use fee ordinance, the subdivider may be required to compensate the Town for
any review fees and related expenses.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 38
5.02 Formal Subdivision Application.
5.02.A General. A formal application for subdivision shall include the following:
1. One (1) copy of the prescribed application form, fully and properly completed and
executed.
2. The required application processing fee.
3. Plans and other documents as required by these Regulations or as required by the
Commission.
4. If the application is for a resubdivision, the application shall include a copy of the plan(s) of the
original subdivision and any subsequent resubdivision as approved by the Commission and filed
with the Town Clerk showing all of the land area involved in the original subdivision.
5.02.B Plan Requirements. Submitted plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1” =
40’) on 24” by 36” sheets. Four copies at full size and eight copies on 11” by 17” sheets are
required. Plans shall contain the following information:
1. Drawing Requirements.
(1) A title block indicating:
(a) names of owner, subdivider, engineer and/or surveyor.
(b) name of subdivision, drawing date and revision dates.
(2) A north arrow and a map scale.
(3) Signature Block for Planning and Zoning Commission Chairman and Secretary
along with space to insert the expiration date (required on all sheets).
(4) Embossed or stamped seal of the appropriate professional(s) and an original
signature of each such professional (required on all sheets).
(5) A Key Map at a scale of 1 inch=1,000 feet or less locating:
(a) the subdivision within the surrounding properties.
(b) the proposed street system in relation to existing streets.
(6) If multiple sheets are used, an Index Map for multiple sheets or sections showing
the entire subdivision with lots, lot numbers, streets, street names, sheet
delineation and match lines between sections.
(7) Zoning data table showing zoning district(s), lot area requirements, setback
requirements, and other relevant zoning information.
(8) The following statement shall be provided on the record subdivision drawing:
(a) “The filing of an approved subdivision plan in the Office of the Town Clerk:
(b) Shall constitute an offer of dedication to the Town for acceptance as a street
of any land shown as a street on such plan,
(c) Shall constitute an offer to the Town for the dedication of land for easements
or other public use as shown on such plan,
(d) Shall be binding upon the owner of such land, his heirs, successors and
assigns, and
(e) Shall not obligate the Town to accept or not to accept such dedication(s). The
procedure for acceptance of any street or other land or interest in land shall
be as determined by the Town of Branford.”
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 39
2. Property Information.
(1) Existing and proposed property boundaries with pin and monument locations.
(2) Parcel areas (including area of each proposed lot excluding areas designated as
steep slopes, inland wetlands and watercourses).
(3) Street address.
(4) Owner’s name(s) and lot line locations for abutting parcels.
(5) Existing and proposed easements and other rights-of-way for utilities, drainage,
access, conservation easements, walks, etc.
(6) Proposed open space(s).
3. Existing Site Conditions.
(1) Existing topography for the subject property with two foot contours based on
field survey.
(2) Existing within 100 feet of the perimeter of the subject property with two foot
contours based on aerial topography (available from the Town).
(3) Wetlands, watercourses, and other water bodies on and near the property
(flagged by a soil scientist and surveyed).
(4) Steep slopes equal to or greater than 25 percent.
(5) Existing drainage features on and near the property.
(6) Base flood elevation data and floodplain data.
(7) Historic buildings and sites, including archeological sites, stonewalls,
monuments, and other structures having historical or cultural significance.
(8) Identification of significant trees in areas of proposed improvements or clearing.
(9) Other community resources and cultural resources as defined in these
Regulations.
4. Soils Information.
(1) Soil types consistent with the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the USDA Soil
Conservation Service.
(2) Locations and identification numbers of percolation test holes and deep hole
tests for each lot.
(3) Results of percolation tests and deep pits.
(4) Notes setting forth any limitations or requirements of the Health Department.
5. Design of Lot Improvements.
(1) Building set-back lines with dimensions.
(2) Location of existing and proposed structures and other improvements (e.g.,
driveways, retaining walls, culverts, or fences).
(3) Location of proposed septic fields with distances to property lines and any
existing well within 200 feet (on or off site).
(4) Location of proposed wells and water sources for each lot, keyed to the Sanitary
Report.
(5) Driveway design with proposed grading and slopes.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 40
6. Design of Overall Improvements.
(1) All proposed soil erosion and sediment control procedures.
(2) Street design including overall layout and grading, plan and profile, construction
details and, where applicable:
(a) sightline - centerline profiles for 300 feet on existing and future streets to
which a subdivision street connects.
(b) cross sections with field topography at 50 foot intervals.
(c) sight line plan and profile.
(3) Drainage design plan and profile and construction details and, where applicable:
(a) points of discharge to or from any street or property.
(b) location of storm water detention.
(4) Utility design (including connections to existing lines).
(5) Detailed drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes, and other special
structures.
(6) The location and design of supplemental water supply systems or fire protection
systems to be installed in the development.
(7) The location and design of streetlights to be installed in the development.
(8) A lighting plan documenting existing and proposed lighting along with
illumination levels.
(9) The location and species of street trees.
(10) Each site development plan drawing and each plan and profile drawing shall
contain a note indicating that, prior to initiation of any tree clearing or site
development activity:
(a) A pre-development meeting shall take place with the Town Engineer and the
Town Planner or their designees,
(b) A cash bond or other suitable financial guarantee shall be provided to the
Town for soil erosion and sediment control, and
(c) Protection for significant trees to be preserved shall be installed.
7. Miscellaneous Requirements.
(1) Lots intended for separate ownership or building shall be numbered
consecutively throughout the entire subdivision beginning with the number "1."
Resubdivisions of lots may be lettered consecutively beginning with the letter
“A.” Adjoining sections of the same subdivision having the same title shall not
duplicate numbers.
(2) When a plan covers only a portion of the subdivider’s entire holdings, the
subdivider shall submit information to demonstrate to the Commission that the
future extension of roads and/or utilities to adjacent properties has been
provided for or that such road access and/or utilities are, or will be, otherwise
available to such adjacent properties.
(3) Design of streets and utilities shall be based on official Town, State or USGS
topographic benchmarks or other permanent benchmarks approved by the Town
Engineer and the benchmarks used shall be noted on the plan.
(4) All appropriate details and dimensions necessary to clearly explain the proposed
street, drainage, and utility construction, including type of construction, material,
top of frame, size, pitch, invert elevations and stream cross sections and profiles,
etc. shall be shown, and shall be in conformity with applicable standards.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 41
5.02.C Additional Information. In addition to plans and documents required by these Regulations, the
Commission may require the submission of:
1. Funds to compensate the Commission for any costs of review or guidance as authorized
by CGS Section 8-1c and any municipal land use fee ordinance,
2. Evidence of application to CTDOT seeking approval of access onto any State Highway or
discharge of drainage into a State system or onto State property,
3. Copies of any decisions rendered by local, state or federal agencies in connection with the
proposed development (e.g. Connecticut Department of Transportation, Connecticut
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, Army Corps of Engineers,
Branford Inland Wetlands Commission, and/or the Branford Water Pollution Control
Authority).
4. A detailed statement of the estimated cost of constructing the proposed subdivision
streets, accessways and other improvements,
5. Any proposed grant or grants to the Town, including any required easements for
drainage, access, utility, or other purposes. The Commission may consult with the Town
Attorney regarding such grants and may require such modifications as it may deem
necessary or appropriate to protect the Town’s interests. The applicant shall also submit:
(1) A title certificate, signed by a Connecticut attorney, showing that the title to the
property covered above is free of encumbrances that would render the title
unmarketable or would otherwise prevent the use of the Property for the
purpose for which it is granted to the Town.
(2) A written agreement permitting entrance by the Town onto the land covered by
the grants mentioned above, as well as the area of the streets shown on the
subdivision plan, for the purposes of inspection and of installing the required
improvements in the event of the failure of the applicant to make such
improvements or to properly maintain them until the Town has assumed
responsibility for them.
(a) Such written agreements shall provide that the developer, on demand,
shall execute and deliver to the Town a deed to the area of the street or
streets shown on the subdivision plan as approved.
(b) Such easements, deeds and agreements shall be presented prior to
endorsement of the Record Subdivision Map.
6. A Coastal Site Plan Application for any subdivision within the Coastal Boundary,
7. Any additional information and data as may be required from the subdivider in order to
establish that the proposed subdivision complies with these Regulations,
8. Additional copies of application materials as necessary for review by the Commission or
other Town agencies.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 42
5.03 Receipt and Scheduling.
5.03.A Review By Other Agencies.
If a formal application for subdivision approval involves land regulated as an inland wetland or
watercourse, the subdivider shall submit an application to the Inland Wetlands Commission no
later than the date the subdivision application is filed with the Commission. The subdivider is
encouraged to acquire permits and approvals from the Inland Wetlands Commission prior to
submission to the Commission.
5.03.B Date of Receipt.
The date of receipt of an application shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting
immediately following the day of submission of such application or 35 days after submission,
whichever is sooner.
5.03.C Public Hearings.
1. Upon receipt of an application for a resubdivision, the Commission shall schedule a
public hearing.
2. The Commission may, but shall not be obliged to, schedule a public hearing on an
application for a subdivision that is not also a resubdivision.
5.03.D Commission Review.
1. The Commission shall not be required to consider an application for approval of a
subdivision plan while another application for subdivision of the same or substantially
the same parcel is pending before the Commission.
2. The Commission may require field staking of proposed improvements, such as proposed
streets and accessways, for visual inspection. Such stakes shall be installed at intervals of
50 feet along the center lines.
5.03.E Withdrawal. At any time following the submission of an application and prior to final action by
the Commission, the applicant may withdraw the application by filing with the Commission a
written request to that effect.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 43
5.04 Notice Provisions.
5.04.A Written Notice, By Applicant. If a public hearing is required, the subdivider shall send, by
Certificate of Mailing, written notice of the date and subject matter of any public hearing to the
owners of all land located within 100 feet of the subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the
date of the first public hearing. Prior to or at the public hearing, the subdivider shall deliver to
the Commission proof of mailing of such written notice.
5.04.B Notice to Regional Water Authority and Connecticut Department of Public Health, By
Applicant.
1. When an application, is filed with the Commission and it involves property that is within
the aquifer protection area delineated pursuant to section 22a-354c or the watershed of a
water company, the applicant or the person making the filing shall provide written
notice of the application, petition, request or plan to the water company and the
Commissioner of Public Health, provided such water company or said commissioner has
filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed
not later than seven (7) days after the date of the application.
3. Such water company and the Commissioner of Public Health may, through a
representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition,
request or plan.
5.04.C Notice to Regional Planning Agency, By Town. In accordance with CGS 8-26b, when any
proposed subdivision or resubdivision will abut land in another Connecticut municipality or
include land in two (2) or more Connecticut municipalities:
1. The Commission shall give written notice of such subdivision plan to the regional
planning agency or agencies in which it or the other municipality is located by certified
mail, return receipt requested not later than thirty days before the date of the first public
hearing to be held in relation thereto,
2. A regional planning agency receiving such notice shall, at or before the hearing, report to
the Commission and to the subdivider on its findings on the inter-municipal aspects of
the proposed subdivision, including street layout, storm drainage, sewer and water
service and such other matters as it considers appropriate.
3. If the report of a regional planning agency is not submitted at or before the hearing, it
shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposed subdivision.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 44
5.04.D Notice to Adjacent Municipalities, By Town.
1. In accordance with CGS 8-7d(f), the Commission shall notify the clerk of any adjoining
Connecticut municipality by certified mail, return receipt requested, within seven (7)
days of the date of receipt of an application concerning any project on any site in which:
(1) Any portion of the property affected by the decision of the Commission is within
500 feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality,
(2) A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use
streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or to exit the site,
(3) A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site
will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system
within the adjoining municipality, or
(4) Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
2. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any
hearing on any such application.
5.04.E Notice to the Connecticut Department of Energy And Environmental Protection Regarding
Coastal Management, By Town. In accordance with CGS Section 22a-109(d), the Commission
shall notify the Commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Energy And Environmental
Protection by certified mail, return receipt requested, within 15 days of the date of receipt of an
application concerning any project within the coastal boundary involving a shoreline flood and
erosion control structure, as defined in CGS Section 22a-109(c).
5.04.F Notice to Public Notice Registry, By Town. In accordance with CGS Section 8-7d(g), the
Commission shall provide notice to all persons and organizations that have registered for notice
of pending public hearings.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 45
5.05 Public Hearings.
5.05.A General. To the extent required by CGS Section 8-7d, when a hearing is to be held on an
application, such hearing shall:
1. Commence within 65 days after receipt of such petition, application, or request, and
2. Be completed within 35 days after such hearing commences, unless a shorter period of
time is required.
3. The applicant may allow extensions of time to commence and complete a hearing in
accordance with CGS Section 8-7d.
5.05.B Notice in Newspaper, By Town. To the extent required by CGS Section 8-7d, notice of the
hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in Branford at least twice
at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than 15 days, nor less than ten (10)
days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing.
5.05.C Access to Application Materials. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto
shall be open for public inspection.
5.05.D Conduct of Hearing. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may
be represented by agent or by attorney.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 46
5.06 Application Processing and Action.
5.06.A Commission Action. The Commission shall act upon an application by approving, modifying
and approving, or disapproving the application.
5.06.B Timeframe to Make a Decision. To the extent required by CGS Section 8-7d, action on an
application shall be rendered within 65 days after completion of the public hearing.
5.06.C Extensions. The applicant may allow extensions of time to make a decision on the application in
accordance with CGS Section 8-7d.
5.06.D Decision Criteria. In making its decision, the Commission shall give due consideration to the
material contained in the record. Any action by the Commission shall:
1. Set forth any reasons for the decision,
2. Set forth any conditions and modifications to which the approval is subject, and
3. Be stated on the Commission's records.
5.06.E Automatic Approval. To the extent required by CGS Section 8-26, a subdivision plan shall be
taken as approved if the Commission does not take action on the application act in accordance
with the statutory timeframe, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Commission on
demand.
5.06.F Notice of Decision. The Commission shall cause notice of its action to be:
1. Delivered to the subdivider by certified mail,
2. Posted in the Office of the Town Clerk, and
3. Published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in Branford as provided in CGS
Section 8-26.
4. Mailed, within 15 days, to the Commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Energy
And Environmental Protection, if the subdivision involves a shoreline flood and erosion
control structure.
5.06.G Failure to Provide Notice. To the extent authorized by CGS Section 8-26(d), if the Commission
fails to cause notice of its action to be published as provided in CGS Section 8-26 (within 15 days
after a decision has been rendered), the subdivider may publish such notice within ten (10) days
thereafter.
5.06.H Street Acceptance. Commission approval of the plans shall not be deemed an acceptance by the
Town of any street or other land shown as offered for dedication to public use.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 47
Section 6 - Post-Approval Procedures
6.01 Finalizing Approved Plans.
6.01.A General. Final plans shall be revised to conform to any modifications called for in the
Commission’s action. No subdivision plan shall be signed by the Commission Chairman or
Secretary until all applicable modifications have been made and conditions of approval have
been met.
6.01.B Post-Approval Modifications. After approval by the Commission, no other changes, erasures,
modifications or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plan or supporting plans without the
approval of the Commission.
6.02 Alternative Approval Formats
6.02.A Declaration Of Approval Format. When submitting the subdivision plan and supporting plans
to the Commission for signature, the subdivider shall declare one of the following approval
formats as authorized by CGS Section 8-25:
1. “Final Approval / No Financial Guarantee Required“ as provided in Section 6.2.B,
2. “Final Approval / Financial Guarantee Provided” as provided in Section 6.2.C, or
3. “Conditional Approval” as provided in Section 6.2.D.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 48
6.02.B Plans To Be Filed As “Final Approval / No Financial Guarantee Required”.
1. A subdivision plan and supporting plans may be filed as “Final Approval / No Financial
Guarantee Required” when:
(1) no street improvements, public utilities, or other requirements are required to
be provided prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision, or
(2) when street improvements, public utilities, and other requirements have been
completed to the satisfaction of the Commission and the Town Engineer and, if
relevant, accepted by the Town of Branford prior to the filing of the subdivision
plans on the land records.
2. Such subdivision plan shall contain the following signature block:
Final Approval /
No Financial Guarantee Required
No street improvement, public utilities, or other requirements were required to be
provided prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision or street improvements, public
utilities, and other requirements have been completed and, if necessary, accepted by the
Town of Branford.
Lots in the subdivision
may be sold at any time.
At a meeting on ________________________, the Branford Planning and Zoning
Commission approved this subdivision plan in accordance with the Branford
Subdivision Regulations.
______________________________________________ _______________
Chairman Date
______________________________________________ _______________
Secretary Date
Expiration Date:
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 49
6.02.C Plans To Be Filed As “Final Approval / Financial Guarantee Provided”.
1. A subdivision plan may be filed as “Final Approval / Financial Guarantee Provided”
when a financial guarantee in a form and amount acceptable to the Commission has been
provided for street improvements, public utilities, and other requirements remaining to
be constructed.
2. Such subdivision plan shall contain the following signature block:
Final Approval /
Financial Guarantee Provided
A financial guarantee has been provided to the Town of Branford to ensure that street
improvements, public utilities, and other requirements will be completed.
Lots in the subdivision
may be sold at any time.
At a meeting on ________________________, the Branford Planning and Zoning
Commission approved this subdivision plan in accordance with the Branford
Subdivision Regulations.
______________________________________________ _______________
Chairman Date
______________________________________________ _______________
Secretary Date
Expiration Date:
In accordance with CGS Section 8-26c, the improvements or other requirements shall be
completed by ___________________.
Date
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 50
3. Acceptable financial guarantees shall include:
(1) One or more savings accounts, money market accounts, or certificates of deposit
from financial institutions approved by the Town of Branford provided:
(a) each such account shall be federally insured for the full amount of the
deposit, and
(b) the Town of Branford shall have the sole authority to withdraw funds
from the account.
(2) A certified or official check from a financial institution approved by the Town of
Branford made payable only to the Town of Branford.
(3) an unconditional irrevocable letter of credit in accordance with the sample letter
in the Appendix approved by the Town of Branford and issued by a financial
institution authorized to do business in Connecticut naming the Town as the sole
beneficiary.
4. An estimate of the cost of all public improvements shall be prepared by the subdivider’s
engineer for review and comment by the Town Engineer.
5. Any financial guarantee which has an expiration date shall include the following
provisions:
(1) the financial guarantee shall not expire unless the Commission or its designated
agent has received written notice of such expiration at least thirty (30) days but
not more than forty-five (45) days before such expiration is to occur, and
(2) in the event such notice is received, the Town may draw without further
condition the balance of the financial guarantee, and
(3) unless such notice is received, the financial guarantee shall automatically be
extended for a period of not less than one year until all improvements or other
requirements of these regulations are completed.
6. If the person posting a financial guarantee under this section requests a release of all or a
portion of such financial guarantee, the Commission shall, not later than sixty-five days
after receiving such request:
(1) release or authorize the release of any such financial guarantee or portion
thereof, provided the Commission is reasonably satisfied that the improvements
for which such financial guarantee or portion thereof was posted have been
completed, or
(2) provide the person posting such financial guarantee with a written explanation
as to the improvements that must be completed before such financial guarantee
or portion thereof may be released.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 51
7. Release of Financial Guarantee. No required financial guarantee shall be released by
the Commission until:
(1) The release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant, providing sufficient
documentation of costs remaining on the project, prepared by a professional
engineer,
(2) The Town Engineer has submitted a letter indicating whether all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed and whether all conditions
and requirements of the Commission's approval have been satisfied, and
(3) The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission, or agent,
through submission of a set of detailed "Record” or “As-Built" plans or sufficient
documentation that all improvements and other work are in accordance with
submitted site plans. All Record and As-Built plans shall be filed on the
Branford Land Records.
8. Retention of Financial Guarantee for Maintenance. A minimum of ten percent of the
total cost of construction and installation of all public improvements shall be retained by
the Town for a minimum of twelve months after completion (see Section 6.09.D).
9. Accrual of Interest or Dividends. Any interest or dividend accruing on any account or
instrument shall accrue in the name of the subdivider and such funds:
(1) Shall be deemed to increase the principal amount of the financial guarantee, and
(2) May be used by the Town in the same manner as the principal.
10. Use of Financial Guarantee by Town. To the extent allowed by law, the Town or the
Commission may use funds derived from a financial guarantee to satisfy a subdivider’s
obligations under these Regulations. If the financial guarantee is inadequate to satisfy all
such obligations, the subdivider shall remain liable for the remainder.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 52
6.02.D Plans To Be Filed As “Conditional Approval”.
1. A subdivision plan and supporting plans shall be filed as “Conditional Approval” when
the street improvements, public utilities, and other requirements have not been
completed prior to filing of the subdivision plans and no financial guarantee has been
provided to the Commission to ensure that such improvements will be constructed.
2. A conditional approval shall lapse five years from the date it is granted, provided the
applicant may apply for and the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a renewal of
such conditional approval for an additional period of up to five years at the end of any
five-year period.
3. Such subdivision plan shall contain the following signature block:
Conditional Approval /
No Financial Guarantee Provided
Street improvements, public utilities, or other requirements in the subdivision have
NOT been completed to the satisfaction of the Commission and the Town Engineer and
a financial guarantee has NOT been provided to the Town of Branford to ensure that
such improvements will be completed.
No lots shall be sold and no certificate of occupancy
shall be issued until the improvements and other
requirements are completed or a financial guarantee
has been provided to the Town of Branford.
At a meeting on ________________________, the Branford Planning and Zoning
Commission approved this subdivision plan in accordance with the Branford
Subdivision Regulations.
______________________________________________ _______________
Chairman Date
______________________________________________ _______________
Secretary Date
Expiration Date:
In accordance with CGS Section 8-26c, the improvements or other requirements shall be
completed by ____________________.
Date
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 53
6.03 Submission of Approved Plans And Documents.
6.03.A Basic Submittals. Following the Commission’s approval of subdivision plans, the subdivider
shall submit to the Commission:
1. One (1) mylar set of the approved plans, with the appropriate signature blocks and any
required modifications.
2. Three (3) paper sets of the approved plans, with any required modifications.
3. One (1) electronic copy of drawings and data of the approved subdivision in a format
acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Department (GIS).
6.03.B Additional Submittals.
1. The subdivider shall also submit, in a form satisfactory to the Town:
(1) Any required grant or grants to the Town in a form ready for execution,
(2) Any required easements for drainage, access, utility, or other purposes in a form
ready for execution,
(3) A certificate of title indicating that any proposed conveyance to the Town is free
of encumbrances,
(4) Evidence of the signatory’s authority to sign on behalf of the grantor.
2. Such grants or easements shall not be recorded on the land records until the Subdivision
Plan has been filed on the land records and until any necessary action has been taken by
any other appropriate Town agency or agencies.
6.03.C Procedure. The Chairman or Secretary of the Commission shall sign the approved plans and
deliver them to the applicant within the time period allowed by law. Such time period shall be
measured from the later of:
1. The date that taking an appeal from the action of the Commission has elapsed,
2. In the event of an appeal, from the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal
or judgment in favor of the applicant, or
3. The date that plans modified in accordance with the approval and that comply with CGS
Section 7-31 are delivered to the Commission.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 54
6.04 Filing of Approved Plans.
6.04.A Once signed and authorized by the Commission, the signed mylar set of the approved plans shall
be filed with the Town Clerk at the subdivider’s expense.
6.04.B Unless otherwise provided by CGS Section 8-25, as amended, such plans shall be filed in the
Town Clerk’s office within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the appeal period under CGS
Section 8-8, or in the case of an appeal, within ninety (90) days of the termination of such appeal
by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the subdivider.
6.04.C The Commission may extend the time for such filing for two (2) additional periods of ninety (90)
days, and the approval shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time. When a
subdivider files a written request with the Commission for an extension of the time for filing
approved plans, the period for filing shall be deemed to be automatically extended to the date
upon which the Commission decides on the request. The Commission shall not grant any
request for an extension which was submitted after the time for filing plans had already expired.
6.04.D Any plan not so filed or recorded within the prescribed time shall become null and void.
6.04.E In the event that any Subdivision Plan, when recorded, contains any changes not approved or
required by the Commission, the Plan shall be considered null and void and the Commission
may then file a notice with the Town Clerk voiding the subdivision.
6.05 Modification of Approval.
6.05.A Any subdivider requesting to modify an approved plan, or any condition of approval, shall file a
written request with the Commission, together with the required fee.
6.05.B The subdivider shall state the reason why a modification is requested, and shall describe any
change in facts or circumstances or any unforeseen natural or technical difficulties forming the
basis for the request.
6.05.C The Commission, in its sole discretion, may require a public hearing on any request, or may
require the subdivider to submit a complete application under these Regulations.
6.05.D The Commission shall require a complete application under these Regulations for any change
meeting the definition of “resubdivision” under CGS Section 8-18, as amended.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 55
6.06 Construction and Inspection.
6.06.A General. Prior to commencing development or construction, the subdivider and contractor shall
schedule a pre-construction meeting with the Town Engineer and the Zoning Enforcement
Officer to.
1. Review the record plans,
2. Confirm receipt of necessary permits (e.g., road excavation permit for intersection work).
3. Review job conditions and the proposed construction schedule,
4. Review the installation of required erosion and sedimentation controls,
5. Confirm boundary demarcation of conservation areas and/or provisions for preservation
of significant trees (if any),
6. Confirm receipt of financial guarantee documents,
7. Identify emergency contacts and contact information.
8. Address any other issues of concern or interest.
6.06.B Periodic Inspections.
1. The improvements to be completed as part of the subdivision approval may be inspected
by the Town Engineer at any time.
2. In the case of a new street or a change in an existing street, the developer shall notify the
Town Engineer for inspections of the work at the following stages of construction:
(1) Rough grading completed.
(2) Drainage and all other underground facilities installed, and prior to backfilling.
(3) Graveling and rolling being done.
(4) A screened gravel topping being applied.
(5) Binder course pavement being done.
(6) Finish course pavement being done.
3. Notice for inspection shall be made at least two (2) business days in advance.
4. The subdivider shall not proceed to work on any subsequent stage until such inspection
has been made by the Town Engineer or his/her authorized agent(s) on the preceding
stage and approval has been obtained on the preceding stage.
5. In no case shall any paving work on an existing or proposed public street be done
without permission from the Town Engineer.
6. In order to conduct inspections, the Town Engineer shall be given free access to the
construction work at all times.
6.06.C Testing and Specification Compliance.
1. The Town Engineer may take any material, samples, cores and tests as deemed necessary
to determine compliance with these Regulations.
2. The Town Engineer may require the subdivider to pay to have such tests made and
certified by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut or by
another properly qualified professional.
3. If the Town Engineer finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements have
not been constructed and maintained in accordance with the approved plans or with the
provisions of these Regulations, he/she shall notify the subdivider and the Commission,
in writing, and the subdivider shall be responsible for completing or repairing said
improvements according to specifications.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 56
6.06.D On-Site Modifications Because of Field Conditions. If unforeseen field conditions arise during
construction (such as, but not limited to, springs, ancient drains, side hill drainage from cuts,
bedrock or other conditions not apparent at the time of the approval by the Commission) which
in the opinion of the Town Engineer require modification to the intended construction procedure,
the subdivider shall:
1. Prepare and submit a proposed construction procedure in conformance with accepted
engineering practices to address the field conditions,
2. Submit such procedure to the Town Engineer for review,
3. If required, provide a supplemental financial guarantee for the additional work.
6.06.E Inspection Records. The Town Engineer shall maintain records of inspections in order to
document that the work is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 57
6.07 Period for Completion of Improvements.
6.07.A General. The subdivision improvements shall be completed in accordance with the statutory
timeframe as provided in CGS Section 8-26c. The Commission’s endorsement of approval on the
plan shall state the date on which the completion period will expire.
6.07.B Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and
facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan and maintained in effective
condition to ensure the compliance with the certified plan.
6.07.C Extensions of Complete Improvements. Upon application by the subdivider, the Commission
may approve one or more extensions of the time period for completion provided that:
1. The time for all extensions shall not exceed ten (10) years from the date the subdivision
was approved,
2. The Commission may revise the amount of the financial guarantee securing the actual
completion of the work.
6.07.D Expiration.
1. If all required work in the subdivision has not been completed by the date of expiration
of the time period for completion, the approval of the subdivision shall be deemed to
have expired, provided the Commission shall file notice on the Land Records of such
expiration.
2. Such expiration shall have the following effects on the lots that were to be created as
shown on the approved subdivision plan:
(1) Where two or more adjoining lots are owned by the same person or persons,
such lots shall be deemed to be merged into a single parcel.
(2) When any lot is owned separately from any other adjoining lot, and either (a) no
building permit has been issued for the establishment of a principal building on
such lot, or (b) such building permit has expired, the lot shall no longer be
recognized as an approved building lot unless all public improvements required
to serve that lot have been completed.
6.07.E Maintenance Until Road Acceptance.
1. Unless and until all required public improvements are accepted by the Town of Branford,
the subdivider shall maintain, or make provision for the maintenance of, all such
improvements, including but not limited to provision for snow removal on streets.
2. If properties on the street are occupied and snow removal is not provided on a timely
basis, the Town may proceed to plow the street and the cost of any such work, including
any damage which may result, shall be a charge against the financial guarantee.
3. If the required public improvements are not maintained and the situation is not corrected
within two (2) days following written notice from the Commission to the subdivider, the
Town may proceed to put the street or other improvement into suitable condition and the
cost of any such work shall be a charge against the financial guarantee.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 58
6.08 Monuments and Markers.
6.08.A Street Lines. The street lines of all new subdivision streets shall be marked with stone or
concrete monuments set by a Connecticut-licensed surveyor. Stone or concrete monuments
along street lines shall be:
1. At least five (5) inches square by 30 inches in length with a suitable marked top.
2. Set flush with proposed grades and with the marked point set on the point of reference.
3. Installed at all points of curvature, all points of tangency, all angle points and no more
than 400 feet apart on straight sections of streets.
4. Indicated and located on the subdivision plan and as-built drawing.
All stone or concrete monuments shall be set in place at the subdivider’s expense after all
street construction is completed and prior to street acceptance by the Town. The cost of
installing monuments shall be included in the financial guarantee as required by these
Regulations.
6.08.B Lot Corners. Corners of all lots, open space, conservation easements, and other parcels or areas
shall be marked with a one (1) inch steel pipe or a three-quarter (3/4) inch reinforcing rod at least
18 inches long, or with stone or concrete monuments and such markings shall be set by a
Connecticut-licensed surveyor.
6.08.C Open Space and Conservation Areas. All open space and conservation areas shall be suitably
identified with a conservation marker installed at various points along the boundary.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 59
6.09 Final Acceptance and Maintenance.
6.09.A General. For final acceptance of subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall submit to the
Commission:
1. A letter requesting a recommendation to the Board of Selectmen and Representative
Town Meeting that the Town accept the street(s),
2. One (1) mylar and three (3) paper copies of plans showing the "as-built" location of all
street and associated improvements approved by the Commission or their authorized
agent and noting where the as-built plans differ from the approved construction plans
due to field conditions or authorized changes,
3. Deeds for the road right of way and other land to be conveyed to the Town. The
subdivider shall also submit fees to record the deed(s).
4. A letter from a registered land surveyor certifying that all required monuments and
property corner pins are properly installed in the correct location,
5. A letter from a Connecticut-licensed design engineer stating that all improvements,
including all street signs, stop signs, and traffic control signs and devices have been
installed or satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved plans or indicating
where exceptions were made,
6. A letter from any companies providing utility services to the effect that such utilities
have been satisfactorily installed,
7. A maintenance financial guarantee in accordance with Section 6.9.D, to protect the Town
against faulty construction and materials, said guarantee to remain in effect for no less
than 12 months after the Town has accepted the public improvements.
8. A copy of all proposed deeds and easements to the Town and other information as
required for review and approval by the Town Attorney, if not previously provided,
9. A copy of all other proposed deeds and easements to other parties that are integral to
public improvements or conditions of approval or the proposed development for
possible review by the Town Attorney.
6.09.B Final Inspection.
1. The Commission or its authorized agent shall conduct a final inspection of all
improvements and utilities to evaluate the general condition of the site and determine
whether the work is satisfactory and in substantial agreement with the approved final
drawings and applicable regulations, ordinances, and standards. The Commission
should also notify the Tree Warden of any proposed inspection and request a report
regarding the status and conditions of any trees planted or retained within the public
right of way.
2. Any improper installations shall be reported to the Commission and remedied by the
subdivider. A report shall be submitted to the Commission.
3. If all items are satisfactory, the Commission shall recommend to the Board of Selectmen
and the Representative Town Meeting that the street(s) be accepted.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 60
6.09.C Road Acceptance. If the Board of Selectmen and Representative Town Meeting agree to accept
the street(s), all executed deeds and easements to the Town shall be submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission office for filing by the Town after the street acceptance.
6.09.D Financial Guarantee After Road Acceptance.
1. The maintenance financial guarantee of at least ten (10) percent of the original approved
estimate of the cost of construction and installation of such public improvements shall be
in effect for a period of 12 months from the date of acceptance of the subdivision
improvements by the Town.
2. 12 months after the public improvements are accepted by the Town and the maintenance
financial guarantee is in place, the Town shall release the financial guarantee as set forth
herein.
3. If the Commission finds, during that period, that there is any defect or failure in any
improvement, it may require that the financial guarantee be extended for up to an
additional twelve (12) months after the date of such finding.
6.10 Modification of Approval.
6.10.A General.
1. Any subdivider seeking to modify an approved plan, including, but not limited to, any
revisions of lot lines shown on such plan, or any condition of approval, shall file an
application for such modification with the Commission, together with the required fee.
2. The subdivider shall state the reason why a modification is requested, and shall describe
any change in facts or circumstances or any unforeseen natural or technical difficulties
forming the basis for the request.
3. If the proposed revisions do not constitute a resubdivision, the applicant is not required
to submit all of the information described in Section 5.2.B at the time of application.
However, the applicant must submit sufficient information to allow the Commission to
evaluate the proposed modifications in accordance with any relevant standards in these
Regulations. The Commission may require additional information if the applicant has
not supplied adequate information for such evaluation.
6.10.B Commission Review.
1. If the proposed modifications do not constitute a resubdivision, the Commission may act
upon the application without a public hearing.
2. The Commission, in its sole discretion, may require a public hearing on any application,
or may require the subdivider to submit a complete application under Section 5.2 of these
Regulations.
3. The Commission shall require a complete application under Section 5.2 of these
Regulations for any change meeting the definition of “resubdivision.”
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 61
Appendix - Sample Letter of Credit
[Letterhead of issuing bank]
[issue date]
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT No. [insert number here]
Beneficiary: Town of Branford
Town Hall
1019 Main Street
Branford CT 06405
Attn: Finance Director
Re: Application for [Subdivision] at [address of jobsite]
Dear Sir/Madam:
At the request and on the instructions of our customer, [full legal name of owner], [home/office address
of owner] (the "Applicant"), we (the "Bank") hereby establish in your favor this irrevocable letter of credit
(the "Credit") in the amount of $[amount in numbers] ([spell out amount in words and xx/100 dollars])
(the “Stated Amount”), as may be reduced pursuant to the second paragraph hereof. This Credit is
effective immediately and expires at the close of business on the Expiration Date, as hereinafter defined.
Drawings hereunder shall not, in the aggregate, exceed the Stated Amount. Each drawing under this
Credit shall reduce the Stated Amount by the amount drawn.
Funds under this Credit are available to you against your sight drafts drawn on the Bank (in the form
annexed hereto as Exhibit A), stating on their face: "Drawn under Irrevocable Letter of Credit No. XXXX
issued by [name and address of bank]", and accompanied by your certificate (each such draft and
certificate to be signed by the Finance Director or his/her designee) reading as follows: "I certify that the
amount of the accompanying draft is payable pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Branford and/or the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut."
This Credit shall terminate on the date (the "Expiration Date") which is the earlier of:
(i) the date on which the Stated Amount is reduced to zero pursuant to the second paragraph of this
Credit, and
(ii) [mmmm dd, 20yy]; provided, however, if the Stated Amount shall not have been reduced to zero
pursuant to the second paragraph of this Credit, it is a condition of this Credit that the
Expiration Date shall be automatically extended, without other amendment, for an additional
period of one year from the Expiration Date hereof, or any future Expiration Date, unless we
notify you, by certified mail, return receipt requested at least 30 (thirty) days prior to any
Expiration Date, at the address set forth above, that we elect not to consider the Expiration
Date of this Credit extended for any such additional period. A copy of such notice shall be
simultaneously mailed certified mail return receipt requested to: Chair, Branford Planning
and Zoning Commission.
Branford Subdivision Regulations – Effective 02.01.13 | Page 62
Upon receipt of such 30 (thirty) day notice that the Expiration Date will not be extended, funds under this
Credit are available to you against your sight drafts drawn on the Bank (in the form annexed hereto as
Exhibit A) and stating on their face: “Drawn under Irrevocable Letter of Credit No. XXXX issued by
[name and address of bank]”, and accompanied by your certificate (each such sight draft and certificate to
be signed by the Finance Director or his/her designee) reading as follows: “I certify that the amount of
the accompanying draft is drawn and will be held by the Town of Branford as a financial guaranty
because we have received notice that the Letter of Credit will expire”.
Each draft and certificate shall be presented:
(1) at the branch of the Bank at [full branch address, which must be in Connecticut and nearest to
Branford, Connecticut], Attention: Letter of Credit Department or
(2) by electronic means addressed to and received by [electronic address of Bank’s Letter of Credit
Department]. If presentation is made by electronic means, you will provide telephone
notification thereof to us at [telephone number] prior to or simultaneously with the sending of
such presentation but receipt of such telephone notice shall not be a condition to payment
hereunder. All documents presented to the Bank in connection with your demand for payment
hereunder, as well as all notices and other communications to the Bank in respect of this Credit,
shall specifically refer to Letter of Credit No. [insert number here].
Payment of each sight draft shall be made by us promptly, but in no event later than the banking day
following receipt, in immediately available funds by wire transfer by us to [name of bank and branch
where Town of Branford has its demand deposit account], [ABA nnnnnnnnn (bank routing number of
bank where Town of Branford has its demand deposit account)], for credit to account #nnnnn (account
number of Town of Branford), attention: [insert name of contact].
We agree that all drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this Credit will be duly
honored upon delivery of the draft and certificate as specified if so presented on or before the Expiration
Date. Our obligations hereunder are primary obligations and shall not be affected by the performance or
nonperformance by you or by the Applicant of any obligations under any agreement between the
Applicant and you or between the Applicant and us.
This Credit is subject to the International Standby Practices 1998, International Chamber of Commerce
Publication No. 590 (“ISP98”)]. This Credit shall be deemed to be a contract made under the laws of the
State of Connecticut and shall, as to matters not governed by ISP98, be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the State of Connecticut.
Sincerely yours,
[name of bank]
[name of signatory]
[title]

