Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-10-1980]
WHEREAS, the Town of Brookfield has reviewed its legislation and adopted
an ordinance providing for the repeal of certain obsolete ordinances and
an ordinance making certain technical changes to said ordinances, and
WHEREAS, it is deemed advisable to codify these revised ordinances into
a volume to be known as the "Code of the Town of Brookfield" and to adopt
said codification, and
WHEREAS, a copy of the Code in its rough draft form with changes noted
therein has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk for review and
examination by the public, and
WHEREAS, it is intended that upon adoption of this ordinance the Code of
the Town of Brookfield will be published,
NOW, therefore, be it ordained as follows:
§ 1-1. Code established.
The compilation of the Charter, ordinances, Zoning Regulations and Land
Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Brookfield, codified and
consolidated into titles, chapters and sections in the form attached hereto
and made a part hereof, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted
as and to be called the "Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut."
§ 1-2. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
A. All ordinances of the Town of Brookfield heretofore enacted and in force
and effect on the date of adoption of this ordinance and not contained
in the Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut, or which have
been heretofore enacted and are inconsistent with any provisions of any
ordinance contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective
date of this Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or altering the Charter
or Zoning and Land Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Brookfield.
§ 1-3. Matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-2 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, regulations,
rights and obligations, which are expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance or regulation adopted subsequent to April 1, 1980.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Brookfield prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
C. Any obligation or liability by reason of any offense or act committed
or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
legislative provision of the Town of Brookfield, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town Meeting.
E. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Brookfield.
F. Any ordinance of the Town of Brookfield providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing of
grade, permitting of encroachment, changing of name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Town of Brookfield or any
portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution of the Town of Brookfield appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Town of Brookfield or other instruments or evidence of the Town's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final subdivision
plats.
§ 1-4. When Code effective.
All provisions contained in the compilation provided for herein and known
as the "Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut," shall be in full force
and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-5. Nomenclature, technical and other minor changes.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Town of Brookfield
for adoption as part of the Code of the Town of Brookfield, certain
grammatical changes, changes in nomenclature and/or technical or
minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the
intention of the Town Meeting of the Town of Brookfield that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code of the Town of Brookfield,
Connecticut, as if the ordinances so changed had been previously
amended to read as such.
B. In printing and publishing the Code of the Town of Brookfield,
Connecticut, certain changes in the order of things, titling and indexing
and certain changes in the number of provisions are anticipated and
may be made. It is the intention of the Town Meeting of the Town of
Brookfield that all such changes be and they hereby are adopted as part
of the Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut, as if the ordinances
so changed had been previously amended to read as such.
§ 1-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-6. Certified copy on file.
A copy of the Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut, in loose-leaf
form, has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Brookfield
and shall remain there for use and examination by the public during all
business hours until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if this
ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Brookfield by impressing thereon the Seal of said Town,
and such certified copy, as from time to time amended and recertified as
hereinafter provided, shall remain on file in the office of the Town Clerk, to
be made available during business hours to persons desiring to examine the
same.
§ 1-7. Amendments.
A. Charter. Any and all amendments or supplements to the Town Charter, or
repeal thereof in whole or in part, adopted pursuant to applicable state
law subsequent to the aforesaid date of April 1, 1980, shall, upon the
adoption and certification by the Town Clerk of said change, become part
of the Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut.
B. Ordinances. Any and all additional ordinances, amendments or
supplements to ordinances or repeal of ordinances in whole or in part,
adopted subsequent to the aforesaid date of April 1, 1980, shall, upon
said adoption and certification by the Town Clerk, become part of the
Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut.
C. Regulations.
(1) Any and all additional Zoning or Land Subdivision Regulations,
amendments or supplements to said regulations or specifications,
or repeal in whole or part thereof, subsequent to the aforesaid
date of April 1, 1980, shall, upon adoption and certification by the
Town Clerk, become part of the Code of the Town of Brookfield,
Connecticut.
D. All changes in the Charter, ordinances, specifications and regulations as
aforesaid shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code, so that
reference to the Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut, shall be
understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Any such additions, amendments, supplements or repeals as adopted
shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the
loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements
thereto.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or such other person authorized and
directed by the Town Clerk, to keep up-to-date, in loose-leaf form, a copy of
the book containing the Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut. Said
up-to-date copy of the Code shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk of
the Town of Brookfield and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public and shall be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during business hours. All changes in said Code shall be included in
the Code by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
as supplements to said Code, at which time such supplements shall, upon
certification by the Town Clerk, be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Publication and distribution.
It shall be the duty of the First Selectman to have printed and distributed
copies of the Code of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut, together with
amendments and supplements thereto, from time to time. Said First
Selectman shall provide the Town Clerk with sufficient copies of the Code
and supplements and amendments thereto so as to enable the Town Clerk
to comply with Connecticut General Statutes, Section 7-148a, as amended.
§ 1-10. Limitation on abridgment of powers.
Nothing contained herein shall abridge the legal authority of any board,
commission or agency of the Town of Brookfield to make, publish, adopt,
repeal, change or amend its rules, regulations or bylaws in accordance with
law.
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Town of Brookfield or
to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will
cause the law of the Town of Brookfield to be misrepresented thereby. A
violation of this section shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not
to exceed $100.
§ 1-14. When ordinance effective.
This ordinance shall be effective 21 days after publication in a newspaper
having a circulation in the Town of Brookfield.
§ 1-8 BROOKFIELD CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Technical Amendments
[Adopted 6-10-1980]
§ 1-15. Enumeration of technical amendments.
A. An ordinance adopted February 27, 1974, pertaining to the Historic District and
Commission,1 is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Section I are amended so that said section will read
as follows:
"1. Historic District No. 1 is situated in the center of Town and is located on
both sides of a portion of Route 25 beginning at the intersection of Route 133
and traveling south for approximately 0.4 mile to include property owned by
Bradley on the westerly side and Ceysens on the easterly side.
"2. Also on both sides of Route 25 beginning at the intersection of Route 133
and traveling north for approximately 0.4 mile to include property owned by
Gregory on the westerly side and Baker on the easterly side.
"3. Also on both sides of Long Meadow Hill Road beginning at the intersection
of Route 25 and traveling north for approximately 0.4 mile to include property
owned by Douglas on the westerly side and the trustees of the Fund for
Ministers on the easterly side.
"4. Also on both sides of Winding Road beginning at the intersection of Route
25 and traveling east for approximately 0.2 mile to include property owned by
B. Rippy on the northerly side and C. Rippy on the southerly side.
"5. Also on both sides of School Street beginning at the intersection of Route
25 and traveling east for approximately 0. 1 mile to include property owned
by Phillips on the northerly side and Narwold on the southerly side. All the
property owners hereinbefore set forth being now or formerly."
(2) Sections II and IV are hereby deleted from said ordinance.
B. An ordinance pertaining to the Inland Wetlands Commission, adopted February
27, 1974,2 is amended to delete the second paragraph of Section 3, which reads
as follows:
"The first two persons named shall serve for a period of one year, term to
run until March 31, 1975; the next two persons named for a period of two
years, term to run until March 31, 1976; and the fifth person named shall
serve for a period of three years, term to run until March 31, 1977. All
appointments subsequent to the original appointment shall be for a term of two
years commencing April 1 in the year of appointment."
C. (Reserved)3
D. An ordinance pertaining to the termination of the Planning and Zoning
Commissions and the adoption of a separate Zoning Commission and Planning
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 26, Historic District.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 34, Inland Wetlands Commission.
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, amending an ordinance creating a Recreation and
Park Commission adopted January 16, 1959, was repealed 1-16-1996. For current
provisions regarding said Commission, see Ch. 46 of this Code.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Commission, adopted October 2, 1968,4 is hereby amended to change the term
of office in Sections (b) and (c) from six to four years and to delete the following
wording in each of those sections: "except that in the first election the terms of
office shall be staggered: two members, two years; two members, four years;
and one member, six years" so that said sections may read as follows:
"(b) The Brookfield Zoning Commission shall consist of five members who shall
be electors of the Town not holding any other elected or appointed Town office
and who shall be elected biennially on the first Tuesday after the first Monday
in November in the odd years. The term of office for each member of said
Commission shall be four years. In the event of the resignation or death of any
member of said Commission, or in the event of any other vacancy existing of
said Commission, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a successor who shall
serve until the next regularly scheduled biennial election, at which time the
vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term for which the original
member was elected. The representation of the minority political party on said
Commission shall be guaranteed in accordance with Section 9-167a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
"(c) The Brookfield Planning Commission shall consist of five members who
shall be electors of the Town not holding any other elected or appointed
Town office and who shall be elected biennially on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November in the odd years. The term of office for each
member of said Commission shall be four years. The representation of the
minority political party on said Commission shall be guaranteed in accordance
with Section 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as
amended. Any vacancies in the Commission shall be filled as provided by law."
E. An ordinance creating a Sewer Commission to serve as the Sewer Authority of
the Town and providing for its organization and proceedings and certain of its
duties, adopted July 11, 1972,5 as amended March 5, 1975, is hereby further
amended to read as follows:
(1) The name of the authority will be changed throughout the ordinance and
wherever it may appear in the proposed Code of the Town of Brookfield to the
Water Pollution Control Authority so as to conform to the state statutes.
(2) The balance of said ordinance shall read as follows:
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Planning and Zoning Commission.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 71, Water Pollution Control Authority.
§ 1-15 BROOKFIELD CODE § 1-15
1:8
"1. The Town of Brookfield does hereby create a Water Pollution Control
Authority to serve as the Sewer Authority of the Town under and pursuant
to Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as
amended.
"2. (a) The Authority shall consist of seven electors and taxpayers of the Town
who shall hold no other Town office, shall be sworn to the faithful performance
of their duties and shall serve without compensation. The Water Pollution
Control Authority members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
The terms of office of said members shall be in accordance with the Charter;
members to serve until their successors shall be appointed and shall have
qualified. A certificate of the appointment of a member by the Selectmen shall
be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be conclusive evidence of the legal
appointment of such member.
"3. The Authority shall choose one of its members to be Chairman and shall
appoint a Clerk, who need not be a member of the Authority, and such agents
and employees as it may require and determine their qualifications, duties and
compensation. At all meetings of the Authority, four members shall constitute
a quorum, and the concurrence of four votes shall be necessary for the
transaction of business. Said Authority may hold such regular and special
meetings as may be advisable at any time upon giving at least 24 hours' notice
to each member before the time of such meeting. The Clerk shall issue a call
for a special meeting either at the direction of the Chairman or upon the
written request of any two members. The Clerk shall keep a complete record
of the proceedings of the Authority and forthwith after each regular or special
meeting of the Authority shall cause a copy of the minutes thereof to be filed
with the Town Clerk.
"4. The Authority shall have authority in the name and on behalf of the Town:
"(a) To do any and all things necessary or appropriate to construct any
sewerage system authorized by the Town, including, but not in limitation
thereof, the taking and holding by purchase, condemnation or otherwise of
the whole or any part of any real property or interest therein which it may
determine to be necessary or desirable for use in connection therewith, to
apportion and assess lands and buildings in the Town which shall, in its
judgment, be specially benefited thereby and upon the owners of such lands
and buildings in such proportions as it may deem equitable, to establish such
charges as it may deem proper for connections with and the use of said
sewerage system, and to maintain and operate said system, all in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
Revision of 1958, as amended.
" (b) Subject to the prior approval of the Board of Selectmen, to contract for
engineering services required to comply with the State of Connecticut order
to the Town to abate pollution and to design and supervise the construction of
the sewerage systems contemplated under the agreements between the Town
and the Town of New Milford, and the Town and the City of Danbury, said
agreements having been authorized by Town Meetings.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
" (c) To establish and revise rules and regulations for the supervision,
management, control and operation and use of the sewerage system, including
rules and regulations prohibiting or regulating the discharge into the sewerage
system of any sewage or any stormwater runoff which, in the opinion of the
Authority, will adversely affect any part or any process of the sewerage system.
"(d) To fulfill contracts entered into between the Town and other municipalities
to obtain sewerage system service.
"(e) Through its Chairman, to execute and file applications and agreements
with the Cornmissioner of Environmental Protection for state grants and/or
advances pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 872 of the 1971 General
Assembly, and to execute all the applications, instruments and documents and
accept payments and do all other things that may be necessary for state grants
and/or advances, and to apply for and accept any and all federal grants-in-aid
in connection with the sewerage system."
F. An ordinance pertaining to the Zoning Board of Appeals, adopted August 29,
1959,6 is amended to delete the last sentence of the ordinance which reads as
follows: "No person can serve on the Planning Commission or the Zoning Board
of Appeals simultaneously."
G. A Town ordinance pertaining to building permit fees, adopted March 12, 1965,7
is hereby amended to delete the fees for building permits so that the first
paragraph of said section reads as follows: "The schedule of fees required for
building permits issued in accordance with the terms of the Building Code to be
paid before a building permit is issued shall be as established from time to time
by the Board of Selectmen, based on the valuation of work."
H. An ordinance pertaining to fees to be charged for demolition permits, adopted
March 12, 1965,8 is hereby amended to delete the fees for permits so that the
first sentence of the ordinance reads as follows: "The fees to be paid to the
Demolition Officer of the Town of Brookfield, acting by and for the Town of
Brookfield, prior to the granting of any permit to demolish any structure in the
Town of Brookfield by said Demolition Officer shall be as established from time
to time by the Board of Selectmen."
I. A Town ordinance pertaining to a permit for vendors and peddlers, adopted
December 17, 1962,9 is amended in Section 3 to delete the reference to the
specific fee so that said section reads as follows:
"Said license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue. The
fee for such license shall be as established from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen.
J. An ordinance pertaining to sewers, adopted July 22, 1959,10 as amended April
30, 1975, is hereby further amended in Section II to delete the reference to the
specific fees for applications so that said section reads as follows:
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Zoning Board of Appeals.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Building Construction, Art. II.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Building Construction, Art. III.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 171, Peddling and Soliciting.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Sewers.
§ 1-15 BROOKFIELD CODE § 1-15
1:10
"All applications for approval of the sewerage facilities shall be filed with
the Director of Health or the inspector appointed by him. All applications for
approval shall be accompanied by a plan of the proposed sewerage facilities.
The fees which shall accompany said application shall be as established from
time to time by the Board of Selectmen."
K. An ordinance pertaining to speed limits on Town roads, adopted June 25,
1951,11 is hereby amended to read as follows:
"There is hereby established a maximum speed limit of 35 miles per hour on all
Town roads in the Town of Brookfield, except as otherwise posted."
L. Throughout the proposed Code of the Town of Brookfield, the term "Building
Inspector" will be changed to "Building Official."
M. A resolution adopted August 9, 1976, by the Board of Selectmen creating
the Housing Authority,12 is hereby amended to restate the resolution as an
ordinance by prefacing the language of this section by the following: "Be it
ordained."
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 207, Vehicles and Traffic.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 31, Housing Authority.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:11

ARTICLE III
Repeal of Certain Legislation
[Adopted 6-10-1980]
§ 1-16. Enumeration of legislation repealed.
A. The following ordinances be and the same are hereby repealed:
(1) Town Ordinance Pertaining to Appointment of Building Inspector,
adopted March 12, 1965.
(2) Resolution Pertaining to Biennial Elections, adopted November 5,
1949.
(3) Resolution Pertaining to Board of Finance, adopted December 9,
1949.
(4) Town Ordinance Pertaining to Uniform Fiscal Year, Adoption of, and
Two Payment System of Taxes, adopted May 28, 1965.
(5) Two resolutions pertaining to the establishment of a Planning
Commission, adopted June 27, 1958.
(6) Ordinance Pertaining to Establishment of Zoning Commission,
adopted August 29, 1959, as amended or October 5, 1973.
(7) Town Ordinance Pertaining to Air Pollution, adopted October 3,
1960.
(8) Town Ordinance Pertaining to Air Raid Protection, adopted March
7, 1942.
(9) An Ordinance Banning the Manufacture, Distribution, Sale and Use
of Firecrackers and Fireworks, adopted November 4, 1950.
(10) Lake Candlewood Safety Ordinance, adopted February 27, 1958.
(11) Resolution pertaining to the Shooting of Domestic Pheasants,
adopted October 1, 1949.
(12) An Ordinance Regulating Auction, Tag and Other Types of Special
Sales, adopted December 28, 1973.
(13) An Ordinance Pertaining to Transportation for Private School
Students, adopted August 9, 1958.
(14) An Ordinance Authorizing the Zoning Commission to Adopt Sign
Regulations, adopted December 28, 1973.
(15) Automobile Trailer Camp Ordinance, adopted May 6, 1949.
(16) Town Ordinance to Prevent Pollution of Lake Candlewood and Lake
Lilinonah, adopted June 19, 1964.
(17) A Resolution Pertaining to the Community Development Action Plan
Agency, adopted September 3, 1968.
(18) An Ordinance Pertaining to Fire Lanes, adopted August 23, 1976.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:13
Chapter 4
AGING, COMMISSION ON
§ 4-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Brookfield a Commission on the Aging pursuant to the provisions of Section
7-127a of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
Said Commission shall consist of seven members and three alternate
members.
§ 4-2. Terms of members.
A. Initially, three members of said Commission shall be appointed for terms
expiring the first Monday in January, 1978, and four members of said
Commission shall be appointed for terms expiring the first Monday in
January 1980. Thereafter, appointments shall be for terms of four years
each in accordance with the provisions of § C7-6 of the Town Charter.
B. Initially, two alternate members of said Commission shall be appointed
for terms expiring the first Monday in January, 1978 and one alternate
member shall be appointed for a term expiring the first Monday in
January 1980. Thereafter, appointments shall be for terms of four years
each in accordance with the provisions of § C7-6 of the Town Charter.
§ 4-3. Powers.
The Commission on Aging shall have the following powers: to study
continuously the conditions and needs of the elderly persons within the
Town, including but not limited to conditions of housing, economics,
employment, health and recreation; to analyze the services for the elderly
provided within the Town by both public and private agencies and to make
recommendations to the public and the Board of Selectmen regarding the
development and implementation of services related to the needs of the
elderly; to cooperate with the state and all other agencies regarding the
above purposes; to provide such essential services to the elderly as are
necessary to carry out the purposes of this section subject to appropriation
therefor; to adopt reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary and
keep records of the conduct of its affairs. The members of the Commission
shall serve without compensation except for reimbursement of authorized
expenses, subject to appropriation therefor. The Commission shall also be
empowered to apply for state grants pursuant to the provisions of Sections
17-137c and 17-137d of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958,
as amended, and to implement and supervise the services and programs set
forth in said statutes.
§ 4-4. Provisions of Charter applicable.
The provisions of §§ C4-12, C7-3, C7-4, C7-5 and C7-6 of the Town Charter,
as well as any other Charter provisions applicable hereto, shall govern the
conditions of membership for the Commission on Aging.
§ 1-16 BROOKFIELD CODE § 4-4
1:14
Chapter 5
AQUIFER PROTECTION AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
51.
Beaches — See Ch. 89.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 220.
§ 5-1. Designation and membership.
A. In accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 22a-354a et seq., the
Zoning Commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection
Agency (hereinafter the "Agency") of the Town of Brookfield. The staff
of the Inland Wetlands Commission, the Wetlands Enforcement Officer,
shall serve as the staff of the Agency.
B. Members of the Zoning Commission shall serve coexisting terms on
the Agency. The membership requirements of the Agency shall be the
same as those of the Zoning Commission, including, but not limited to,
the number of members, terms, methods of selection and removal of
members, and filling of vacancies.
C. At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall complete
the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of
Energy and Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut,
pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-354v.
§ 5-2. Regulations to be adopted.
The Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-354p
and Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies (RCSA) § 22a-354i-s. Said
regulations shall provide for:
A. The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be
established and amended or changed.
B. Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area.
C. The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the
area.
D. Notice and publication requirements.
E. Criteria and procedures for the review of applications.
F. Administration and enforcement.
§ 5-3. Inventory of land use.
A. In order to carry out the purposes of the Aquifer Protection Program, the
Agency will conduct an inventory of land use within the area to assess
potential contamination sources.
B. Not later than three months after approval by the Commission of the
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection of
Level B Mapping of aquifers, the Agency will inventory land uses
overlaying the mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:15
aquifers in accordance with guidelines established by the Commissioner
pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-354f. Such inventory shall be completed not
more than one year after authorization of the Agency.
Chapter 6
ARTS COMMISSION
§ 6-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established an Arts Commission to be known as the
"Brookfield Arts Commission."
§ 6-2. Membership; terms of office.
A. The Brookfield Arts Commission shall consist of 15 resident electors
of the Town of Brookfield who shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. Eight of the Commission members shall be appointed to
serve until the first Monday in February 1992, and the remaining seven
Commission members shall be appointed to serve until the first Monday
in February 1994. Thereafter, appointments shall be for terms of four
years.
B. There shall be no alternate members of said Commission.
C. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of six members of
the Commission.
§ 6-3. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Arts Commission shall be as follows:
A. To engage in activities which are intended to promote understanding and
appreciation of the arts to residents of the Town of Brookfield.
B. To encourage community participation in arts activities.
C. To coordinate information concerning artists and the arts in the Town of
Brookfield.
D. To act as a liaison between artists, schools and the community.
E. To engage in activities designed to encourage local artists in
demonstrating their talents.
F. To promote activities that both entertain and enlighten.
Chapter 7
ASSESSOR
§ 5-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 6-3
6:16
ARTICLE I
Position Established
[Adopted 6-27-1958 by resolution]
§ 7-1. Board of Assessors abolished.
The Board of Assessors of the Town of Brookfield is abolished effective
August 31, 1958.
§ 7-2. Single Assessor established.
There shall be a single Assessor in said Town, who shall have all the powers,
duties and rights conferred upon said Board of Assessors.
§ 7-3. Appeals authorized; procedure.
Appeals may be taken from assessments made by said Assessor in the same
manner as from the assessment made by the former Board of Assessors.
§ 7-4. Records and maps open to inspection.
All records and maps of said Assessor shall be open for public inspection at
all reasonable times.
§ 7-5. Salary; appointment of assistants.
The salary of said Assessor shall be fixed by a majority vote of the Board
of Finance of said Town in the same manner as all other requests for
appropriations and shall be included in the Town budget and acted upon
at a Town Meeting in the same manner as all other appropriations
recommended by the Board of Finance. The Assessor is hereby authorized
to appoint such clerical and other assistance as may be required in the
performance of his duties, within the limits of the appropriation provided
therefor.
§ 7-1 ASSESSOR § 7-5
7:17

ARTICLE II
Appointment
[Adopted 6-27-1958 by resolution]
§ 7-6. Method.
The Assessor of the Town of Brookfield shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. He shall possess such qualifications as the Selectmen shall, from
time to time, prescribe.
§ 7-6 ASSESSOR § 7-6
7:19
Chapter 11
BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
§ 11-1. Appointment authorized.
The Selectmen are hereby authorized and empowered to appoint a Building
Code Board of Appeals of five members, in conformity with Section 19-402
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Chapter 13
BUILDING COMMITTEE, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code Board of Appeals — See Ch. 11.
Economic Development Commission — See
Ch. 19.
Park and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
46.
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
51.
§ 13-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established a Municipal Building Commission of the Town
of Brookfield, which shall be known as the "Municipal Building Committee."
§ 13-2. Membership.
The Municipal Building Committee shall consist of five members and three
alternates, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance
with the provisions of § C4-12, § C7-4, § C7-5 and § C7-6 of the Town
Charter. The qualifications of said members and alternates shall be as set
forth in § C7-3 of the Town Charter. The terms of office of said members and
alternates shall be as set forth in Exhibit A of the Town Charter, except that
the current members and alternates of the Committee shall serve for the
balance of the terms for which they were appointed.
§ 13-3. Ex officio members.
A member of the Board of Selectmen, appointed pursuant to the provisions
of § C5-2F of the Town Charter, shall serve as an ex officio member of the
Committee.
§ 7-6 BROOKFIELD CODE § 13-4
11:20
§ 13-4. Officers, procedures and records.
The procedures of the Committee, including election of officers, shall be as
set forth in § C7-1 of the Town Charter, subject to the following additional
requirements:
A. Regular meetings of the Committee shall be held not less than once
every three months. The Committee may hold such special meetings as
it deems appropriate.
B. The Committee shall maintain separate files and records for each
municipal construction project and all other matters entrusted to it.
(1) Said records shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(a) All preliminary and final plans for each project, together with all
modifications thereto.
(b) The preliminary budget for the project, the final budget therefore
and all change orders or other budget modifications.
(c) A statement of the scope and purpose of the project as presented
to, approved and funded at Town Meeting or at Referendum,
together with any and all subsequent modifications thereto.
(d) All bid documents and modifications thereto, all bids received, all
construction contracts and change orders and all architectural
contracts and changes thereto.
(e) The itemized project budget and the itemized amount expended
to date on each construction and architectural contract and on
all other expenditures related to the project.
(f) Copies of the portion of the minutes of each meeting of the
Commission and all subcommittees thereof wherein the project
was discussed or decisions made regarding the project.
(g) Copies of all correspondence and notes with reference to the
project, except privileged communications.
(2) Said records shall be maintained in the office of the Brookfield Town
Clerk and shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours.
§ 13-5. Powers and duties.
The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To undertake, supervise, manage, control and execute authorized and
funded building construction projects upon the written request and
authorization of the Board of Selectmen.
B. To advise, consult with and make recommendations to the Board of
Selectmen, Board of Education, Planning Commission, Zoning
Commission, Park and Recreation Commission, Board of Finance and
other Town boards, commissions, agencies and departments concerning
the scope, cost and feasibility of both contemplated and approved
municipal building construction projects.
C. To negotiate and recommend to the Board of Selectmen the approval and
execution of architect, construction and other contracts for municipal
building construction projects which are within its jurisdiction and for
which necessary funds have been appropriated.
§ 13-4 BUILDING COMMITTEE, MUNICIPAL § 13-5
13:21
D. To have all other powers which are necessary to enable it to perform its
duties as herein set forth.
§ 13-6. Scope of projects and reports.
A. Prior to the authorization of construction funds for any municipal
building project within its jurisdiction, the Committee shall prepare and
submit to the Board of Selectmen and Board of Finance a report setting
forth the scope of the project, including but not limited to a description
of the nature, size and type of facility to be constructed and an estimate
of all costs of construction, including architect fees and all other costs
associated with the project. Once a project has been approved and
funded, the Committee shall not alter the scope of the project without
the prior approval of the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance
and, in the case of school facilities, the Board of Education.
B. The Committee shall submit progress reports to the Board of Selectmen
and Board of Finance not less than once every three months during
the course of construction, including a statement of the estimated
completion date, any significant problems which have occurred and
the proposed resolution of the same, any anticipated cost overruns or
savings and any contemplated modifications to the scope of the project,
including the reasons therefor.
C. The Committee shall submit a final report to the Board of Selectmen and
Board of Finance upon final completion of the project, which report shall
include the total project cost, the reasons for any delay in completion
and the recommendations of the Committee for improvements to the
construction process in the future which would result in cost savings or
improved efficiency.
Chapter 15
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inland Wetlands Commission — See Ch. 34. Planning and Zoning Commissions — See Ch.
51.
§ 15-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established a Conservation Commission of the Town of
Brookfield, which shall be known as the "Conservation Commission."
§ 15-2. Membership.
The Conservation Commission shall consist of five members and three
alternates, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance
with the provisions of § C4-12, § C7-4, § C7-5 and § C7-6 of the Town
Charter. The qualifications of said members and alternates shall be as set
§ 13-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 15-2
13:22
forth in § C7-3 of the Town Charter. The terms of office of said members and
alternates shall be as set forth in Exhibit A of the Town Charter, except that
the current members and alternates of the Commission shall serve for the
balance of the terms for which they were appointed.
§ 15-3. Ex officio members.
A member of the Board of Selectmen, appointed pursuant to the provisions
of § C5-2F of the Town Charter, shall serve as an ex officio member of the
Commission.
§ 15-4. Officers, procedures and records.
The procedures of the Commission, including election of officers, shall
be as set forth in § C7-1 of the Town Charter, subject to the additional
requirement that regular meetings of the Commission shall be held not less
than once a month. The Commission may hold such special meetings as it
deems appropriate.
§ 15-5. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To supervise and control all designated open space, conserved land
and dwellings and other structures upon those properties owned or
controlled by the Town and to make rules and regulations for the use
of said land and dwellings and other structures subject to the approval
of said rules and regulations by the Board of Selectmen. To designate
"historically significant" dwellings and other structures as such and
to maintain such dwellings and other structures in accordance with
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties. Reference to dwellings and other structures in this
subsection is limited to those dwellings and other structures that are
under the supervision and control of the Conservation Commission.
[Amended 4-4-2012]
B. To advise and consult with the Board of Selectmen, Planning Commission
and Zoning Commission with reference to the acquisition of open space
land and conserved land areas and to make recommendations to said
Board and Commissions with reference to the impact, if any, which the
development of land which is adjacent to open space or conserved land
areas would have on said properties.
C. To advise and make recommendations to the Planning Commission,
Zoning Commission and Inland Wetlands Commission regarding
proposed land development and proposed changes in land use.
D. To expend, for the purposes set forth in this chapter, funds appropriated
to it in the annual budget or any supplemental appropriation as well as to
raise funds and apply for grants in connection with the purchase and/or
maintenance of all open spaces and the dwellings and other structures
therein. [Amended 4-4-2012]
E. To educate the public concerning conservation of land and the historic
and agricultural heritage of Brookfield. [Added 4-4-2012]
§ 15-2 BUILDING COMMITTEE, MUNICIPAL § 15-6
13:23
§ 15-6. Admission fees; other fees.
The Commission may impose admission fees and other reasonable fees and
charges for the use of the lands under its control. All such fees and charges
shall be approved by the Board of Selectmen prior to being imposed.
§ 15-7. Rental and use of facilities by private individuals and
organizations. [Amended 4-4-2012]
The Commission may rent or permit the use of the lands, dwellings and
other structures under its control by private individuals and organizations,
provided that said rental or use does not substantially interfere with the use
of said lands, dwellings and other structures by the residents of the Town.
The Commission shall establish rules and regulations for such rental and
use, subject to the approval thereof by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 15-8. Contracts and other agreements. [Amended 4-4-2012]
The Commission, with the prior approval of the Board of Selectmen, may
enter into contracts and other agreements which are appropriate to enable
it to perform the functions and duties delegated to it by the provisions
of this chapter, including contracts for the provision by third parties of
services on lands, dwellings and other structures under its control.
However, the Commission shall not enter into any contract or agreement
which shall obligate the Town to the expenditure of funds in excess of the
amount appropriated therefor.
§ 15-9. Assistance of other Town agencies.
With the prior approval of the First Selectman, the Commission may request
assistance in the performance of its duties from any other Town board,
commission, department or agency. Such assistance shall be provided in
a timely and competent manner by such other board, commission,
department or agency.
§ 15-10. Jurisdictional disputes.
In the event that any dispute arises between the Commission and any other
Town agency, board, commission or department regarding their authority
and control over any specific land, building or facility owned or controlled
by the Town, said dispute shall be resolved by the Board of Selectmen,
whose decision shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute.
Chapter 16
CONTROLLER
§ 16-1. Office created.
There is hereby created, for the Town of Brookfield, the office of Controller,
which office shall consist of the Controller and such assistants and
§ 15-6 BROOKFIELD CODE § 16-1
16:24
employees as shall be approved by the Board of Selectmen from time to
time.
§ 16-2. Appointment and removal.
The Controller shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, with the
approval of the Board of Finance and the Treasurer, for an indefinite term.
The Controller may be removed from office by the Board of Selectmen
for good cause, provided that such dismissal shall have the approval of a
majority of the full Board of Finance and the Treasurer.
§ 16-3. Powers and duties.
A. The Controller shall install, maintain and supervise the general
accounting system for all departments, offices, boards, committees,
commissions and agencies in conformity with the uniform system of
accounts for Connecticut municipalities, or such other system as may
be approved by the Board of Finance and the Tax Commissioner of
the State of Connecticut; shall prescribe the form of accounts to be
kept by each department, office, board, committee, commission and
agency of the Town; shall keep separate accounts for the appropriations
contained in the budget and encumber immediately with the amount of
each purchase order, payroll or contract and maintain for each account a
record of the amounts paid and remaining unpaid, all encumbrances and
the unencumbered balance. The Controller shall audit before payment
all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidence of claims, demands or
charges against the Town.
B. He shall compile for the Board of Selectmen estimates for the budget
and capital program and assist in the preparation of the annual budget
document and recommend to the Board of Selectmen changes in
department programs and departmental estimates of revenue and
expenditures; shall submit monthly to the Board of Selectmen, the Board
of Finance and the Treasurer a financial statement showing the amount
of each appropriation and any transfers, encumbrances and
expenditures therefrom and such other fiscal data as may be prescribed
by the Board of Selectmen and/or the Board of Finance and the
Treasurer; and shall prepare for the Board of Selectmen, the Board of
Finance and the Treasurer, at the end of each fiscal year, a complete
financial statement and report of the Town. The Controller shall establish
and supervise inventories wherever required and shall perform such
other duties as may be requested by the Board of Selectmen and/or the
Board of Finance or the Treasurer.
§ 16-4. Purchasing procedure.
A. The First Selectman and the Controller, acting in conjunction, shall be
the general purchasing authority of the Town. All supplies, materials,
equipment and other commodities required by any department, office,
agency, board, committee or commission shall be purchased by the
purchasing authority on requisition, in such form and in such manner
as the Board of Selectmen may prescribe, signed by the head of the
§ 16-1 CONTROLLER § 16-4
16:25
department, office, agency or Chairman of the board, committee or
commission.
B. All purchases shall be made in full compliance with the existing
ordinances of this Town pertaining to bidding.
C. No requisition for any purchase and no contract for public work or other
service shall be valid unless it bears the endorsement of the Controller.
The Controller shall endorse a requisition or contract only after he has
examined the same and has found that it conforms to the requirements
of this section and that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance
of any applicable appropriation to pay the same. If by making any
contract or purchase, the budget allowance of the officer, department,
commission, committee or board requesting the same shall be exceeded,
the purchasing authority shall bring the request to the attention of the
Board of Finance at its next meeting, and the Board of Finance may
authorize such contract or purchase in accordance with and subject to
the limitations of the general statutes or other laws pertaining to this
Town.
D. No voucher, claim or charge against the Town shall be paid until it has
been approved by the Controller and the Town Treasurer for correctness
and legality.
E. Contracts for public works or other services involving an expenditure
exceeding $3,000, or such other amount as may be specified by the
Board of Finance from time to time, shall, in addition to the requirement
of this section, be subject to the consideration and approval of the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 16-5. Applicability to Board of Education.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the Board of Education. The
Controller, however, shall be available to the Board of Education for advice
and consultation as to said Board's systems and manner of fiscal accounting.
Chapter 19
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics - See Ch. 21.
§ 19-1. Establishment.
There shall be an Economic Development Commission, established in
accordance with Section 7-136 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, for the promotion and development of the economic resources of
the Town.
§ 16-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 19-2
19:26
§ 19-2. Powers.
The Economic Development Commission of the Town of Brookfield, created
pursuant to General Statutes, is hereby authorized and directed to carry out
the powers conferred upon the Town by Section 7-136 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, and by any and all laws amendatory thereof
and supplemental thereto.
§ 19-3. Composition.
The Commission shall be composed of:
A. Seven members shall be appointed in accordance with § C7-4 of the
Brookfield Town Charter for terms commencing on the first Monday
in February. Membership and terms of office shall be as follows: four
members for terms of two years, three members for terms of four years,
and biannually thereafter four members or three members shall be
appointed for terms of four years on a rotating basis as terms expire.
B. The First Selectman or a Selectman designated by him shall be an ex
officio member of said Commission, but shall have no vote.
§ 19-4. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in the membership of said Commission which may occur
through death, resignation or otherwise may be filled for the unexpired
term of such member in the manner provided by §§ C74 and C4-12 of the
Brookfield Town Charter.
§ 19-5. Compensation; appropriations.
The members of the Commission shall serve without pay, but the Board of
Selectmen and Board of Finance may annually appropriate a sum not in
excess of statutory limits for such expenses as the Commission may incur
and for the purpose of reimbursing the members of the Commission for any
necessary expenses which they may incur in connection with their duties.
§ 19-6. Residence requirement.
As of the effective date of this chapter no person shall be appointed to or
reappointed to the Commission unless he or she is a resident of the Town of
Brookfield.
Chapter 20
EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 82.
§ 19-2 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 20-1
19:27
§ 20-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a difference
meaning is intended:
EMERGENCY — Includes any human-caused or natural event or
circumstances causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or
property, human suffering or financial loss, and includes but is not limited
to fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, spills or
releases of hazardous materials, or public health emergencies.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN — That plan entitled "Town of
Brookfield, Connecticut, Emergency Operations Plan," submitted by the
Emergency Management Director and approved by the First Selectman.
§ 20-2. First Selectman responsibilities.
The First Selectman, as the chief elected official, is responsible for
implementation of the Emergency Operations Plan. When he or she, in
conjunction with the Emergency Management Director, determines that a
state of emergency exists, the First Selectman shall make a declaration in
writing as well as activate the Emergency Operations Plan.
§ 20-3. Declaration of emergency.
A. The declaration by the First Selectman of a state of emergency shall (in
writing):
(1) State the nature of the emergency.
(2) Designate the geographical area affected and subject to the
emergency controls.
(3) State that the First Selectman shall exercise all powers, functions,
and duties prescribed by state law, Town Charter, and all applicable
ordinances, resolutions, and the Emergency Operations Plan.
B. As per state law, notice of the declaration will be transmitted to the area
Emergency Management Office immediately, followed by a copy of the
written document forwarded as soon as possible.
§ 20-4. Authority of the First Selectman.
During a declared emergency, the First Selectman shall have the authority
to:
A. Exercise, within the designated area in the proclamation, all police
powers vested in the Town by Charter and ordinance in order to reduce
the vulnerability of the Town to loss of life, injury to persons or property
and human suffering and financial loss resulting from emergencies, and
to provide recovery and relief assistance for the victims of emergencies.
B. Direct any department of the Town to utilize Town personnel, equipment
and facilities for the performance of any activities designed to prevent
or alleviate actual or threatened damage due to the emergency, and may
direct the departments to provide supplemental services and equipment
§ 20-1 BROOKFIELD CODE § 20-4
19:28
to federal, state, or local agencies to restore any services in order to
provide for the health and safety of the citizens of the Town.
C. Designate persons to coordinate the work of public and private relief
agencies' operation in such area and exclude from such area any person
or agency refusing to cooperate with work under such coordination or to
cooperate with other agencies engaged in emergency work.
D. Request the aid and assistance of any state or other public or quasipublic
agencies in the performance of duties and work attendant upon
emergency conditions in such area.
E. Clear or remove from publicly or privately owned land or water, debris
and wreckage which may threaten public health or safety or public or
private property.
(1) In exercising this authority, the Town administrator may accept
funds from the Federal Government or the State of Connecticut
for the purpose of removing debris or wreckage from publicly or
privately owned land or water.
(2) Whenever the Town administrator provides for clearance of debris
or wreckage pursuant to this section, employees of the Town or
individuals appointed by the Town administrator are authorized to
enter upon private lands or waters and perform any tasks necessary
to the removal or clearance operation.
(3) Except in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith,
any employee or individual appointed by the First Selectman to
perform duties necessary to the removal of debris or wreckage shall
not be liable for death of or injury to persons or damage to property.
§ 20-5. Regulation of persons and property.
A. When a state of emergency is declared to exist and has been declared,
the First Selectman:
(1) May order the following measures, in the interest of the public
health, safety, or welfare, in the area designated as an emergency
area:
(a) Redirect Town funds for emergency use and suspend standard
Town procurement procedures.
(b) Establish a curfew that fixes the hours during which all other
than officially authorized personnel may be upon the public
streets or other public places.
(c) Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or
congregate upon any public street, public place, or any outdoor
place.
(d) Barricade streets and prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or
regulate the traffic on any public street, public place, or any
outdoor place.
(e) Evacuate persons.
(f) Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(g) Prohibit or restrict the sale of gasoline or other flammable
liquids.
§ 20-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 20-5
19:29
(h) Prohibit the sale, carrying, or possession of any weapons or
explosives of any kind on public streets, public places, or any
outdoor places.
(i) Curtail or suspend commercial activity.
(j) Control, restrict, or regulate, by rationing, freezing, use of
quotas, prohibitions on shipments, price fixing, allocation or
other means, the use, sale or distribution of foods, fuel, clothing,
and other commodities, materials, goods, and services.
(k) Close all roads and highways in such area to traffic or limit the
travel on such roads to such extent as the First Selectman deems
necessary and expedient.
(l) Order such other measures necessary for the protection of life or
property or for the recovery from the emergency.
B. All orders issued under authority conferred by this section shall have the
full force and effect of law during the declaration of a state of emergency.
All existing laws, ordinances, rules and orders inconsistent with this
chapter shall be inoperative during this period of time and to the extent
such inconsistencies exist.
§ 20-6. Additional powers during emergencies.
During the existence of an emergency, the First Selectman may:
A. Enter into purchase, lease, or other arrangements with any agency of the
United States or the State of Connecticut for temporary housing units to
be occupied by disaster victims.
B. Accept or borrow funds from or passed through by the State of
Connecticut for temporary housing for disaster victims.
C. Upon determination that the Town will suffer a substantial loss of tax and
other revenues from a major disaster and that there is a demonstrated
need for financial assistance to perform its governmental functions,
apply to the Federal and State Government, or request the state to apply
on the Town's behalf, for grants and loans and to receive, on behalf of
the Town, such grants and loans.
D. Determine the amount needed to restore or resume the Town's
government function and certify the same to the State of Connecticut or
the Federal Government.
§ 20-7. Termination of the state of emergency.
The First Selectman, in conjunction with the Emergency Management
Director, shall terminate the state of emergency by proclamation when
the emergency no longer exists or when the threat of emergency has
passed. This proclamation will also be transmitted to the State Emergency
Management Office.
Chapter 21
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 20-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 21-1
19:30
§ 21-1. Findings; purpose; applicability.
A. Our Charter states: "All officials and employees of the Town shall carry
out their duties with the highest ethical standards regardless of personal
consideration. Their conduct shall at all times be for the public good and
within the bounds of law, shall comply with the Town Charter and the
Town Code of Ethics, shall be above reproach and shall avoid conflict
between public and private interests and responsibilities." The trust of
the people is one of the most important assets of our government. In
order to ensure that continuing trust, all who are elected, appointed, or
hired to serve the public must fulfill their public duties faithfully and
honestly, and subordinate any personal interests which conflict with the
public interest.
B. In accord with the provisions of Section 7-148h of the Connecticut
General Statutes and Article X of the Town Charter, there is hereby
established a Code of Ethics. The purpose of this code is to provide
standards for the conduct of officials and employees so as to maintain
the public's confidence in the integrity and fairness of its government.
C. This Code of Ethics shall be incorporated into the Personnel Manual
for Town Employees, and these standards of ethical conduct shall be
applicable to all Town officials, elected and appointed, and all employees,
paid and unpaid, full-time and part-time, including employees who are
members of any labor union. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all
employees shall also be subject to all other administrative processes,
including, without limitation, applicable disciplinary proceedings.
§ 21-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ASSOCIATED — When used with reference to business, enterprise or
organizations, includes the officer's/employee's or close associate's/
relative's relationship to that business, enterprise, or organization, or
anyone who influences the activities of that business, enterprise or
organization.
BUSINESS OR ENTERPRISE — Any activity, association, commercial entity,
sole proprietorship, consultation, trust or other legal entity designed to earn
or otherwise obtain money, whether for profit or nonprofit.
CLOSE ASSOCIATE/RELATIVE — Includes a spouse, dependent child, or
other close relationship of the officer/employee, including a business
associate.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Includes a motivation for monetary gain arising
primarily from the officer's/employee's interest or that of a close associate/
relative.
HE/HIM/HIMSELF — Shall also encompass she/her/herself.
OFFICER/EMPLOYEE — Any person elected or appointed to any board or
commission in Town and any person hired by the Town or its agencies or
receiving wages or salary from the Town, except persons hired by, and/or
who are under the direct supervision of, the Brookfield Board of Education.
§ 21-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 21-2
19:31
PERSONAL INTEREST — Includes a motivation for action arising primarily
from the officer's/employee's or a close associate's/relative's interest.
§ 21-3. Purpose.
In recognition of the importance of establishing a culture of ethical
behavior, this code will:
A. Set forth the standards for conduct by which officers/employees shall
conduct all public business.
B. Require that all officers/employees engage in ethical practices which
meet or exceed those standards set forth.
C. Provide a process by which officers/employees may identify and resolve
ethical issues.
D. Establish penalties as appropriate for officers/employees who violate the
public trust.
§ 21-4. Standards and guidelines for conduct.
A. Benefit. Public officers/employees should serve for the benefit of the
Town of Brookfield, and not for their personal benefit. Acceptance of
any significant gift or favor based on the officer's/employee's position in
Town is prohibited.
(1) Acceptable gifts would be token items (e.g., a mug, pen, inexpensive
baseball cap) the value of which is less than $15 per event, for a total
of $50 annually from the same source/enterprise.
(2) Unacceptable gifts would be any items, regardless of value, the main
purpose of which is to influence the officer/employee to perform in
a certain way on behalf of the giver. These would include, but are
not limited to, a valuable act, contract, compensation, contribution,
employment, favor, fee, fringe benefit, gift, gratuity, loan, offer,
privilege, promise, service, or the promise that any of these things
will be conferred in the future.
B. Conflict of interest and personal benefits prohibited. No officer/
employee of the Town shall engage in any business or transaction which
is incompatible with his official duties in the public interest or would
tend to impair the independence or judgment or action in the
performance of his duties as an officer/employee in the Town.
Specifically, no officer/employee shall:
(1) Accept any benefit from any person or business that, to his
knowledge, is interested directly or indirectly in business dealings
with the Town.
(2) Otherwise engage in any business transactions, employment or
professional activities, or private dealings, which are in direct or
indirect conflict with the discharge of his official duties as an officer/
employee of the Town.
C. Deliberation and vote prohibited. No officer/employee shall vote, act,
participate in official discussions or give official opinions on matters in
which he has a direct or indirect financial or other personal interest.
Any officer/employee who, as part of his official duties, comes upon a
circumstance where he may have a conflict shall acknowledge publicly
that a conflict exists. That action shall be noted in the minutes of the
§ 21-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 21-4
19:32
meeting and the officer/employee shall recuse himself from participation
in that particular issue. The officer/employee does not have to disclose
the specific nature of this conflict or submit a disclosure form. If the
conflict occurs during the public session of a meeting, the officer/
employee shall move away from the table and may sit in the audience. If
the conflict occurs in executive session, the officer/employee shall leave
the room.
D. Public confidence and property. No officer/employee shall:
(1) Disclose or act on any confidential information concerning the
property, government business or affairs of the Town to advance the
private financial or personal interests of himself or others.
(2) Request or permit himself or others to use Town-owned or- leased
vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience
or profit, except when such services are available to the public
generally, or are provided in conformance with established Town
policies for the use of such officers/employees in the conduct of Town
business.
E. Disclosure of conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest.
(1) Any officer/employee shall, upon appointment or hiring, complete
the Board of Ethics disclosure form. Any officer/employee who is
required to take an oath of office pursuant to the Town Charter shall
file the disclosure form prior to being sworn in. This form, which
shall be available from the Town Clerk, will be filed in accordance
with the Town Charter.
(2) In addition to acknowledgment of having received and agreeing to
the rules established by this chapter, the following disclosures are
required:
(a) All real estate located within the Town of Brookfield (other than
the primary residence of the officer/employee) owned by the
officer/employee, his spouse, dependent children, or held by a
business or trust for the benefit of the officer/employee, his
spouse or dependent children or business associates.
(b) The names of any businesses in which the officer/employee has
a personal financial interest, and which have supplied goods or
services to the Town in excess of $10,000 per annum during the
two years preceding the election or appointment of the officer/
employee.
(c) In the event an officer's/employee's circumstances change that
would require disclosure under this section, the officer/employee
shall, within 30 days, file a new Board of Ethics disclosure form.
F. Other abuses or misuses of position. Officers/Employees of the Town
should exhibit high standards of conduct at all times. In addition to
being a violation of laws, it is a violation of this chapter for any officer/
employee to:
(1) Be convicted of the criminal offense of bribery, corruption,
racketeering, larceny, or a criminal offense, the elements of which
include criminal fraud or deception.
§ 21-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 21-4
19:33
(2) Engage in repeated discriminatory, harassing, abusive or
intimidating behavior in the execution of his responsibilities as an
officer/employee.
(3) Engage in any intentional act of physical harm in the execution
of his responsibilities as an officer/employee, except any act that
is consistent with established guidelines for the use of force by
individuals trained to do so in the line of duty.
(4) Engage in any willful violation of the Town Charter.
§ 21-5. Board of Ethics' responsibilities and procedures.
A. There shall be a Board of Ethics with responsibilities as outlined in
state statutes (C.G.S. § 7-148h) and the Town Charter (Article X). The
membership of the Board of Ethics and terms shall be established in
accordance with the Town Charter.
B. In the application of this chapter, care should be given to distinguish
between concerns of management of Town employees and violations of
the public trust. The daily management of employee performance is the
responsibility of Town managers. Personnel policies should be the first
guide in those areas where applicable. Similarly, the routine activities of
Commission members should be governed by their respective bylaws.
C. To provide for a fair and respectful hearing, protecting the rights and
interests of all parties, the Board shall:
(1) Receive communication and/or complaints through the office of the
Town Clerk. The Board will establish a form to be available in the
Town Clerk's office. Pursuant to statutes, complaints shall remain
confidential until a finding of probable cause.
(2) Establish bylaws governing its procedures and providing for the
holding of regular and special meetings.
(3) Administer oaths.
(4) Conduct hearings as needed to hear and decide specific cases in
which a violation of this chapter is alleged in a complaint. Pursuant
to C.G.S. § 7-148h, the processing of complaints shall comply with
the requirements of C.G.S. § 1-82a.
(5) Consider rendering advisory opinions.
(a) The Board may respond to requests for advisory opinions. Such
advisory opinions shall be in writing and filed in the Town Clerk's
office.
(b) The Board may decline to respond to requests for advisory
opinions.
§ 21-6. Statute of limitations.
A. Complaints are to be filed within two years after violations of this
chapter are alleged to have occurred.
B. A complaint alleging a violation must be filed within six months from the
date the person filing the complaint knew or should have known of the
alleged violation.
§ 21-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 21-7
19:34
§ 21-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any disciplinary action that the Board of Ethics recommends to the Board
of Selectmen shall be appropriate to the findings of fact, the position of the
offender and the gravity of the offense. The Board of Ethics may recommend
any action which it is lawfully permitted to, including, but not limited to,
any one or combination of the following:
A. Public admonition or reprimand.
B. Suspension or demotion.
C. Forfeiture of or removal from appointed or elected office.
D. Termination of employment.
E. Cease and desist orders, which must be enforced by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
F. A fine up to the maximum amount permitted by law.
§ 21-8. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter are to be construed liberally, to the end that
the public interest be fully protected. This chapter shall be construed in a
manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws and applicable
to provisions of the Charter. In the event a conflict exists between this
chapter and a federal or state law or the Charter, the federal or state law or
Charter shall control.
Chapter 24
GURSKI HOMESTEAD COMMISSION
§ 24-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established a commission known as the "Gurski Homestead
Commission."
§ 24-2. Membership.
The Gurski Homestead Commission shall consist of 11 members who shall
be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the provisions
of §§ C 4-12, C 7-4 and C 7-5 of the Town Charter. The eligibility of said
members shall be as set forth in § C 7-3 of the Town Charter.
§ 24-3. Terms of office.
Initially, six members shall be appointed for two-year terms expiring on
the first Monday in February 2009, and five members shall be appointed
for four-year terms expiring the first Monday in February 2011. Thereafter,
appointments shall be for terms of four years.
§ 24-4. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 21-7 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 24-4
19:35
A. To assist and make recommendations to the Conservation Commission
and the Board of Selectmen pertaining to the conservation, preservation,
maintenance and educational promotion of the Gurski Homestead Farm
property.
B. To preserve the history and agricultural heritage of farming and to
educate the public of its significance in Brookfield.
C. To raise funds and apply for grants in connection with the development
and maintenance of the Gurski Homestead.
Chapter 26
HISTORIC DISTRICT
§ 26-1. District established; boundaries.
A. To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public through the preservation and protection of buildings, places
and districts of historical interest by the maintenance of such landmarks
in the history of architecture of the Town, state or nation and through
the development of appropriate settings of such buildings, places and
districts, there is hereby established an historic district in the Town of
Brookfield to be known as "Brookfield Center Historic District No. 1."
B. Historic District No. 1 is situated: [Amended 6-10-198013]
(1) In the center of Town and is located on both sides of a portion of
Route 25 beginning at the intersection of Route 133 and traveling
south for approximately 0.4 mile to include property owned by
Bradley on the westerly side and Ceysens on the easterly side.
(2) Also on both sides of Route 25 beginning at the intersection of
Route 133 and traveling north for approximately 0.4 mile to include
property owned by Gregory on the westerly side and Baker on the
easterly side.
(3) Also on both sides of Long Meadow Hill Road beginning at the
intersection of Route 25 and traveling north for approximately 0.4
mile to include property owned by Douglas on the westerly side and
the trustees of the Fund for Ministers on the easterly side.
(4) Also on both sides of Winding Road beginning at the intersection of
Route 25 and traveling east for approximately 0.2 mile to include
property owned by B. Rippy on the northerly side and C. Rippy on
the southerly side.
(5) Also on both sides of School Street beginning at the intersection of
Route 25 and traveling east for approximately 0.1 mile to include
property owned by Phillips on the northerly side and Narwold on the
southerly side.
C. All the property owners hereinbefore set forth being now or formerly.
D. All of the foregoing area included in the Historic District 1 No. is shown
on a map delineating the area involved, which map is incorporated
13.Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted 6-10-1980 also repealed Sections II and IV of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
§ 24-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 26-1
26:36
herein by reference and is to be kept on file by the Historic District
Commission.
E. Both sides of all of said streets are included to a depth of 200 feet from
the highway and street lines.
§ 26-2. Powers and duties of Historic District Commission.
The Historic District Commission shall have such powers and shall perform
such functions and shall be subject to such limitations as shall from time to
time be provided by the General Statutes of Connecticut.
Chapter 29
HOUSATONIC VALLEY REGION COUNCIL
§ 29-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town of Brookfield hereby adopts the provisions of Section 32-7a, 32-7b
and 32-7c,14 as amended by Public Act No. 378 of the 1967 Session of the
Connecticut General Assembly, and hereby authorizes and directs the First
Selectman to meet in council with the chief executive officer of such other
towns in the Housatonic Valley Region, as defined by the Connecticut State
Development Commission, as shall by ordinance adopt the provisions of said
section.
§ 29-2. Power and authority of First Selectman.
In connection with said Housatonic Valley Region Council of Elected
Officials, as and when formed, said First Selectman of the Town of
Brookfield shall have all the powers and authority and be subject to all of
the restrictions and regulations as set forth in said statute.
Chapter 31
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 31-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby found and declared that there is a shortage of safe and sanitary
dwelling accommodations in the Town of Brookfield available to families of
low and moderate income at rentals they can afford, and therefore there is
a need for a Housing Authority in the Town of Brookfield.
§ 31-2. Creation of authority.
There is hereby created and activated a public body corporate and politic
to be known as the "Housing Authority of the Town of Brookfield." Said
14.Editor's Note: Section. 32-7a, 32-7b and 32-7c have been revised and renumbered as
Sections 4-124c, 4-124d and 4-124e, respectively.
§ 26-1 HOUSATONIC VALLEY REGION COUNCIL § 31-2
29:37
Authority is created and activated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 128
of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
§ 31-3. Rights, powers and duties.
Said Housing Authority of the Town of Brookfield shall have and possess all
of the rights, powers and duties set forth in Chapter 128 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and shall be subject to the
limitations and regulations contained in said chapter.
§ 31-4. Membership.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint five resident electors of the Town
of Brookfield as Commissioners of said Authority. The appointment,
qualifications and tenure of said Commissioners shall be set forth in Section
8-41 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
The Board of Selectmen shall designate which of the Commissioners shall
be the first Chairman of said Housing Authority.
Chapter 32
HOUSING PARTNERSHIP TASK FORCE
§ 32-1. Establishment.
The Brookfield Housing Partnership is hereby established and enacted
pursuant to the authority contained in and for the purposes set forth in
Public Act 88-305 of the State of Connecticut.
§ 32-2. Membership.
The Brookfield Housing Partnership Task Force shall consist of the First
Selectmen and 10 additional members appointed by the First Selectman
with the advice and consent of the Board of Selectmen. Said 10 additional
members shall be chosen as follows:
A. One member from among the members and alternates comprising the
Brookfield Planning Commission.
B. One member from among the members and alternates comprising the
Brookfield Zoning Commission.
C. One member from among the members and alternates comprising the
Brookfield Inland Wetlands Commission.
D. One member from among the members and alternates comprising the
Brookfield Housing Authority.
E. Two members representing the local business community, who shall be
electors of the Town of Brookfield.
F. One member who represents public interest groups and one member
who represents local planning, land use and housing professionals. Both
of said members shall be electors of the Town of Brookfield.
G. Two members of the public, who shall be electors of the Town of
Brookfield.
§ 31-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 32-3
32:38
§ 32-3. Terms of office.
A. The First Selectman shall serve as a member of the Housing Partnership
during his term of office as First Selectman.
B. All other members shall be appointed for terms of office as follows:
Initially, five members shall be appointed for terms expiring on the
first Monday in February 1990, and five members shall be appointed
for terms expiring on the first Monday in February 1992. Thereafter,
appointments shall be for terms of four years.
C. The term of office of any member who represents a Land Use
Commission or the Housing Authority shall expire immediately if said
member ceases to be a member of said Commission or Authority.
§ 32-4. Powers and duties.
A. The Brookfield Housing Partnership shall possess and exercise the
following powers and duties:
(1) To apply to the Housing Commissioner of the State of Connecticut
for an initial designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership
Program and to provide said Commissioner with such evidence and
information as is necessary to achieve said designation.
(2) To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the Town
of Brookfield.
(3) To investigate the availability of any state, municipal or other land
within this Town which is suitable for the development of affordable
housing.
(4) To review the Brookfield Zoning Regulations15 and determine
whether those regulations restrict the development of affordable
housing in the Town and to identify and recommend to the Zoning
Commission any changes which should be made to said regulations
to minimize or eliminate such restrictions.
(5) To establish a long-range plan to meet identified housing needs in the
Town and to establish priorities for the implementation of the plan.
Said plan shall be consistent with regional housing needs.
(6) To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal
or proposals to achieve such priorities in accordance with the longrange
plan.
(7) To engage in any activity, development or project which is designed
to create additional affordable housing in the Town.
B. Any such activity, development or project must be approved by the
Board of Selectmen before it is undertaken by the Brookfield Housing
Partnership.
§ 32-5. Employees and consultants.
A. Any employees of the Brookfield Housing Partnership shall be hired and
dismissed in accordance with the provisions of § C5-3 of the Charter of
the Town of Brookfield.16
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Zoning.
16.Editor's Note: The Charter is included at the front of this volume.
§ 32-3 HOUSING PARTNERSHIP TASK FORCE § 32-5
32:39
B. All contracts with consultants, state agencies or others must be
approved and authorized by the Board of Selectmen prior to being
executed or implemented by the Housing Partnership.
§ 32-6. Appropriations and expenditures.
All appropriations and expenditures of the Brookfield Housing Partnership
shall be subject to and shall be made in strict compliance with the
applicable provision of the Charter of the Town of Brookfield.
Chapter 34
INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Waterways — See Ch. 216.
§ 34-1. Commission established.
There shall be an Inland Wetlands Commission established in accordance
with An Act Concerning Inland Wetlands and Watercourses17 (Public Act
155, 1972 Session of the General Assembly, State of Connecticut, as
amended by Public Act 571, 1973 Session).
§ 34-2. Powers and responsibilities.
Said Commission shall have all the powers and responsibilities authorized
under said Public Act 155, as heretofore or hereafter amended.
§ 34-3. Membership. [Amended 6-26-1975; 6-10-1980]
A. The Commission shall be composed of five members appointed by the
Board of Selectmen. The provisions of Section 9-167a of the Connecticut
General Statutes shall be applicable to said appointment.
B. There shall be three alternate members of the Commission appointed
by the Board of Selectmen. The provisions of Section 9-167a of the
Connecticut General Statutes shall be applicable to said appointment.
The first person named shall serve for a period commencing on the date
of appointment and running until March 31, 1976; the second person
named shall serve for a period commencing on the date of appointment
and running until March 31, 1977; the third person named shall serve
for a period commencing on the date of appointment and running until
March 31, 1978. All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of two
years commencing April 1 in the year of appointment.
17.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 22a-36 et seq.
§ 32-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 34-4
34:40
§ 34-4. Filling of vacancies; removal of members.
Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission which may occur
through death, resignation or otherwise may be filled for the unexpired
term of such member by the Board of Selectmen. In the event that a
Commission member misses four consecutive meetings, the Board of
Selectmen may remove the member and fill the vacancy thus created.
Chapter 35
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
§ 35-1. Number.
There shall be 100 Justices of the Peace for the Town of Brookfield.
§ 35-2. Nomination.
Said Justices of the Peace shall be nominated pursuant to the provisions of
Section 9-252 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 35-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the nomination of Justices of the Peace for terms
beginning on the first Monday of January 1993 and thereafter.
Chapter 38
LAKE AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches — See Ch. 89.
§ 34-4 JUSTICES OF THE PEACE § 35-3
35:41

ARTICLE I
Lake Lillinonah Authority
[Adopted 6-30-199318]
§ 38-1. Authority established.
Pursuant to the powers granted by Section 7-151a of the Connecticut
General Statutes, Revision of 1989, as amended, the Lake Lillinonah
Authority is hereby established. Said Authority shall be comprised of the
Town of Brookfield and such other towns having Lake Lillinonah within
their territorial limits as may adopt the provisions of said statute and shall
exercise all powers authorized under the statutes of this state for lake
authorities.
§ 38-2. Membership.
Said Authority shall be composed of three delegates from each member
town who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, or governing body,
of each town, one for a term of one year, one for a term of two years and one
for a term of three years. All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of
three years.
§ 38-2.1. Powers and duties.
Said Authority shall have the power to:
A. Act as agent for the member towns in cooperating with the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection in the enforcement of the
boating laws on such water.
B. Control and abate algae and aquatic weeds in cooperation with the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
C. Study water management, including but not limited to water depth and
circulation, and make recommendations for action to its member towns.
D. Act as agent for member towns with respect to filing applications for
grants and reimbursements with the Department of Environmental
Protection and other state agencies in connection with state and federal
programs.
E. Act as agent for member towns with respect to receiving gifts for any of
its purposes.
§ 38-2.2. Appropriations.
A. Said Authority shall receive from each member town their prorated
share of the expenses of the Authority based upon the annual budget
of the Authority divided by 11. Roxbury shall pay 1/11 and each of the
other member towns shall pay 2/11, thus enabling the other five member
towns to pay an equal share and Roxbury to pay 1/2 of an equal share.
B. The annual budget, prepared by the Authority, shall be submitted to each
of the member towns for approval. In the event that different amounts
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Lake Lillinonah Authority,
adopted by Town Meeting 11-24-1969. See also § 38-2.4.
§ 38-1 JUSTICES OF THE PEACE § 38-2.2
35:43
are approved by the member towns, an average of the three highest
amounts approved shall be used to determine the final budget.
C. The annual budget will be accompanied by an independent auditor's
report of the past year's expenditures.
§ 38-2.3. When effective.
This article shall become effective only upon its passage and publication as
required by law and upon adoption of substantially similar ordinances by
the Towns of Bridgewater, New Milford, Newtown, Roxbury and Southbury.
§ 38-2.4. Repealer.
The Lake Lillinonah Authority Ordinance adopted by the Town of Brookfield
on November 24, 1969,19 is hereby repealed as of the effective date of
this article. However, members of the Lake Lillinonah Authority appointed
pursuant to the provisions of said repealed ordinance shall continue to serve
the balance of the terms for which they were appointed.
19.Editor's Note: Said ordinance comprised former Art. I, Lake Lillinonah Authority, of this
chapter.
§ 38-2.2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 38-2.4
35:44
ARTICLE II
Lake Candlewood Authority
[Adopted 11-30-1971]
§ 38-3. Authority established.
The Town of Brookfield, acting in concert with any other town or towns
having a portion of Lake Candlewood within their territorial limits, hereby
establishes a Lake Authority for said lake to be known as the "Lake
Candlewood Lake Authority."
§ 38-4. Composition.
Said Authority shall be composed of three delegates from each member
town, for terms of three years, all of which such terms shall be commenced
upon the date when the first such delegate is appointed, except that the
initial appointments shall be for terms of one, two and three years,
respectively.
§ 38-5. Town members. [Amended 8-27-198420]
The delegates from Brookfield, each of whom must be resident electors,
shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brookfield.
Delegates shall serve without compensation; provided, however, that
delegates may receive reimbursement for administrative expenses incurred
in the performance of their duties upon approval by a majority vote of the
Candlewood Lake Authority.
§ 38-6. Powers and duties. [Amended 8-27-1984; 1-8-2007]
A. The Candlewood Lake Authority shall possess and may exercise all
powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes for lake authorities,
including, without limitation, powers relating to the enforcement of
boating laws on said lake and such other powers as from time to time
may be granted to said Authority by the legislative bodies of all member
Towns and by the General Statutes.
B. The Candlewood Lake Authority shall establish a water quality
management program, whose objective shall be to study the
improvement and maintenance of the water quality of Lake Candlewood
and to make recommendations for action to its member municipalities.
C. The Candlewood Lake Authority may:
(1) Assist the Town with lake, shoreline and watershed management
to preserve and enhance the recreational, economic, scenic, public
safety and environmental values; and
(2) Provide environmental support for Candlewood Lake by undertaking
and coordinating educational initiatives on lake and watershed
protection.
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall take effect 21 days after
publication following its passage and after it has been adopted by all other Candlewood
Lake Authority member municipalities.
§ 38-3 JUSTICES OF THE PEACE § 38-6
35:45
D. Each member municipality shall pay to the Candlewood Lake Authority
(hereinafter the "CLA") its respective share of the expenses of the CLA.
Shares shall be established by an equal division of the budget among
the member municipalities. The annual budget of the CLA shall be
established by first averaging the appropriations of the three member
municipalities whose CLA appropriations are closest to the municipal
share proposed by the CLA to its member municipalities and then by
multiplying said appropriation by the number of member municipalities.
§ 38-6 BROOKFIELD CODE § 38-6
35:46
Chapter 42
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 42-1. Establishment.
In accordance with Charter § C7-6 and the Addendum to the Charter,
the Town of Brookfield hereby establishes this chapter governing the
composition and terms of the members of the Library Board of Trustees.
§ 42-2. Membership.
The Library Board of Trustees shall consist of nine members who shall be
appointed in accordance with the Town Charter.
§ 42-3. Terms of office.
Initially, three members shall be appointed for three-year terms expiring on
the first Monday in February 2021, and three members shall be appointed
for four-year terms expiring on the first Monday in February 2022.
Thereafter, appointments shall be for terms of three years.
§ 42-4. Powers and duties.
The Library Board of Trustees shall have such powers as are conferred by
the Connecticut General Statutes to the extent not inconsistent with the
Town Charter and this chapter.
§ 42-5. Alternates.
There shall be no alternates for this nine-member Board.
Chapter 46
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Building Committee — See Ch. 13.
§ 46-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established a Park and Recreation Commission of the
Town of Brookfield, which shall be known as the "Park and Recreation
Commission."
§ 38-6 JUSTICES OF THE PEACE § 46-2
35:47
§ 46-2. Membership.
The Park and Recreation Commission shall consist of five members and
three alternates, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in
accordance with the provisions of § C4-12, § C7-4, § C7-5 and § C7-6 of the
Town Charter. The qualifications of said members and alternates shall be as
set forth in § C7-3 of the Town Charter. The terms of office of said members
and alternates shall be as set forth in Exhibit A of the Town Charter, except
that the current members and alternates of the Commission shall serve for
the balance of the terms for which they were appointed.
§ 46-3. Ex officio members.
A member of the Board of Selectmen, appointed pursuant to the provisions
of § C5-2F of the Town Charter, and a member of the Board of Education,
appointed by said Board, shall serve as ex officio members of the
Commission.
§ 46-4. Officers, procedures and records.
The procedures of the Commission, including election of officers, shall be as
set forth in § C7-1 of the Town Charter, subject to the following additional
requirements:
A. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held not less than once
a month. The Commission may hold such special meetings as it deems
appropriate.
B. The Commission shall maintain separate books of account for income
and expenses relating to activities funded by the Annual Town Budget
and for income and expenses relating to activities funded by fees of the
participants (self-sustaining fund activities).
§ 46-5. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To plan, organize supervise, control, direct and conduct all recreational
activities conducted on land owned, leased or otherwise controlled by
the Town, except that such activities on land under the control of the
Board of Education shall be supervised and controlled by said Board
unless said Board delegates the supervision and control of recreational
activities on said land to the Commission. The Commission may also
conduct recreational activities on private property with the consent of
the owner thereof and with the prior approval of the Board of Selectmen.
B. To plan, organize, supervise, control, direct and conduct recreational
activities which are to be funded entirely from admission fees and other
fees and charges to be paid by the participants in said activities. Said
activities shall be known as "self-sustaining."
C. To control, manage, operate, supervise and maintain all recreational
facilities and structures, public parks, playgrounds, play fields, bathing
beaches and other recreational areas and facilities owned or controlled
by the Town, except those which are under the control of the Board
§ 46-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 46-5
35:48
of Education. Said Board may, in its discretion, delegate some or all
of its authority over its recreational facilities and structures to the
Commission.
D. To maintain all other land owned or controlled by the Town whose
maintenance has been delegated to the Commission by the Board of
Selectmen or the Board of Education.
E. To advise and consult with the Board of Selectmen, Board of Education
and Municipal Building Committee with reference to all municipal
improvements which have the potential for use for recreational purposes
or for which the Commission will have the responsibility for
maintenance.
F. To advise and make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen with
reference to the appointment, discipline or removal of the Director
of Parks and Recreation and to advise and make recommendations to
the First Selectmen with reference to the appointment, discipline and
removal of any Town employee who is employed to perform work for or
on behalf of the Commission.
G. To recommend to the First Selectman the wage to be paid to any
employee who is to be paid out of the income received from selfsustaining
programs conducted by the Commission.
H. To expend, for the purposes set forth in this chapter, funds appropriated
to it in the Annual Budget or any supplemental appropriation.
I. To expend, for proper purposes, funds donated to it and funds derived
from self-sustaining activities conducted under its direction. With regard
to self-sustaining income, funds in excess of expenses may be
accumulated to the extent that the balance (“threshold”) at the end of
each fiscal year does not exceed 20% of the average annual revenue for
the three previous fiscal years (the just ended fiscal year and the two
immediate fiscal years). These accumulated funds may be used to fund
revenue shortfalls and to provide financial assistance to participants
for activities sponsored by the Self-Sustaining Fund, with the approval
of the Parks and Recreation Commission; and to fund capital and
equipment expenditures directly related to recreation programs within
the Parks and Recreation Department, with the approval of the Parks
and Recreation Commission. Any such expenditure in excess of $20,000
shall also require approval of the Board of Selectmen. Annually, prior to
the end of the fiscal year, the Board of Selectmen shall review the fund
balance in the self-sustaining account. Funds in this account that exceed
the threshold will be transferred to the General Fund from time to time
upon request of the Board of Selectmen in accordance with provisions of
the Town Charter. [Amended 12-3-2012]
§ 46-6. Admission fees; other fees.
The Commission may impose admission fees and other reasonable fees and
charges for the use of the lands, facilities and structures under its control.
All such fees and charges, other than those for self-sustaining activities,
shall be approved by the Board of Selectmen prior to being imposed. The
Commission shall also establish the fees and other charges to be paid for
self-sustaining activities.
§ 46-5 JUSTICES OF THE PEACE § 46-7
35:49
§ 46-7. Rental and use of facilities by private individuals and
organizations.
The Commission may rent or permit the use of the lands, facilities and
structures under its control by private individuals and organizations,
provided that said rental or use does not substantially interfere with the
use of said lands, facilities or structures by the residents of the Town. The
Commission shall establish rules and regulations for such rental and use,
subject to the approval thereof by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 46-8. Contracts and other agreements.
The Commission, with the prior approval of the Board of Selectmen, may
enter into contracts and other agreements which are appropriate to enable
it to perform the functions and duties delegated to it by the provisions
of this chapter, including contracts for the provision by third parties of
refreshments and other services on lands, facilities and structures under
its control. However, the Commission shall not enter into any contract or
agreement which shall obligate the Town to the expenditure of funds in
excess of the amount appropriated therefore.
§ 46-9. Assistance of other Town agencies.
With the prior approval of the First Selectman, the Commission may request
assistance in the performance of its duties from any other Town board,
commission, department or agency. Such assistance shall be provided in
a timely and competent manner by such other board, commission,
department or agency.
§ 46-10. Jurisdictional disputes.
In the event that any dispute arises between the Commission and any other
Town agency, board, commission or department regarding their authority
and control over any specific land, building or facility owned or controlled
by the Town, said dispute shall be resolved by the Board of Selectmen,
whose decision shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute.
Chapter 51
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 74.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 46-7 BROOKFIELD CODE § 51-1
51:50
§ 51-1. Combined Commission abolished.
The designation of the Brookfield Zoning Commission as the "Brookfield
Zoning and Planning Commission," made by ordinance adopted on
December 17, 1962, effective January 4, 1963, shall be and the same hereby
is reversed, and the terms of office of the present members of said combined
Planning and Zoning Commission shall terminate upon the effective date
of this chapter, all in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-4b of
the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and there
hereafter shall be a separate Brookfield Zoning Commission and a separate
Brookfield Planning Commission.
§ 51-2. Composition of Zoning Commission. [Amended 6-10-1980]
The Brookfield Zoning Commission shall consist of five members who shall
be electors of the Town not holding any other elected or appointed Town
office and who shall be elected biennially on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in the odd years. The term of office for each member
of said Commission shall be four years. In the event of the resignation
or death of any member of said Commission or in the event of any other
vacancy existing of said Commission, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
a successor who shall serve until the next regularly scheduled biennial
election, at which time the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of
the term for which the original member was elected. The representation
of the minority political party on said Commission shall be guaranteed
in accordance with Section 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes,
Revision of 1958, as amended.
§ 51-3. Composition of Planning Commission. [Amended 6-10-1980]
The Brookfield Planning Commission shall consist of five members who shall
be electors of the Town not holding any other elected or appointed Town
office and who shall be elected biennially on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in the odd years. The term of office for each member
of said Commission shall be four years. The representation of the minority
political party on said Commission shall be guaranteed in accordance with
Section 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as
amended. Any vacancies in the Commission shall be filled as provided by
law.
Chapter 54
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 54-1. Police Commission established.
There is hereby established a board of police commissioners for the Town
of Brookfield. Said board shall be known as the "Brookfield Police
Commission," and the members of said board shall be known as
"Commissioners."
§ 51-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 54-2
54:51
§ 54-2. Membership in Commission.
Said Brookfield Police Commission shall consist of five resident electors of
said Town, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Two of said
Commissioners shall be appointed to serve until the first Monday in January
1978, and the remaining three Commissioners shall be appointed to serve
until the first Monday in January 1980. Successor Commissioners shall be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms of four years commencing
on the first Monday of January in even-numbered years. At no time shall
more than three Commissioners be members of the same political party.
Each such Commissioner shall be sworn to the faithful performance of his
duties and shall serve until his successor shall be appointed and shall have
qualified. Said Police Commissioners shall annually, in the month of January,
elect a Chairman and Secretary from their number. The Police Commission
shall hold regular meetings at least once a month and shall keep records
thereof. Special meetings of said Police Commission shall be held upon the
call of the Chairman or a majority of the members thereof. A majority of the
members of said Police Commission shall constitute a quorum. Said Police
Commission shall make a report annually to the Selectmen, which shall be
included in the annual report of the Town.
§ 54-3. Filling of vacancies in Commission.
All vacancies occurring in the membership of said Police Commission shall
be filled by the Board of Selectmen, and the Board of Selectmen may
remove any Commissioner for cause.
§ 54-4. Compensation of Commission members.
Said Commissioners shall serve without compensation, but their actual
expenses and disbursements incurred in the performance of their duties
shall be paid from the Town treasury.
§ 54-5. Commission to manage and control Police Department.
Said Brookfield Police Commission shall organize, maintain and have the
general management and control of a Police Department in the Town of
Brookfield and shall have all of the powers given by the Connecticut General
Statutes to Boards of Police Commissioners, except as limited by the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 54-6. Powers and duties of Commission.
Said Brookfield Police Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
A. To organize, maintain and have the general management and
supervision of the Police Department of the Town of Brookfield and of
the property and equipment used in connection therewith.
B. To make all rules and regulations necessary for the government of
said Police Department not contrary to law and to prescribe suitable
penalties for the violation of any such rule or regulation, including
§ 54-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 54-6
54:52
suspension or removal from office of any officer, supervisor or civilian
employee of said Police Department.
C. To appoint, promote and remove the officers, supervisors and civilian
employees of said Police Department, under said regulations as it adopts
for the purpose. Such appointees shall hold office during good behavior
and until removal by said Police Commission for cause upon written
notice and after hearing. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to the
Chief of Police, who shall be appointed and hold office in accordance
with the provisions of § 54-7 of this chapter and the Charter of the Town
of Brookfield.
D. To determine the number of officers and civilian employees of said Police
Department and to determine the number and rank of the supervisory
personnel of said Department, within the budgetary limits prescribed by
the annual Town budget and any special appropriations increasing said
budget.
§ 54-7. Chief of Police.
There shall be a Chief of Police who shall be the chief administrative
officer of the Brookfield Police Department and shall be responsible to the
Brookfield Police Commission for the efficiency of said Department and
for the execution of all rules and regulations promulgated by said Police
Commission. Said Chief of Police shall be responsible for the enforcement
and execution of all laws, rules and regulations of the United States of
America, State of Connecticut and Town of Brookfield. Said Chief of Police
shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the provisions of
§§ C6-5 and C6-9 of the Town Charter. Suspension or removal of such Chief
of Police shall be in accordance with the provisions of § C4-11 of the Town
Charter and Section 7-278 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 54-8. Authority of members of the Police Department.
The members of said Police Department shall have all such authority with
respect to service of criminal process and the enforcement of criminal laws
as is vested by the Connecticut General Statutes in police officers and
constables. The members of said Police Department shall each receive a
salary, and no member shall receive any fee for service in any criminal
matter except his salary. Any and all fees received by any member of said
Police Department for services rendered in any criminal matter shall be
paid immediately to the Town Treasurer and deposited in the general fund.
§ 54-9. Status of appointed Constables.
All persons holding appointments as full-time regular appointed Constables
of the Town of Brookfield at the time this chapter shall take effect shall
be entitled to become members of the Police Department without loss of
or prejudice to rank, seniority, pay, pension or any other existing rights or
benefits held by reason of service as said Constable. Upon acceptance of
membership in the Police Department, the appointments of such persons as
Constables shall expire and terminate.
§ 54-6 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 54-10
54:53
§ 54-10. Cessation of Constables' authority.
The Constables in the Town of Brookfield shall have no authority in any
criminal matter after September 1, 1977.
§ 54-11. Appointment of special members of the Police Department.
The Brookfield Police Commission shall have the power to appoint such
special members of the Police Department as it shall deem necessary. Such
special members shall have the same powers as regular members of said
Police Department but shall be subject to such restrictions, if any, as are
imposed by the rules and regulations of said Police Commission.
Chapter 56
REGIONAL RESOURCES RECOVERY AUTHORITY
§ 56-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of Chapter 103b, Sections 7-273aa to 7-273oo, of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by the provisions of Public Act
85-478, are hereby adopted.
§ 56-2. Authority established. [Amended 5-1-1989]
A public body politic and corporate of the state, to be known as the
"Housatonic Resources Recovery Authority" (hereinafter referred to as the
"Authority"), constituting a political subdivision of the State of Connecticut
established and created for the performance of an essential public and
governmental function, is hereby created for the purposes, charged with the
duties and granted the powers provided in Chapter 103b, Sections 7-273aa
to 7027oo, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by Public Act
85-478, and Chapters 446d and 446e of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended, which Authority is hereby designated as the Resources
Recovery Authority for the Town of Brookfield. The Authority shall be the
Resources Recovery Authority for the Town of Brookfield and for such
other member municipalities as shall, by ordinance concurrent herewith,
adopt the provisions of Chapter 103b of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended, create the Authority and designate the Authority as their
Resources Recovery Authority and such other municipalities as shall, by
ordinance and upon such terms and conditions as the Authority may
determine, hereafter become member municipalities of the Authority.
§ 56-3. Purpose.
The Authority is established and created for the purpose of providing solid
waste management and disposal services within the region of the Authority,
which shall be the region within the jurisdiction of all of the member
municipalities of the Authority, and which purpose includes providing for
the disposal of residential and commercial solid waste, the financing,
§ 54-10 BROOKFIELD CODE § 56-3
56:54
construction and operation of one or more solid waste disposal facilities for
such purpose and the delivery of solid waste thereto, including facilities
for the incineration of solid waste and production of steam, electricity and
other by-products for sale to public utilities and others.
§ 56-4. Membership; terms.
A. The membership of the Authority shall consist of one member from each
member municipality of the Authority. Each such member, including
each of the first members of the Authority, shall be appointed in the
manner set forth in the concurrent ordinance adopted by each member
municipality. Members shall serve for terms of three years, except that
the first members of the Authority shall serve terms commencing July
1, 1986, and terminating as follows: Bethel, June 30, 1987; Bridgewater,
June 30, 1988; Brookfield, June 30, 1989; Danbury, June 30, 1987; New
Fairfield, June 30, 1988; New Milford, June 30, 1989; Newtown, June 30,
1987; Redding, June 30, 1988; and Ridgefield, June 30, 1989; provided,
however, that members shall continue to serve until their successors are
appointed and have qualified. In no event shall the terms of more than
1/2 of the members expire simultaneously. If, because of the addition or
reduction of the number of member municipalities, the terms of more
than 1/2 of the members would expire simultaneously, then the terms of
a sufficient number of members shall be automatically extended for a
period of one year. Said extensions shall be based upon the alphabetical
order of the member municipalities.
B. Each member municipality may appoint one alternate member of the
Authority, who shall act in the event of the disability or absence for
any other reason of the member of the municipality. Said alternate
member shall have a voice at Authority meetings and shall have a vote at
Authority meetings if the member from said municipality is absent from
the meeting. [Amended 5-1-1989]
§ 56-5. Appointment of Brookfield representative.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brookfield shall appoint the
Brookfield member and alternate to the Authority. The Board of Selectmen
shall fill any vacancy which occurs and may remove said member or
alternate for cause pursuant to the provisions of § C4-11 of the Charter of
the Town of Brookfield. No person shall be eligible for appointment as a
Brookfield member or alternate to the Authority unless, at the time of his
appointment, he is an elector of the Town. Any such person who ceases to
be an elector of the Town shall thereupon cease to hold said office.
§ 56-6. Voting units. [Amended 5-1-1989]
A. Except in the case of membership termination, the Authority shall
operate with 100 voting units which shall be assigned to member
municipalities in proportion to each municipality's share of the total
population of all members of the Authority as determined by the latest
decennial federal census of population. There shall be no fractional
votes, and each municipality shall have a minimum of one vote. The
§ 56-3 REGIONAL RESOURCES RECOVERY § 56-6
56:55
distribution of voting units among members shall be recomputed
following each decennial federal census and upon the withdrawal or
termination of any member municipality or the admission of a new
member municipality. All actions by the Authority shall require the
affirmative vote of at least 51% of the total voting units present and
voting at a duly called meeting of the Authority at which a quorum is
present.
B. Members of the Authority holding a majority of the voting units shall
constitute a quorum, provided that no quorum shall be deemed to exist
unless at least 51% of the members of the Authority shall be present and
voting.
C. In case of membership termination, each member municipality shall
have one vote, and there shall be no vote by voting units.
§ 56-7. Compensation. [Amended 5-1-1989]
Members of the Authority shall serve without compensation but may be
reimbursed for their necessary expenses.
§ 56-8. Withdrawal of member municipalities.
Member municipalities may withdraw from the Authority only after
agreeing, in writing, to comply with the terms and conditions contained in
any contracts between such municipality and the Authority or the holders
of any bonds of the Authority. No such withdrawal shall relieve such
municipality of any liability, responsibility or obligation incurred by it as a
member of the Authority or as a user of any of the Authority's projects.
§ 56-9. Concurrent ordinances.
This chapter shall be deemed to be concurrent with such ordinances as shall
be enacted by the City of Danbury and the Towns of Bethel, Bridgewater,
New Fairfield, New Milford, Newtown, Redding and Ridgefield, which
ordinances are not inconsistent in any material respect with the provisions
of this chapter. Said chapter shall be deemed concurrent even though said
ordinances are not adopted simultaneously by said municipalities and even
though one or more of said municipalities shall fail to adopt said ordinances.
Chapter 57
RETIREMENT
§ 56-6 BROOKFIELD CODE § 56-9
56:56
ARTICLE I
Retirement Benefits Advisory Committee
[Adopted 2-1-2010]
§ 57-1. Committee established.
A permanent Retirement Benefits Advisory Committee is hereby established
by the Town of Brookfield. The purpose of this Committee is to render
advice to the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance on issues
concerning the Town's pension program and other post-retirement benefits
provided to Town employees.
§ 57-2. Membership; terms of office; vacancies.
A. The Committee shall be comprised of the Town Treasurer, one member
of the Board of Selectmen, one member of the Board of Finance, plus
three electors of the Town of Brookfield, all of whom shall be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen, and one member appointed by the Board
of Education. When possible, the appointed electors shall be
knowledgeable in the general field of pension plans and investments.
The Town Controller shall be an ex-officio member of the Committee.
No voting member of this Committee shall be a beneficiary or future
beneficiary of the Town's retirement benefit plans. [Amended
1-3-2012; 12-1-2014]
B. The members from the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Finance and
the Town Treasurer shall serve for the length of that member’s term
on the respective board or in the elected position. The term of the
member appointed by the Board of Education shall be four years. The
appointed electors shall serve for a four-year term; however, in the initial
appointment of electors, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint one of the
appointed electors to a two-year term and one of the appointed electors
to a four-year term. Appointments shall comply with the minority
representation requirements set forth in C.G.S. § 9-167a. [Amended
12-1-2014]
C. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with
the Charter.
§ 57-3. Officers.
The Committee shall elect its Chairman and any other officers it requires
from its membership.
§ 57-4. Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.
The Committee shall establish its own meeting schedule, and will meet no
less than once per calendar quarter. All meeting schedules and agendas
shall be made available to the public in advance, in accordance with the
Town Charter and state statutes. The presence of three voting members
shall constitute a quorum. Meetings shall be open to the public, and public
comment shall be allowed at all meetings. Minutes of meetings shall be
kept and filed in accordance with the Town Charter and state statutes,
§ 57-1 REGIONAL RESOURCES RECOVERY § 57-4
56:57
as applicable. The Committee may also establish bylaws and rules of
procedure as appropriate.
§ 57-5. Responsibilities.
A. This Committee shall render advice to the Board of Selectmen and the
Board of Finance on issues concerning the Town's pension program and
other post-retirement benefits provided to Town employees.
B. This Committee shall recommend to the Board of Selectmen a schedule
of appropriate and periodic communications to the general public and
the employees.
C. This Committee shall meet with the Controller, Director of Business
and Technology Operations of the Board of Education and the Town
Treasurer to review all pertinent government accounting standards
(GASB), as well as recommendations from the investment firm
concerning the Town pension plan and retirement benefits program in
order to better give advice to the Board of Selectmen and the Board of
Finance.
§ 57-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 57-5
56:58
ARTICLE II
Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust
[Adopted 3-2-2015]
§ 57-6. Establishment; purpose; administration.
The Town of Brookfield ("Town"), in accordance with General Statutes
§ 7-450(b), hereby establishes the Town of Brookfield Other Post-
Employment Benefits Trust (the "trust") to hold and invest the assets that
are set aside for the payment of other post-employment benefits, with the
trust to be administered and operated in accordance with the provisions
of Government Accounting Standards Board Statements 43 and 45, as may
be amended or superseded, and pursuant to the terms and declarations set
forth in the Declaration of Trust which is, and as amended from time to
time, incorporated herein as though it was fully set forth herein.21
§ 57-7. Responsibility for oversight and assets.
The Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for the oversight of the trust
and the trust assets and shall consult the Retirement Benefits Advisory
Committee in the conduct of its duties pursuant to this article and the
Declaration of Trust.22
§ 57-8. Delegation of duties.
The Town delegates the duties of Trustees of the trust to the Town
Controller and Town Treasurer, whose duties are as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and as required by law.23
21.Editor's Note: Said Declaration of Trust is on file in the Town offices.
22.Editor's Note: Said Declaration of Trust is on file in the Town offices.
23.Editor's Note: Said Declaration of Trust is on file in the Town offices.
§ 57-6 REGIONAL RESOURCES RECOVERY § 57-8
56:59
Chapter 59
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 57-8 BROOKFIELD CODE § 57-8
59:60
ARTICLE I
Town Clerk
[Adopted 12-19-1977]
§ 59-1. Salary to be in lieu of all fees.
Commencing on the effective date of this chapter,24 the Town Clerk of
the Town of Brookfield shall receive a salary in lieu of all fees and other
compensation provided for in the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut. Said salary shall, from time to time, be fixed by the legislative
body of the Town of Brookfield pursuant to the provisions of § C3-1D of the
Town Charter.
24.Editor's Note: The effective date of this chapter is 1-6-1978.
§ 59-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 59-1
59:61
Chapter 62
SEAL
§ 62-1. Explanation of symbols.
The symbols used in the Seal of the Town of Brookfield have the following
meanings:
A. A defiant eagle: the spirit of Brookfield's founders.
B. On the eagle's breast, a shield of courage:
(1) Showing the incorporation date of the Town, 1788.
(2) A pair of shears manufactured in the ironworks early in Brookfield's
history.
C. The eagle's wings: support the Town's indomitable will to survive during
its early days.
D. The eagle's talons: shown gripping firmly some links of the historic
chain25 that was made pro patria (for one's country) to stretch across the
Hudson River at West Point to keep British ships from going beyond the
highlands during the American Revolution.
E. The two stars in the border symbolize the many stars, 34, that adorned
the 1861 flag that was made by Brookfield Women and flown on Obtuse
Road South all during the Civil War.
Chapter 71
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 184.
Water system — See Ch. 215, Art. I.
Waterways — See Ch. 216.
§ 71-1. Authorization as Sewer Authority.
The Town of Brookfield does hereby authorize the Water Pollution Control
Authority, created in 1974, to serve as the Sewer Authority of the Town,
hereinafter "Authority." Such Authority shall have all powers and duties of
a municipal water pollution control authority as provided by Chapter 103 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
25.Editor's Note: The following is an explanation of this historic chain: From the book
"Everyday things in American Life 1607 - 1776." Page 164. Vol. 1, by William C. Langdon
Furnace at Salisbury, Connecticut. "This furnace made cannon and shot for the American
Army throughout the Revolution. It has been claimed that parts of the great chain
stretched across the Hudson River at West Point to keep British ships from going beyond
the highlands was forged there. " From the book "Annals of Brookfield" by Emily Hawley,
Page 127 Chapter 9 "Eleazer Hathaway made muskets, chains and anchors and other
things for innumerable purposes." It is alleged also that much of his chain was used with
the Salisbury Chain to stretch across the Hudson. There were also the Kent furnaces and
others.
§ 59-1 BROOKFIELD CODE § 71-2
62:62
§ 71-2. Membership.
The Water Pollution Control Authority shall consist of five members and
three alternates, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in
accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter. (See §§ C4-12 and
C7-4, Town Charter, revision of November 6, 2007.) The qualifications of
said members and alternates shall be as set forth in Exhibit A of the Town
Charter. Alternates may participate fully in all meetings of the Authority,
except that only seated alternates may vote on a particular matter. In the
event of a vacancy or an absence or disqualification of a member, the
Chairman or other presiding officer shall seat and designate an alternate
member to vote at the meeting.
§ 71-3. Officers, procedures and records.
The procedures of the Authority, including election of officers, shall be
as set forth in the Town Charter (See § C7-1, Town Charter, revision of
November 6, 2007.), subject to the following additional requirements:
A. Regular meetings of the Authority shall generally be held not less than
once a month.
B. The Authority shall maintain separate books and records of account for
transactions relating to operation of the sewerage system and Authorityfinanced
capital improvements.
C. The Authority shall operate in accordance with the requirements of the
Connecticut General Statutes and as an Enterprise Fund in accordance
with the current rules of Government Accounting Standards Board,
GASB.
§ 71-4. Powers and duties.
The Authority shall have authority in the name and on behalf of the Town:
A. To do any and all things necessary or appropriate to construct any
sewerage system authorized by the Town, including, but not in limitation
thereof, the taking and holding by purchase, condemnation or otherwise
of the whole or any part of any real property or interest therein which
it may determine to be necessary or desirable for use in connection
therewith; to apportion and assess lands and buildings in the Town
which shall, in its judgment, be specially benefited thereby and upon
the owners of such lands and buildings in such proportions as it may
deem equitable; to establish such charges as it may deem proper for
connections with and the use of said sewerage system; and to maintain
and operate said system, and to exercise such other powers of a
municipal water pollution control authority, all in accordance with, as
provided by, the provisions of Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
B. To establish and revise rules and regulations for the supervision,
management, control and operation and use of the sewerage system,
including rules and regulations prohibiting the discharge into the
sewerage system of any sewage or any stormwater runoff which, in the
§ 71-2 SEAL § 71-4
62:63
opinion of the Authority, will adversely affect any part or any process of
the sewerage system.
C. To fulfill contracts entered into between the Town and other
municipalities to obtain sewerage system service.
D. Through its Chairman, to execute and file applications and agreements
with the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection for state grants and/or advances pursuant to the provisions
of Chapter 446k of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958,
as amended, and to execute all the applications, instruments and
documents and accept payments and do all other things that may be
necessary for state grants and/or advances, and to apply for and accept
any and all federal grants-in-aid in connection with the sewerage system.
§ 71-5. Finance.
A. On or before the April 15 of each year, the Authority shall prepare and
submit to the Board of Selectmen its proposed operating and capital
expenditures budgets for the ensuing fiscal year. The budgets shall be
prepared on an accrual basis. The Board of Selectmen shall return the
Board's formal written comments on the proposed budgets, if any, for
consideration by the Authority not later than May 20. Thereafter, not
later than the fourth Wednesday of June, the Authority shall adopt its
operating and capital expenditures budgets for the ensuing fiscal year
and file the same with the Town Clerk. Copies of said budgets shall be
forwarded to the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance by the
Authority at the time of said filing.
B. The capital budget shall set forth in detail the Authority's estimate of
the capital expense to be incurred in the ensuing fiscal year, including
the cost of engineering and other professional services associated with
capital expense items. Any expenditure for a project requiring Planning
Commission approval pursuant to Section 8-24 of the General Statutes,
other than an expenditure associated with preliminary studies and
planning, shall be considered expenditure for a capital item.
C. The operating budget shall set forth in detail the Authority's estimate
for the ensuing fiscal year of the revenue to be received from sewer
user charges, sewer connection fees, capital cost recovery fees,
miscellaneous fees, and from municipal, state and federal grants in aid
of capital projects and other income; the expense to be incurred in
the operation, rehabilitation, repair and maintenance of the sewerage
system, including interest on bonded indebtedness and the Authority's
estimate of the fees to be paid to the City of Danbury pursuant to the
provisions of the Interlocal Agreement between Danbury and Brookfield
dated April 3, 1974, as amended by agreement dated April 9, 1992, and
as the same hereafter may be further amended, and including the cost of
engineering and other professional services attributable to the operation
and maintenance of the sewerage system; and a reasonable reserve to
meet depreciation, interest and reserves for infrastructure replacement,
contingencies and unanticipated expense.
D. The Authority shall establish and levy, in the manner prescribed by
Section 7-255 of the General Statutes, fair and reasonable charges and
§ 71-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 71-5
62:64
fees for connection with and for the use of the municipal sewerage
system. The revenue to be derived from such charges, together with
other revenue available to the Authority for operations, shall be
sufficient to pay all projected expense to be incurred by the Authority in
the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system for the ensuing
fiscal year. Revenue surplus, if any, may be used as a source of funds to
offset user charges in subsequent fiscal years.
E. As provided by Section 7-249 of the General Statutes, as amended,
revenue from the assessment of benefits shall be used solely for the
acquisition or construction of the sewerage system providing such
benefits and for the payment of principal and interest on bonds or notes
issued to finance such acquisition or construction.
F. The Authority shall determine the most effective way to finance capital
projects. If project bond funds are obtained using the full faith and
credit of the Town, so as to obligate the Town, a payment plan shall be
developed between the WPCA and the Town Controller, subject to the
review of the Board of Finance.
G. On or before October 1 of each year, the Authority shall prepare an
annual financial report setting forth a summary of the Authority's
financial affairs for the most recently completed fiscal year. The report
shall be prepared on an accrual basis. The report shall be in such form as
required for the inclusion of such Authority financial information in the
Town of Brookfield annual audited financial statements. The Authority
shall file the report with the Controller and shall provide a copy thereof
to the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance at the time of
such filing. The Board of Selectmen or the Board of Finance may make
formal fiscal recommendations to the Authority based on such annual
financial report not later than December 31 next ensuing. The Authority
shall consider any such recommendations in its next ensuing budget
deliberation.
§ 71-6. Capital improvements and sewer extensions.
A. The Authority shall notify the Board of Selectmen of any proposed
extension of the municipal sewerage system by an applicant or member
of the public that, after preliminary review, it is willing to consider for
approval and shall forward to the Board of Selectmen all information
submitted in support of said proposal, petition or request. The Board
of Selectmen shall submit its comments and recommendations to the
Authority within 45 days of receipt of said notification from the
Authority; provided, however, that the Board of Selectmen may request
and be entitled to one thirty-day extension of said comment and
recommendation period. The Authority shall defer further action with
respect to such proposed extension until either it receives the comments
and recommendations of the Board of Selectmen or said comment and
recommendation period has elapsed.
B. Upon consideration by the Authority, after preliminary review, of any
proposal for sewerage system expansion or for a capital improvement
not contained in the Authority's capital budget, excluding repairs,
replacements or substitutions to existing facilities, the Authority shall
§ 71-5 SEAL § 71-6
62:65
notify the Board of Selectman of said proposal and shall forward to
the Board of Selectmen all information which is available concerning
said proposal. The Board of Selectmen shall submit its comments and
recommendations concerning said proposal to the Authority within 35
days of receipt of said notification from the Authority. The Authority shall
defer further action with respect to such proposal until either it receives
the comments and recommendations of the Board of Selectmen or said
thirty-five-day period for comment has elapsed.
Chapter 72
YOUTH COMMISSION
§ 72-1. Creation.
There is hereby established a Youth Commission for the Town of Brookfield,
which shall be known as the "Brookfield Youth Commission."
§ 72-2. Membership; terms; alternate members.
A. The said Brookfield Youth Commission shall consist of five members,
three alternate members and five nonvoting youth representatives.
B. Three members of said Commission shall be appointed to serve until
the first Monday in February 1985, and the remaining two members of
said Commission shall be appointed to serve until the first Monday in
February 1986. Thereafter, appointments shall be for terms of two years,
each commencing on the first Monday in February. Said appointments
are to be made by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the provisions of
§ C4-12 of the Town Charter.
C. One alternate member of said Commission shall be appointed for a term
expiring the first Monday in February 1985, and two alternate members
shall be appointed for a term expiring the first Monday in February
1986. Thereafter, appointments shall be for a term of two years, each
commencing on the first Monday in February. Said appointments are to
be made by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the provisions of § C4-12
of the Town Charter.
§ 72-3. Youth representatives.
The five youth representatives on said Commission shall be residents of
the Town of Brookfield, and each of them shall be not less than 12 nor
more than 18 years of age. They shall advise the Commission of issues
before it and participate in all deliberations, but shall not be entitled to
vote on Commission matters. Initially, said youth representatives shall be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms expiring on the first Monday
of February 1985. Thereafter, appointments shall be made by the Board
of Selectmen for terms of two years, commencing on the first Monday of
February in odd-numbered years.
§ 71-6 BROOKFIELD CODE § 72-4
72:66
§ 72-4. Vacancies.
All vacancies occurring in the memberships of said Commission shall be
filled by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the provisions of § C4-12 of the
Town Charter.
§ 72-5. Powers and duties.
The Youth Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To study the needs of youthful persons within the Town, including those
needs relating to employment, mental and physical health, youth
activities and social issues and to develop a plan to meet the needs of the
youth of the Town of Brookfield.
B. To analyze services for the youth provided within the Town by both
public and private agencies and to make recommendations to those
agencies and to the Board of Selectmen regarding the development and
implementation of services related to the needs of the youth.
C. To provide coordination of community programs for the youth.
D. To provide such services as are needed by the youth of the Town of
Brookfield, subject to the appropriations of funds therefor by the Town.
§ 72-6. Applicability of Charter provisions.
The provisions of §§ C4-12, C7-3, C7-4 and C7-5 of the Town Charter,
as well as any other Charter provisions applicable hereto, shall govern
the conditions of membership for the Youth Commission, except that the
provisions of §§ C7-3 and C7-5 of the Town Charter shall not be applicable
to the youth representatives of said Commission.
Chapter 74
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commssions — See Ch.
51.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 74-1. Membership. [Amended 6-10-1980]
The Brookfield Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five regular
members and three alternate members who shall be electors of the Town
not holding any other elected Town office and who shall be elected
biennially at the regular elections on the first Monday in October in the odd
years. The term of office for each regular member of said Board shall be
six years, except that in the first annual election the terms of office shall
be staggered; two members, two years; two members, four years; and one
member, six years. In the event of the resignation or death of any member
of said Board, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a successor who shall
§ 72-4 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 74-1
74:67
serve until the next regularly scheduled biennial election, at which time the
vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term for which the original
member was elected. The term of office for each alternate member of said
Board shall be six years, except that in the first annual election the terms
of office shall be staggered; one alternate member, two years; one alternate
member, four years; and one alternate member, six years. In accordance
with Act No. 665 of the Public Acts of 1959,26 the Zoning Board of Appeals
of five regular and three alternate members shall be considered an eightmember
board, thereby limiting the maximum representation of the same
political party to five.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 78
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 78-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Adult-Oriented Business Establishments
Ordinance for the Town of Brookfield."
§ 78-2. Policy.
The Board of Selectman of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut (hereinafter
the "Town") finds:
A. There are or may in the future be adult-oriented business
establishments, hereinafter defined, located in or which may wish to
locate in the Town of Brookfield, which establishments require special
regulation and supervision from the Town's public safety agencies in
order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such
establishments as well as the health, safety and welfare of the Town's
citizens.
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and
Towns in the United States indicate that:
(1) Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adultoriented
business establishments;
(2) Persons under the age of eighteen may be attracted to adult-oriented
business establishments and seek to enter or loiter about them
without the knowledge or permission of their parents and guardians;
26.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 9-167a.
§ 74-1 BROOKFIELD CODE § 78-2
78:68
(3) Closed booths, cubicles and rooms for private viewing of adultoriented
materials is not conducive to the public health and safety of
the residents of the Town;
(4) The Town wishes to discourage conditions which are likely to lead to
increases in crime, drug abuse, prostitution and adverse effects on
residential neighborhoods and property values;
(5) Nude dancing, movie studios that depict principally pornographic
films for mature audiences, and sexual performances and similar
activities do not comport with the moral standards of this community,
and that by a resolution of the Town Meeting, it was found that such
businesses should be regulated to promote the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of this Town and the potential customers of
any such establishments, and that not to do so would be detrimental
to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Brookfield;
(6) The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented business
establishments is and would be detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Brookfield;
(7) Despite restrictions, minors often manage to enter and view adult
materials in motion-picture theaters or video machines;
(8) The Constitution and the laws of the State of Connecticut grant
the Town powers, especially regulatory and police powers, to enact
legislation in measure to regulate and supervise such adult-oriented
business establishments in order to protect the public health, safety
and welfare; and
(9) It is the intent of the Town in enacting this chapter to impose such
limitations and restrictions as may be allowed by the United States
Constitution and in keeping with the morals of this community, while
at the same time, allowing venues for an adult to obtain and/or view
sexually oriented materials from an establishment that chooses to
locate within this Town.
§ 78-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context:
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — A public or private establishment in which
20% or more of the wholesale value of its inventory, or 20% or more of its
monthly sales, consist of adult books, adult videos, adult novelties, adult
magazines, which can be characterized as "adult materials" because they
emphasize matters depicting sexual activities or sexual parts of the male
or female anatomy or facsimiles of the same, and are intended for adult
viewing.
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any amusement machine that
is regularly used for presenting material distinguish or characterized by its
emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities or
anatomical areas of the human body for viewing by adults eighteen years or
older.
§ 78-2 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 78-3
78:69
ADULT CABARET — A public or private establishment which is licensed to
serve food or alcoholic beverages and which features nude or partially nude
dancers, gogo dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers
where the emphasis is on depicting sexual activities or anatomical areas of
the human body consisting of male and female genitalia or female breasts.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of less than fifty persons, used regularly or routinely for presenting
materials that have as a dominant theme an emphasis on sexual activities
or sexual anatomical areas of the human body for observation by adults
wherein minors are excluded by virtue of age.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of fifty or more persons used regularly or routinely for the
presentation of motion pictures, films, videocassettes, and similar visual
media, characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or
relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas of the human body
for observation by adults wherein minors are excluded by virtue of age.
ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS — An establishment having 10% or more of
its stock and trade in adult materials, toys and other devices designed
for sexual stimulation or wearing apparel that exposes specific anatomical
areas when worn that would otherwise be covered by such articles of
clothing.
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — A public or private
establishment which is customarily not open to the general public but only
to one or more classes of the public, thereby excluding any minor by reason
of age, and whose principal activity includes but is not limited to one
or a combination of the following types of businesses: adult amusement
machines, adult bookstore, adult motion-picture theater and adult minimotion-
picture theater, adult personal service establishment, adult cabaret,
adult video store, adult novelty business as well as any premises to which
the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are
so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises
for the purposes of viewing adult entertainment, any premises to which the
public, patrons or members are invited, or admitted wherein an entertainer,
as defined below, provides adult entertainment to a member of the public,
a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted,
operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect, regardless of how
such premises are advertised or represented, but including, without
limitation, adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio,
encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or any other term of
like import, as well as adult cabaret, adult novelty business, adult personal
service business. Adult-oriented business establishments shall not include
a business that only has an accessory adult use as a component of its
merchandise or inventory.
ADULT PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — An establishment,
club, or business by whatever name designated which offers or advertises
or is equipped or arranged so as to allow a person to provide personal
§ 78-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 78-3
78:70
services for a person of the same or other sex, where either person is
nude or partially nude, on an individual basis in an open or closed room
and which excludes minors by virtue of age. Such services or activities
include but are not limited to massages, body rubs, alcohol rubs, baths
and other similar treatments, as well as modeling studios, body painting
studios, wrestling studios, and individual theatrical performances. It does
not include the following specific uses and activities, performed by persons
pursuant to, and in accordance with, licenses issued to such persons by the
State of Connecticut:
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having 10% or more of its stock
and trade in videotapes or films for barter, sale or rent or for viewing
on premises by use of motion-picture devices or any other coin-operated
means, and other printed materials and other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting or
relating to specified sexual activities or specific anatomical areas, as
defined below.
BOARD — The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brookfield.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Town of Brookfield or his
designated agent.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented business establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who engages in the performance of adult
entertainment within an adult-oriented business establishment, as defined
in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such
Treatment by a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a
Connecticut-licensed masseur or masseuse, a licensed practical nurse
or a registered professional nurse;
A.
B. Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment;
C. Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or medical offices;
Barbershops, or beauty parlors which offer massage to the scalp, the
face, the neck or shoulders only;
D.
Athletic facilities of an educational institution, including alumni club, or
of a philanthropic or charitable institution; and
E.
Health establishments, including commercial and noncommercial
clubs, which are equipped and arranged to provide instruction,
services, or activities which improve or affect a person's physical
condition by physical exercise or by massage. Physical exercise
programs include aerobics, martial arts or the use of exercise
equipment.
F.
G. Accredited educational institutions.
§ 78-3 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 78-3
78:71
entertainment and whether or not such person is an employee or an
independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the Brookfield Police Department, Health
Department, or the Fire Department, including the Fire Marshal, Building
Department, Zoning Enforcement Officer, and/or or other Town employees
designated by the Chief of Police, who shall hereby be authorized to inspect
premises regulated under this chapter, and to take the required actions
authorized by this chapter in case of violations being found on such
premises, and to require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on
said premises.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person, or any proprietor, shareholder, general partner,
LLC member or limited partner who holds twenty percent or more of
the shares or partnership interest or ownership interest of any business,
which is operating, conducting, owning or maintaining an adult business
establishment.
PARTIALLY NUDE — Having any part of specified anatomical areas, as
defined below, less than completely or opaquely covered.
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITY — A use accounting for 10% or more of a business's
stock and trade, in display space, or floor space, or movie display time per
month.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: —
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT-ORIENTED
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — The sale, lease or sublease of the
premises; the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or the
establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers
the ownership or control of the business, except for transfers by bequest or
other operation of the law upon death of the person possessing ownership
or control.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; and
Fondling, lap dancing, or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breast.
C.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, cleft of buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
§ 78-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 78-4
78:72
§ 78-4. Restrictions.
All adult-oriented business establishments shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. Such uses are only permitted in IRC 80/40 Zone north of Production
Drive.
B. No such adult-oriented business establishment shall be located within
500 feet of any residential structure.
C. No such adult-oriented business establishment shall be located within
500 feet of the property line of any public or private school or other
educational facility serving individuals under the age of 17 years, daycare
center or senior center.
D. No such adult-oriented business establishment shall be located within
500 feet of the property line of any lot containing a preexisting
establishment which sells alcoholic beverages (other than beer and
wine) for on-premises consumption, or within 500 feet of the property
line of any lot containing a preexisting restaurant or other food service
establishment which does not sell alcoholic beverages (other than beer
or wine) for on-premises consumption.
E. No such adult-oriented business establishment shall be located within
500 feet of another such establishment.
F. For purposes of compliance with these separation requirements,
distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the principle entrance of the
building containing or proposing to contain an adult-oriented business
establishment to the nearest boundary of the uses specified in
Subsections A, B, C, and D above.
G. In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 8-6, these
regulations shall not be varied by the Zoning Board of Appeals to
accommodate the location of an adult-oriented business establishment.
H. No adult-oriented business establishment shall allow, feature or exhibit
employees or entertainers who are nude or partially nude where live
specific anatomical areas are exposed to patrons.
I. No adult-oriented business establishment shall remain open between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
J. No adult-oriented business establishment shall include or feature live
entertainment involving the touching or displaying of specific
anatomical areas or in any way displaying, featuring, performing or
simulating live specific sexual activities.
§ 78-5. Signage.
A. An adult-oriented business establishment shall be permitted one singlefaced
sign affixed to the building where the permitted use is located
that contains the name of the establishment or otherwise refers to the
permitted use, provided that the total area of said sign shall not exceed
the area allowed in § 242-306F(4).
B. Each adult-oriented business establishment must post and maintain a
sign twenty four inches by six inches on the exterior of the building
adjacent to its main entryway indicating "ADULTS ONLY" with letters
five inches in height.
§ 78-4 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 78-5
78:73
C. Entrance and exit signs shall be allowed pursuant to § 242-306F(6) of the
Zoning Regulations. No other signage is allowed, except as set forth in
this section.
§ 78-6. Window and exterior display limitations.
No adult entertainment shall be conducted in a matter that permits the
observation of any material or novelties depicting, describing, or relating
to specified sexual activities or specific anatomical areas from any public
way or from any property not registered as an adult-oriented business
establishment. This requirement shall also apply to any display, decoration,
sign, show window or other opening.
§ 78-7. Land use registration requirement.
A. All existing or proposed adult-oriented business establishments shall,
within 30 days of the effective passage of this chapter or prior to the
opening of business, register with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
provide the following information:
(1) The street address of the premises;
(2) The name of the owner of the premises, or the names of the
beneficial owners if the property is in a trust;
(3) The address of the operator and owner or the beneficial owners;
(4) The trade name of the adult-oriented business establishment;
(5) The name(s) and address(es) of the owner, beneficial owner,
partners, limited partners or the major stockholders of the adultoriented
business establishment;
(6) The date of initiation of the adult-oriented business establishment;
(7) If the building or premises is leased, a copy of said lease shall be
furnished;
(8) A description of the business's principal activity and the nature and
type of adult-oriented business establishment to be conducted on
the premises;
(9) A description of the anticipated percentage of stock or inventory
that will be of an adult-oriented nature;
(10) A description of all signs visible from the exterior of the premises;
(11) A description of any proposed window displays or the manner in
which windows will be covered;
(12) A schematic showing of the layout or proposed layout of the interior
of the business establishment.
B. Upon filing of this information, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
automatically issue a certificate of registration within 10 days. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall require proof of posting of the
"ADULTS ONLY" sign as called for under these regulations. The failure
of any adult-oriented business establishment to obtain a certificate of
registration shall be deemed a violation of this chapter entitling the
Zoning Enforcement Officer to issue a cease-and-desist order. Any
appeals from the cease-and-desist order shall be handled in accordance
with Connecticut General Statutes § 8-8. No cease-and-desist order will
stay the operation of the establishment unless the Zoning Enforcement
Officer seeks and obtains a court-ordered injunction. During any
§ 78-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 78-7
78:74
administrative appeal or injunction proceedings, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall carry the burden of proof.
§ 78-8. Severability.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or
provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect
only such section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional, and
shall not affect any other section, clause or provision of this chapter.
§ 78-9. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the injunctive relief and other statutory remedies afforded to
the municipality, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of
$100. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 78-10. Enforcement.
Any adult-oriented business establishment may be inspected during its
normal business hours by an inspector as defined herein to ensure
compliance with this chapter. Any violation of this chapter, in addition to
the other enforcement mechanisms available, may be referred to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer for the issuance of a cease-and-desist order to be
prosecuted in accordance with § 78-7 above or to the Police Department for
appropriate enforcement.
§ 78-11. Requirements for adult-oriented business establishments.
A. Requirements of the operator.
(1) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the
operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and
the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same
manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(2) An operator of an adult-oriented establishment shall be responsible
for the conduct of all employees while on the premises of such
establishment, and any act or omission of any employee constituting
a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act
or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the
operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
(3) No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall
allow or permit any minor or intoxicated person to loiter in any part
of such establishment, including parking lots immediately adjacent
to such establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented
establishment.
(4) Every adult-oriented business establishment in Town on or after
September 1, 2001, shall be well-lit at all times in the interior
and shall be physically arranged in such a manner as to prohibit
booths, cubicles or stalls. All portions of the premises shall be readily
§ 78-7 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 78-11
78:75
accessible and open and well-lit at all times in their entirety by
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which a patron is permitted access, at not less than one
footcandle as measured from the floor level. It shall be the duty
of the operator and its employees to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times of hours of operation.
(5) The operator shall insure compliance of the adult-oriented business
establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Inspections. An operator or an applicant for a license to operate an
adult-oriented business establishment shall permit representatives of
the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Building
Department and/or any other inspector as defined above to inspect
the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law, at all reasonable times.
C. Police Department license required. The operator of each adult-oriented
establishment shall be responsible for and shall acquire a license from
the Town in the following manner:
(1) The premises may be inspected by the Town Health Department, Fire
Department, Building Department and Zoning Enforcement Officer
within 60 days of receipt of the complete application. If the premises
are in compliance with state and local health, fire and building codes
and zoning regulations, a license shall be issued within 90 days of
receipt of the complete application unless the applicant is deemed
unqualified.
(2) An applicant shall be unqualified if one or more of the following is
true:
(a) An applicant is under 18 years of age;
(b) An applicant is overdue in payment to the Town of taxes, fees,
fines, or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in
relation to an adult-oriented business;
(c) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(d) An applicant has violated a provision of this chapter within two
years immediately preceding the application;
(e) The premises to be used for the adult-oriented business have not
been approved by the Town Health Department, Fire Department
and Building Department, as being in compliance with applicable
laws, ordinances and regulations, within 60 days of the filing of
the application;
(f) An applicant is in violation Article V, § 242-501 et seq. of the
Town of Brookfield Zoning Regulations;
(g) The license fee required herein has not been paid at the time the
application was filed with the Chief of Police;
(h) An applicant has been employed in an adult-oriented
establishment in a managerial capacity within the preceding 36
months and knowingly:
[1] Permitted alcohol liquor or cereal malt beverages to be
illegally brought or consumed upon the premises;
§ 78-11 BROOKFIELD CODE § 78-11
78:76
[2] Permitted the sale, distribution, delivery or consumption of
any controlled substance or illegal drug or narcotic on the
premises;
[3] Permitted any person under the age of 18 to be in or upon
the premises of an adult-entertainment business; or
[4] Permitted the act of prostitution or patronizing prostitution,
as defined under state law, on the premises.
(i) An applicant has been convicted or has plead nolo contendere to
a felony within five years immediately preceding the application
or has been convicted of or plead nolo contendere within two
years immediately preceding the application where such
misdemeanor involved sexual assaults or batteries, prostitution,
indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child, child pornography or
the sale or distribution of controlled substances or illegal drugs
or narcotics.
(3) If an applicant is deemed unqualified, said rejection shall be in
writing and shall specifically state the evidence presented and
reason for rejection and shall be sent to the applicant by registered
mail as further provided in this chapter.
(4) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the adult-oriented business. The license shall be posted
in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult-oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
§ 78-12. License application information required.
A. This application shall include the information called for in Subsection
A(1) through (9) below. If the applicant is an enterprise, it shall designate
an officer or partner as applicant. In such case, in addition to the
information in Subsection A(1) through (9) below, the application shall
state the date of formation of the organization and the information called
for in Subsection A(2) through (6) of this section with respect to each
officer, director, general partner and all other persons with authority
to participate directly and regularly in management of the business,
but such information need not be provided with respect to attorneys,
accountants and other persons whose primary function is to provide
professional assistance to the licensee.
(1) The name, business location, business mailing address and phone
number of the proposed adult-oriented business establishment.
(2) The full true name and any other names, aliases or stage names used
in the preceding five years.
(3) Current residential mailing address and telephone number.
(4) Written proof of age, in the form of a birth certificate, current
driver's license with picture, or other picture identification document
issued by a governmental agency.
(5) The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or
permit relating to an adult-oriented business or adult service,
whether any such license or permit has been revoked or suspended
and, if so, the reason or reasons therefor.
§ 78-11 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 78-12
78:77
(6) All criminal charges, complaints or indictments in the preceding
five years which resulted in a conviction or a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere.
(7) The name and address of a statutory agent or other agent authorized
to receive service of process.
(8) The name(s) of the adult-oriented business manager(s) who will have
actual supervisory authority over the operations of the business.
(9) An accurate, to scale, but not necessarily professionally drawn, floor
plan of the business premises clearly indicating the location of one
or more manager's stations.
B. The information provided pursuant to Subsection A(5) and (6) shall be
supplemented in writing by certified mail to the Chief of Police within
10 working days of a change of circumstances which would render
information originally submitted false or incomplete.
§ 78-13. License application fee.
A license fee of $1,500 shall be submitted with the application for a license.
If the application is denied, 1/2 of the fee shall be returned.
§ 78-14. Renewal of license; fees.
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may
be renewed annually by making application as provided in this chapter.
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, to allow Town officials to review the application in a
timely manner. However, when an application for renewal is made less
than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will
not be affected.
B. An annual license renewal fee of $750 shall be submitted with the
application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of
$100 shall be assessed against the applicant who files for renewal less
than 90 days before the license expires. If the application for renewal is
denied, 1/2 of the total fees collected shall be returned.
C. No adult-oriented establishment shall operate if its license expires by
lapse of time.
§ 78-15. Suspension of license.
The Chief of Police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if he determines that an operator or an employee of an operator has
violated any part of this chapter or violated any state statute regarding the
subject establishment.
§ 78-16. Revocation of license.
A. The Chief of Police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in this
chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding
12 months.
B. The Chief of Police shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(1) An operator gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
§ 78-12 BROOKFIELD CODE § 78-16
78:78
(2) An operator or an employee of an operator has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises of
the adult-oriented business;
(3) An operator or an employee of an operator has knowingly allowed
or promoted prostitution on the premises of the adult-oriented
business;
(4) An operator or an employee of an operator has knowingly operated
the adult-oriented establishment during a period of time when the
operator's license was suspended;
(5) An operator or an employee of an operator has knowingly allowed or,
as a result of his or her negligent failure to supervise, has allowed
any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation
or sexual contact to occur in or on the premises of the adult-oriented
establishment;
(6) Any operator is convicted or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to an
offense stated above.
C. An operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation.
§ 78-17. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this
section shall be fined a defined sum not to exceed $100 for each such
violation.
B. Each violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense, and
any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered
a separate offense for each hour of violation.
§ 78-18. Transfer of license.
A. An operator shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
an operator operate an adult-oriented establishment under the authority
of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
B. The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically
and immediately revoke the license.
§ 78-19. Appeal.
If the Chief of Police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or
revokes a license, he shall, within 10 days of his decision, send to the
applicant or operator at the address listed on the application, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his decision and further
shall specifically state the evidence presented, the reason for the decision,
and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision
to the Board of Police Commissioners within 30 days of receipt of the
notice. The Board must render a decision within 45 days of receipt of the
appeal. The aggrieved party may file an appeal from the Board of Police
Commissioners directly to the Superior Court for the Judicial District of
Ansonia-Milford within 15 days of issuance of notice of denial of the appeal
from the Board of Police Commissioners. The filing of an appeal stays the
§ 78-16 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES § 78-19
78:79
action of the Town in suspending or revoking a license under the Board
of Commissioners. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the Town in
suspending or revoking a license until the Board of Police Commissioners or
Superior Court makes a final decision. Nothing in this section shall prevent
the Town from proceeding with an injunction action as provided for herein.
§ 78-20. Injunction.
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business
without a valid license is subject to a suit for injunction.
Chapter 82
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 82-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Ordinance Regulating
Fire, Burglar and Intrusion Alarm Systems."
§ 82-2. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public safety and welfare by
reducing the number of false alarms, providing for the effective deployment
of Police and Fire Department personnel, reducing the hazard to the public
and members of the Police and Fire Departments which occurs during
responses to false alarms and promoting the responsible use of fire, burglar
and intrusion alarm devices.
§ 82-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — To engage in the supplying, installation, maintenance
or servicing of fire, burglar or intrusion alarm devices or systems.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device which, when activated by fire, heat, smoke,
intrusion or other cause, automatically transmits a telephone signal or
audio or visual signal to which the Brookfield Police or Fire Department is
expected to respond. Excluded from the scope of this definition or chapter
are devices designed and intended solely to alert or signal any persons
within the premises in which the device is installed.
ALARM USER — That person whose name appears on the registration form
as the user or, if there is no such registration, the owner of the premises
upon which the alarm system is located.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — An alarm system using a telephone
device or attachment that mechanically or electronically selects a telephone
line to reproduce a prerecorded voice message to report a fire or other
emergency calling for Police or Fire Department response.
§ 78-19 BROOKFIELD CODE § 82-3
82:80
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner
or lessee of an alarm system or of his guests, employees or agents. Such
terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes,
tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent conditions. "False alarms" as
defined in this chapter do not include those alarms which are transmitted
with criminal, malicious or mischievous intent.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 82-4. Registration; fee; validity; renewal.
No person shall install or operate an alarm system within the Town of
Brookfield until an application has been filed with the Chief of Police of the
Town of Brookfield and a permit authorizing the installation and operation
of said alarm system has been issued by the Chief of Police. The application
shall include the name, telephone number and address of the alarm user
and at least two other persons who shall have access to the alarm system
in order to reset the system or disconnect the same when necessary. Said
application shall contain other information as may be requested by the Chief
of Police or the Brookfield Fire Department. A fee of $10 shall be paid to
the Town of Brookfield upon the filing of the application. However, no fee
shall be charged with respect to applications for the registration of alarm
systems installed in buildings owned or leased by the Town of Brookfield,
the State of Connecticut or the United States of America. Said permit shall
be valid until January 1 of the year following its issuance, unless suspended
or revoked by the Chief of Police. Said permit may be renewed annually by
filing an application with the Chief of Police. Said renewal application shall
contain such information as may be requested by the Chief of Police. There
shall be no fee imposed for renewal applications.
§ 82-5. Audible signal.
All alarm systems, as defined in this chapter, which sound an audible signal
which may be heard outside of the protected premises shall be equipped
with a device which shall limit the duration of the audible signal to not more
than 15 minutes.
§ 82-6. Specifications.
No alarm equipment shall be installed or used within the Town of Brookfield
unless said equipment meets the specification promulgated by the National
Fire Protection Association and the specifications contained within the
Connecticut Building Code.27 Said equipment must also be listed by the
Underwriters Laboratory.
27.Editor's Note: See Chapter 541 of the General Statutes.
§ 82-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 82-7
82:81
§ 82-7. Automatic dialing equipment.
No automatic telephone dialing device shall be interconnected to any
number maintained by the Brookfield Fire Department or the Brookfield
Police Department. The provisions of this section shall not apply to alarm
systems installed in buildings owned or leased by the Town of Brookfield,
the State of Connecticut or the United States of America. Alarm systems
used in such buildings may be interconnected by automatic telephone
dialing devices to a number maintained by the Brookfield Fire or Police
Department with the prior written approval of the Chief of said Department.
§ 82-8. Maintenance and testing.
A. Alarm users shall be responsible for maintaining their alarm systems in
good working order.
B. No alarm system shall be tested without prior notification to, and
permission from, the Brookfield Fire Department and the Brookfield
Police Department.
§ 82-9. Penalties for false alarms.
A. There are hereby imposed the following penalties upon an alarm user
whose system transmits a false alarm:
(1) For the first false alarm: written notice.
(2) For the second false alarm within 12 months of first date: written
notice.
(3) For the third false alarm within 12 months of first date: written
notice and a violation fine of $25.
(4) For the fourth through the seventh false alarm within 12 months of
the first date: written notice and a violation fine of $50 per false
alarm. [Amended 6-3-1996]
(5) For the eighth and each subsequent false alarm within 12 months of
the first date: written notice and a violation fine of $100 per false
alarm. [Added 6-3-1996]
B. The failure of the alarm user to correct the malfunctioning system and/
or respond to this notification within 10 days shall result in suspension
or revocation of the alarm user's permit by the Chief of Police.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a first false
alarm occurring within one month after the issuance of a permit shall
not be taken into account for the purposes of this section.
D. Any person who performs or causes to be performed any of the following
acts shall be subject to a fine pursuant to Section 7-148 of the
Connecticut General Statutes not to exceed $100 for each such act:
(1) Intentional causing of a false alarm.
(2) Failure to register an alarm system or give notice of changes in
registration information as required by this chapter. Each day of
such failure shall constitute a separate violation.
(3) Use of an automatic dial alarm or an exterior audible alarm device in
violation of the provisions of this chapter. Each day of such use shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 82-7 BROOKFIELD CODE § 82-10
82:82
§ 82-10. Town to assume no responsibility for alarm system.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Town, its departments,
officers, agents and employees shall be under no obligation whatsoever
concerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any alarm device
or of alarm-monitoring facilities. No liability whatsoever is assumed for
the failure of such alarm devices or monitoring facilities or for failure to
respond to alarms or for any other act or omission in connection with such
alarm devices.
§ 82-11. Appeals.
Any person or entity aggrieved by the actions of the Chief of Police in
refusing to issue a permit hereunder, in suspending or revoking a permit
or imposing fines for false alarms may appeal, in writing, to the Board
of Selectmen within 10 days of receipt of written notice from the Chief
of Police of said action. The Board of Selectmen shall hear said appeal
within 30 days of receipt of said written notice of appeal and shall render
a decision on the appeal within 30 days following the date of the hearing.
The Board of Selectmen may sustain the appeal, in whole or in part, may
dismiss the appeal and may take such further action concerning said appeal
as the Board of Selectmen deem appropriate. The decision of the Board of
Selectmen shall be final and no further appeal shall be permitted.
§ 82-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 1994. Alarm systems in
existence on the effective date of this chapter shall be disconnected and
rendered inoperable by the property owner within 60 days following the
effective date of this chapter unless a permit is obtained from the Chief of
Police authorizing the continued use and operation of said alarm system.
Chapter 82A
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 82-10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 82-12
82A:83

ARTICLE I
Possession of Alcohol by Minors
[Adopted 8-9-2004]
§ 82A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to address the issue that the unregulated
possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years old is
detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the residents of the
Town of Brookfield, especially its youth.
§ 82A-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — The same meaning as the term which is defined in
Title 30, Section 30-1 of The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
HOST — To organize a gathering of two or more persons, or to allow
the premises under one's control to be used with one's knowledge for
a gathering of two or more persons, for personal, business, or social
interaction.
MINOR — The same meaning as the term which is defined in Title 30,
Section 30-1 of The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 82A-3. Possession.
No minor shall be in possession of alcoholic liquors, whether in opened or in
closed containers or otherwise, within the Town of Brookfield except when
accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent or legal guardian
or spouse who has attained the age of 21 years old, and except that this
provision shall not apply to 1) a person over age 18 who is an employee
or permit holder under Section 30-90a and who possesses alcoholic liquor
in the course of his employment or business; or 2) a minor who possesses
alcoholic liquor on the order of a practicing physician. This restriction shall
apply to both public and private property.
§ 82A-4. Hosting events.
No person while in the Town of Brookfield shall host an event or gathering
at which the host knowingly allows alcoholic liquor to be consumed by or
dispensed to any minor unless said minor is accompanied by or is in the
presence of his or her parent or legal guardian or spouse who has attained
the age of 21 years old. This restriction shall apply to both public and
private property.
§ 82A-5. Penalty.
Any person violating § 82A-3 or 82A-4 of this article shall be subject to a fine
of $90 for each offense.
§ 82A-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 82A-5
82A:85
Chapter 83
BLIGHTED BUILDINGS AND PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Director of Health – See Charter, § C6-7.
Citation procedure — See Ch. 84.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Lead and lead-based paint – See Ch. 166.
§ 83-1. Findings; purpose; legislative authority.
A. It is hereby found and declared that dilapidated, blighted, or
deteriorating structures, buildings and premises located within the Town
of Brookfield contribute to the decline of neighborhoods, that the
existence of such structures, buildings or premises adversely affects the
economic well-being of the Town and is inimical to the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Town.
B. It is hereby further found that, while certain other remedies presently
exist to remediate or abate serious property deficiencies, including
blighted conditions, the adoption of this chapter has been enabled by
state law to permit such remediation and/or abatement of specific and
unacceptable property maintenance and/or blighted conditions.
C. This chapter is therefore enacted pursuant to the authority granted to
the Town under C.G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(7), 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), 7-148-aa and
7-152c, and Connecticut Public Health Code § 19-13-B25, and pursuant
to Connecticut State Building Code Sections 115 to 117, 2005
Connecticut Supplement, as amended 2009, all as amended hereinafter.
§ 83-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — A building, dwelling or unit which, by any reasonably
objective observation, has been relinquished and is vacant.
BLIGHTED PREMISES —
Any structure, building, or parcel of land (property), including, but
not limited to, single-family or multifamily residential or commercial/
industrial property, whether occupied, abandoned or vacant, which is
in such a condition that it poses a serious long-term or immediate
danger to the community through risk of collapse, fire or infestation, or
which has been declared by the Director of Health as unfit for human
habitation, or which otherwise puts at risk the health or safety of the
citizens.
A.
Conditions constituting blighted premises include, but are not limited
to, the following:
B.
§ 82A-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 83-2
82A:86
BLIGHT PREVENTION PANEL — The Panel shall consist of the Building
Official, Director of Health, Fire Marshal, Zoning Enforcement Officer and
the First Selectman.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Building Official of the Town as defined in
C.G.S. § 29-260.
DILAPIDATED — Any building or structure, or part thereof, that would not
qualify for a certificate of occupancy and is deemed an unsafe structure;
and any dwelling or structure, or part thereof, which is designated as unfit
It is determined by the Town that existing conditions pose a serious
or immediate danger to the community because of a lifethreatening
condition or a condition which puts at risk the health
or safety of citizens.
(1)
The property is not being maintained. The following factors may
be considered in determining whether a structure, building or
property is not being properly maintained:
(a) Missing or boarded-up windows or doors;
(b) A collapsing or missing wall;
(c) Sagging or collapsed roof or floor;
(d) Siding that is seriously damaged or missing;
(e) Fire damaged;
(f) A foundation that is seriously damaged or missing;
(g) A foundation that is structurally faulty;
(h) Garbage, trash or abandoned cars situated on the premises.
(2)
It is, or is becoming, dilapidated or unsafe, as determined by the
Building Official.
(3)
(4) It is an unsafe structure as defined herein.
(5) It has attracted illegal activity as determined by the Chief of Police.
(6) It is a fire hazard, as determined by the Fire Marshal.
It is a factor in materially depreciating property values in the
immediate neighborhood, because of its poorly maintained
condition.
(7)
It has become a factor creating a substantial interference with the
reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other space within a
building or structure or of other premises within the neighborhood.
(8)
It constitutes a threat to the general health, safety or welfare as
determined by the Director of Health.
(9)
§ 83-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 83-2
82A:87
for human habitation as defined in the State Building Code, the Fire Code
or the Public Health Code.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health of the Town as defined in
the C.G.S. § 19a-200.
EXEMPT PROPERTY — Any building or structure undergoing active
remodeling, restoration, repair or renovation, provided that the blighted
condition will be corrected thereby and that the exemption period will not
exceed one year from the date of receipt by the Blight Prevention Panel of a
written complaint.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Fire Marshal of the Town as defined in C.G.S.
§ 29-297.
UNSAFE STRUCTURES — All structures, or structures with deficient
existing equipment or fixtures, which have become unsanitary or deficient
because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light or
ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life or the public welfare, or which involve illegal or improper
occupancy or inadequate maintenance, or which are not secured against
entry.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Enforcement Officer as
defined in the Brookfield Town Charter, Article VI, § C6-1A.
§ 83-3. Creating or maintaining blighted or dilapidated premises or
unsafe structures prohibited.
No owner, agent, tenant or person in control of real property shall cause
blighted or dilapidated premises, whether occupied or not, or unsafe
structures to be created or maintained within the Town of Brookfield.
§ 83-4. Enforcement.
A. Determination of violation.
(1) Upon receiving a written complaint of a possible violation signed
by a complainant, the matter may be referred to the proper Town
official for appropriate action within that official's jurisdiction and
authority. If a matter is proper for review by the Blight Prevention
Panel, then the Panel shall make an investigation. The Panel may
also initiate the procedures set forth in this chapter in the absence
of a complaint.
(2) If after investigation, a probable violation is found to exist, the Blight
Prevention Panel shall serve written notice upon the owner/occupant
of the premises where the probable violation exists. The notice shall
be sent in the manner prescribed to the last known address of each
owner/occupant. A copy of such notice shall also be sent to the Chief
of Police.
(3) Such notice shall state the probable violation and the conditions
evidencing such violation and require the persons to whom it is
delivered to attend a hearing before the Blight Prevention Panel to
determine whether there has been a violation and, if so, to establish
§ 83-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 83-4
82A:88
a plan for abatement of such violation, including the date by which
such violation shall be fully abated. The notice shall also include the
date, time and location of the hearing. A copy of the notice shall also
be mailed to the complainant, if applicable.
(4) The Blight Prevention Panel shall hold a hearing within 30 calendar
days of the date of the notice provided in Subsection B. At the
hearing, all persons notified shall be given the opportunity to
present evidence on the question of whether a violation of this
chapter has occurred. The Panel or parties notified may call
witnesses to present evidence.
(5) If the owner/occupant who received the notice fails to appear, the
Blight Prevention Panel may, nevertheless, determine whether a
violation has occurred, provided the Panel has made a finding that
notice was properly served.
(6) After the hearing, the Blight Prevention Panel shall make a written
determination of whether a violation exists. If the Blight Prevention
Panel determines that a violation exists, it shall include in its written
determination the actions to be taken to abate such violation and
a reasonable deadline date by which such violation shall be fully
abated.
(7) If the Blight Prevention Panel determines that no violation has
occurred, no further action as to that complaint shall be taken, and
the Blight Prevention Panel shall serve written notice that no further
action as to that complaint shall be taken, to the owner/occupant of
the premises where the possible violation existed.
(8) Whenever, in the judgment of the Director of Health, an emergency
exists, which requires immediate action to protect the public health,
safety or welfare, an order may be issued, without hearing or appeal,
directing the owner, agent, tenant or person in control of any
blighted, unsafe or dilapidated premises to take such action as
is appropriate to correct or abate the emergency situation. If
circumstances warrant, the Director of Health may immediately act
to correct or abate such emergency in accordance with statutory
authority.
B. Special consideration. Special consideration may be given to those who
require it in order to correct a violation of this chapter. Specifically, the
Blight Prevention Panel may grant an owner/occupant additional time
to correct a violation where the owner/occupant, or a person acting
on his or her behalf, establishes good cause. As used in this section
"good cause" includes, but is not limited to, an elderly individual who
is unable to personally correct a violation due to his or her age; a
disabled individual who is unable to personally correct a violation due
to his or her disability; or an exempt property as defined in this chapter.
In determining whether good cause exists, the Blight Prevention Panel
shall consider whether other occupants of the premises are able to assist
in correcting the violation in a timely fashion and whether the severity
of the violation is such that additional time is not warranted.
C. Notice of violation.
§ 83-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 83-4
82A:89
(1) Upon the determination by the Blight Prevention Panel, in
accordance with Subsection A(6), that a violation of this chapter
exists, the Blight Prevention Panel shall serve a written notice of
violation upon the owner/occupant and shall simultaneously send
to each lien holder of the subject property a copy of the notice of
violation.
(2) The notice of violation shall state:
(a) The violation;
(b) The actions to be taken to abate such violation and the date upon
which the violation shall be remedied;
(c) That the failure of the owner/occupant to remedy the violation
within the prescribed time shall result in the issuance of a
citation in accordance with this chapter;
(d) The amount of the daily civil penalties and any other fines or
penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter or as authorized by
statute; and
(e) That if the owner/occupant fails to remove, abate or remedy the
violation, the Town may cause the remediation of the violation at
the expense of the owner/occupant.
(3) Delivery of the notice of violation to the owner/occupant shall be by
one or both of the following methods:
(a) By personal delivery to the owner/occupant; or
(b) By certified mail, return receipt requested, and simultaneously
by regular United States Postal Service mail, addressed to the
owner/occupant at their last known address.
D. Extensions. The Blight Prevention Panel may grant, for good cause
shown, extensions of time for the holding of the hearing or to remediate
the violation.
E. Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable
by a civil penalty equal to the greater of $100 or the maximum amount
allowed by C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), as the same may be amended
from time to time, for each day a violation exists and continues beyond
the date required for remediation set forth in the notice of violation, or
as extended by the Panel.
Violators will also be responsible for all costs and expenses associated
with enforcement and the collection of any civil penalties, which shall
include, but shall not be limited to, attorney fees court costs, mailing
costs and filing fees.
F. Issuance of citations.
(1) A member of the Blight Prevention Panel shall issue a citation when
a violation of this chapter continues beyond the date by which the
Blight Prevention Panel required that the violation be remedied.
(2) The citation shall state:
(a) A description of the violation.
(b) The amount of the daily civil penalties levied and that such civil
penalties shall be levied from the date of the citation, plus such
other fines, penalties, costs and/or fees due.
§ 83-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 83-4
82A:90
(c) That the uncontested payment of such civil penalties, fines, costs
and/or fees shall be made within 10 business days of the date of
the citation.
(d) That the owner/occupant may contest his/her liability before a
Citation Hearing Officer by delivering in person or by mail within
10 business days of the date of the citation a written demand for
a hearing.
(e) That if the owner/occupant does not demand a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him/her and
that such judgment may issue without further notice.
(f) That the Town shall file a lien against the real estate in
accordance with C.G.S. § 7-148aa for the amount of any unpaid
civil penalties or other fines, costs and/or fees imposed by the
Town in accordance with this chapter.
(3) Delivery of the citation shall be by the manner provided herein
for service of the Notice of Violation. A copy of the citation shall
simultaneously be sent to each lien holder of the subject property.
G. Uncontested payment; time period. Any owner/occupant receiving a
citation shall be allowed a period of 10 business days from the date of
the citation to make an uncontested payment of the civil penalties, fines,
costs and/or fees specified in the citation. All amounts shall be made
payable to the Town.
H. Payment of civil penalties.
(1) If the owner/occupant who has been issued a citation pursuant
to this chapter wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation,
the owner/occupant may, without requesting a hearing, pay the
full amount of the civil penalties, fines, costs and/or fees to the
Blight Prevention Panel. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any
subsequent proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of
such owner/occupant or other person making the payment.
(2) Any owner/occupant who does not deliver or mail payment or a
written demand for a hearing within 10 business days of the date of
the citation shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the Blight
Prevention Panel shall certify to the Citation Hearing Officer that
such owner/occupant has failed to respond. The Citation Hearing
Officer shall thereupon enter and assess the civil penalties, fines,
costs and/or fees provided for by this chapter and shall follow the
procedures set forth in this chapter.
I. Hearing procedure for citations.
(1) Citation Hearing Officers are appointed in accordance with
Brookfield Code § 84-3.
(2) An owner/occupant who chooses to appeal a citation and requests a
hearing to this effect shall be given written notice of the date, time
and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than
15 calendar days nor more than 30 calendar days from the date of
mailing of the citation notice, provided the Citation Hearing Officer
shall grant, upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by a
party for a postponement or continuance. An original or certified
copy of the citation issued by the Blight Prevention Panel shall be
§ 83-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 83-4
82A:91
filed with and retained by the Town and shall be deemed to be a
business record within the scope of C.G.S. § 52-180 and evidence of
the facts contained therein. Upon request of the person appealing
the citation, the presence of the Blight Prevention Panel member
who issued the citation shall be required at the hearing. A member
or members of the Panel and/or a designated Town official, other
than any Citation Hearing Officer, may present evidence on behalf
of the Town. An owner/occupant wishing to contest liability shall
appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his/her behalf.
If the owner/occupant who received the citation fails to appear, the
Citation Hearing Officer may enter an assessment by default against
him upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable
statutes and this chapter. The Citation Hearing Officer may accept
from such owner/occupant copies of any relevant investigatory and
citation reports, and/or any other official documents, by mail and
may determine thereby that the appearance of such person is
unnecessary.
(3) The Citation Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in the order
and form, and with such methods of proof, as the Hearing Officer
deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility
of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be
given under oath or affirmation. The Citation Hearing Officer shall
announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If the Citation
Hearing Officer determines that the owner/occupant is not liable,
the Citation Hearing Officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that
determination, in writing, accordingly. If the Citation Hearing Officer
determines that the owner/occupant is liable for the violation, the
Citation Hearing Officer shall forthwith enter and assess the civil
penalties, fines, costs and/or fees as provided by this chapter.
(4) If the Citation Hearing Officer's assessment is not paid on the date
of its entry, the Citation Hearing Officer shall send, by first-class
mail, a notice of assessment to the owner/occupant found liable and
shall file, not less than 30 calendar days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the Clerk of the Superior Court designated by the Chief Court
Administrator, together with the applicable entry or filing fee. The
certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of
assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments against
the same owner/occupant may be accrued and filed as one record
of assessment. The Clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of
the Citation Hearing Officer's record of assessment, as well as court
costs, against such owner/occupant in favor of the Town. The
Citation Hearing Officer's assessment, when so entered as a
judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and a levy
of execution of such judgment may issue without further notice to
the owner/occupant.
(5) An owner/occupant against whom an assessment has been entered
pursuant to this chapter is entitled to judicial review by way of
appeal in accordance with C.G.S. § 7-152c(g).
§ 83-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 83-4
82A:92
J. Recording of lien. Any unpaid civil penalty or other fine imposed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and any and all costs and
expenses incurred by the Town for the enforcement of this chapter, shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the civil penalty
or other fine was imposed from the date of such civil penalty or fine.
Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner
provided for in C.G.S. § 7-148aa. Each such lien shall take precedence
over all other liens filed after July 1, 1997, and encumbrances, except
taxes, and may be enforced in the same manner as property taxes.
K. Removal or remediation by Town. If the hearing officer determines
the owner/occupant is liable for the violation, the Town may cause
or take such action as is necessary to correct the violation. All costs
and expenses of such corrective action shall be a lien upon the real
estate. The Blight Prevention Panel shall cause a certificate of lien to
be recorded in the Town Clerk's office within 60 calendar days after
completion of such corrective action if all costs and expenses thereof are
not reimbursed in full by said owner/occupant.
§ 83-5. Other remedies. [Amended 9-4-2018]
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to all remedies civil or
criminal provided to the Town or its officials by any local, state or federal
statute or regulation, including, without limitation, the provisions of the
State Building Code, the State Fire Code and the State Public Health Code,
Zoning Regulations or other sections of the Town Code. The election of the
Town to pursue the remedies provided by this chapter shall not preclude the
Town from pursuing any other remedies available to it.
A. In addition to the remedies provided by § 83-4, if the Building Official or
Fire Marshal determines that any premises are in an unsafe condition,
or the Director of Health finds that any premises is unfit for human
habitation or violates the Connecticut General Statutes governing public
nuisances or the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that zoning
violations exist, the Building Official, Fire Marshal, Zoning Enforcement
Officer or Director of Health may serve upon the owner of the premises
a notice detailing the condition deemed unsafe or constituting a threat
to health, safety or general welfare and specifying the required repairs
or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe, unsightly, unhealthy
or nuisance conditions. The notice may require that any building or
structure that has been determined to be a fire hazard or otherwise
dangerous to human life or the public welfare, in accordance with
General Statutes Section 29-253(b), be demolished within a certain time
period. The notice shall be delivered to the owner personally or sent
by certified mail to the last known address of the owner. If neither
method is successful, the notice shall be posted on the premises in
a conspicuous place. In the event that the owner, agent, tenant or
person in control fails to comply with the terms of the order within the
reasonable timeframe set forth in the order, the Building Official, Fire
Marshal, Zoning Enforcement Officer or Director of Health shall refer
the matter to the Blight Prevention Panel, which may: 1) instruct the
Town Attorney to take appropriate enforcement action in the courts,
§ 83-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 83-5
82A:93
including, but not limited to, the commencement of an injunction action;
or 2) proceed in accordance with § 83-5B herein.
B. Demolition.
(1) The Blight Prevention Panel shall order a building or structure to be
demolished if it has been designated by the Panel as unfit for human
habitation and the Panel determines that the building or structure
constitutes a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life
or the public welfare, in accordance with General Statutes Section
29-253(b), has been posted or placarded on site as such, has been
vacated, and has not been put into proper repair so as to rescind the
designation or determination by the Panel.
(2) The owner of any building or structure which has been ordered
demolished shall be given notice of this order in the manner provided
for service of notice in § 83-5A and shall be given a reasonable
time, not to exceed 120 days, in which to demolish such building or
structure. This notice is required even if notice was previously given
pursuant to §83-5A.
(3) When the owner fails, neglects or refuses to demolish any building
or structure within the requisite time, the Blight Prevention Panel
may: a) instruct the Town Attorney to apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for a demolition order and/or other legal remedies; or
b) if the Blight Panel has determined that the building or structure
constitutes a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life
or the public welfare, then, in accordance with General Statutes
Section 29-253(b), the Town can proceed directly with demolition
of the offending building or structure. The cost of such demolition
shall create a debt in favor of the Town of Brookfield against such
owner, and the Town may record a lien, within 30 days after the
date that such demolition work has ceased, in the principal amount
of such costs and expenses in accordance with General Statutes
Section 49-73b, and shall give notice to the owner of the property
in the same manner as set forth in General Statutes Section 34-34.
Such costs shall be recoverable in a civil foreclosure or other action
brought by the Town of Brookfield which shall possess all the rights
of a municipal tax collector or as otherwise provided by law.
(4) Whenever a building or structure is demolished, whether carried out
by the owner or by the Director of Health, such demolition shall
include the filling in of the excavation on which the demolished
building or structure was located in such manner as to eliminate all
potential danger to the public health, safety and welfare arising from
such excavation.
(5) All demolition shall be preceded by an inspection of the premises by
the Director of Health to determine whether or not extermination
procedures are necessary. If the premises is found to be infested,
appropriate rodent extermination to prevent the spread of rodents to
adjoining or other areas shall be instituted before, during and after
demolition.
Chapter 84
§ 83-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 83-5
82A:94
CITATIONS
§ 83-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 83-5
82A:95

ARTICLE I
Citation Procedure
[Adopted 2-3-1997]
§ 84-1. Title
This article, which shall be known as the "Citation Appeal Procedure
Ordinance," is hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-152c
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 84-2. Citation hearing procedure.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-152c of the Connecticut
General Statutes, the following procedure is established for the
enforcement of municipal citations:
A. At any time within 12 months from the expiration of the final period for
the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation
issued pursuant to the provisions of the Code of the Town of Brookfield
for an alleged violation of any of the provisions of any of the ordinances
contained therein, a designated officer or employee of the Town shall
send notice to the person cited. Said notice shall inform the person cited:
(1) Of the allegations against him and the amount of the fines, penalties,
costs and fees due;
(2) That he may contest his liability before a citation hearing officer by
delivering in person or by mail written notice within 10 days thereof;
(3) That, if he does not demand a hearing, an assessment and judgment
may be entered against him; and
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
B. If the person who is sent notice pursuant to the provisions of Subsection
A above wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may,
without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official or employee
designated by the Town. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any
proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person,
or of the person making payment. Any person who does not deliver
or mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date of
the first notice provided for in Subsection A above shall be deemed to
have admitted liability, and the designated Town official or employee
shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The
hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinance and shall follow
the procedure set forth in Subsection D of this section.
C. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of
the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held
not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the
mailing of the notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant, upon
good cause shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for
postponement or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial
notice of violation issued by an issuing officer or employee of the Town
shall be filed with and retained in the records of the Town and shall be
§ 84-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 84-2
82A:97
deemed to be a business record within the scope of Section 52-180 of
the Connecticut General Statutes and be evidence of the facts contained
therein. The presence of the issuing officer or employee shall be required
at the hearing if so requested by the appealing party. A person wishing
to contest his liability shall appear at the hearing and may present
evidence in his behalf. A designated Town official or employee, other
than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the Town. If
the appealing party fails to appear for the hearing, the hearing officer
may enter an assessment by default against him upon a finding of proper
notice and liability under the applicable statutes and/or ordinances. The
hearing officer may accept written statements from the appealing party,
by mail, together with any relevant supporting documents submitted by
mail by the appealing party, and may determine that the appearance of
the appealing party at the hearing is not necessary. The hearing officer
shall conduct the hearing in order and form and with such methods
of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the
admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony
shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall
announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that
the appealing party is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter
his determination in writing on the record of the proceeding. If he
determines that the appealing party is liable for the violation(s), he shall
forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against the
appealing party as provided by the applicable ordinances of the Town.
D. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer
shall send a notice of the assessment by first class mail to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the
Clerk of the Superior Court for the geographical area, together with the
required court entry fee. The certified copy of the notice of assessment
shall constitute a record of assessment. Within said twelve-month period,
assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed with the
Court as one record of assessment. The Court Clerk shall enter judgment
in the amount of such record assessment, together with court costs,
against such person and in favor of the Town. Notwithstanding any other
provision of the General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when
so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment,
and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further
notice to such person.
E. A person against whom an assessment has been entered by the hearing
officer shall be entitled to judicial review by way of an appeal to the
Superior Court. Any such appeal must be instituted within 30 days of
the mailing of the notice of assessment by the filing of a petition to
reopen said assessment with the Superior Court for the geographical
area (GA-3), together with the required filing fee, and by service of
a copy of such petition on the Brookfield Town Clerk. The filing of a
timely petition of appeal shall entitle the appealing party to a hearing in
accordance with the Rules of the Superior Court.
§ 84-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 84-3
82A:98
§ 84-3. Appointment and term of office for hearing officers.
The First Selectman of the Town of Brookfield shall appoint, with the
consent of the Board of Selectmen, not more than six electors of the Town
of Brookfield to be Citation Hearing Officers. Initial appointments shall
be for terms expiring on the first Tuesday of February 1998. Subsequent
appointments shall be for terms of two years. No person who has the power
to issue citations for the violation of any provision of the Code of Ordinances
of the Town shall be eligible for appointment as a hearing officer.
§ 84-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 84-3
82A:99

ARTICLE II
Citations for Violations of Zoning Regulations
[Adopted 9-11-2006]
§ 84-4. Citation and fine for violation of Zoning Regulations.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Brookfield, or any duly
authorized Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer, is hereby authorized to
issue a citation to and impose a fine, as hereinafter set forth, upon any
property owner or other person which is found to be in violation of any of
the following provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Brookfield,
as amended.
Zoning
Section(s)
Type Fine
§§ 242-201A and
242-301B
Construction of a building or structure
contrary to the cited section number(s) of the
regulations
$100
§§ 242-201A,
242-401A and B,
242-501B,
242-309B
Use of property for a purpose(s) which is in
violation of the permitted use provisions of any
one or more of the cited section numbers(s) of
the regulations and which does not constitute a
legal nonconforming use of the property
$150
§§ 242-201A,
242-201B,
242-201C
Noncompliance with the area dimensions,
access, or open space provisions of the cited
section number(s) of the regulations
$150
§ 242-301B Use of property without obtaining a certificate
of zoning compliance
$100
§ 242-301C Noncompliance with any condition of a design
review permit issued by the Zoning
Commission or any stipulations or drawings
attached thereto
$150
§ 242-302 Noncompliance with the provisions of the
natural resources removal, regulations
$150
§ 242-303 Noncompliance with the provisions of the
excavation, filling or grading regulations
$150
§ 242-304 Noncompliance with the provisions of the
woodcutting, lumbering and forestry
operations regulations
$150
§ 242-305 Noncompliance with the provisions of the offstreet
parking regulations
$50
§ 242-306 Noncompliance with the permit requirements,
location, size, number of signs on a parcel of
land, wording, height setback, illumination,
type, or other standards or provisions of the
sign regulations
$50
§ 84-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 84-4
82A:101
Zoning
Section(s)
Type Fine
§ 242-308 Noncompliance with the height, setback,
temporary permit, tag sale, street obstruction,
liquor outlets, swimming pool, fence and
temporary living quarters requirements of the
miscellaneous provisions of the regulations
$50
§ 242-310 Noncompliance with the provisions of the
conservation subdivision regulations
$150
§ 242-312 Noncompliance with the provisions of the
telecommunications tower and antennae
regulations
$150
§ 242-401A(6) Noncompliance with the provisions of the
livestock and/or poultry regulations
$50
§§ 242-401D,
242-402,
242-403
Noncompliance with the lot area, width, yards,
coverage or height provisions of the cited
section number(s) of the regulations
$150
§ 242-404 or
242-405
Creation and/or maintenance of a multifamily
dwelling(s) or apartment within a single-family
dwelling without a permit
$150
§§ 242-501C,
242-501D,
242-501E,
242-501F,
242-501G
Noncompliance with the area, yard, height,
buffer, land coverage, setback, road and drive,
or special conditions provisions of the cited
section number(s) of the regulations
$150
§ 242-502 Noncompliance with the provisions of the
Aquifer Protection District regulations
$150
§ 242-503 Noncompliance with the provisions of the
Floodplain District regulations
$150
§ 242-505 Noncompliance with the provisions of the
Central Business District regulations
$150
§ 242-601 Noncompliance with the provisions of the land
use standards and design criteria of the
regulations
$100
§ 84-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 84-4
82A:102
Chapter 89
BEACHES
§ 89-1. Persons permitted to use beaches.
Only those persons who are bona fide residents, resident and/or nonresident
taxpayers and the immediate family of said residents and taxpayers of the
Town of Brookfield, including guests of said residents and taxpayers to the
number of 10 persons per season when accompanied by one or more of said
residents and taxpayers, shall be admitted to the Brookfield Town Beach,
so-called, located in the Town of Brookfield.
Chapter 96
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code Board of Appeals — See Ch. 11.
Citation Procedure — See Ch. 84.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 99.
Fees — See Ch. 127.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 84-4 BEACHES § 89-1
89:103

ARTICLE I
Adoption of State Code
[Adopted by Town Meeting 3-12-1965]
§ 96-1. Code adopted.
The Town of Brookfield does hereby adopt as and for the Building Code for
the Town of Brookfield the State Building Code, as amended.
§ 96-1 BEACHES § 96-1
89:105

ARTICLE II
Permits
[Adopted by Town Meeting 3-12-1965]
§ 96-2. Schedule of fees for building permits established.
A. The schedule of fees required for building permits issued in accordance
with the terms of the Building Code to be paid before a building permit
is issued shall be as established from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen, based on the valuation of work.28 [Amended 6-10-1980]
B. Building permits shall be required for all new construction, including
swimming pools and alterations to existing structures.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fees.
§ 96-2 BEACHES § 96-2
89:107

ARTICLE III
Fees Paid to Demolition Officer
[Adopted by Town Meeting 3-12-1965]
§ 96-3. Schedule of fees for demolition permits established.
[Amended 2-27-1974; 6-10-1980]
The fees to be paid to the Demolition Officer of the Town of Brookfield,
acting by and for the Town of Brookfield, prior to the granting of any permit
to demolish any structure in the Town of Brookfield by said Demolition
Officer shall be as established from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen.29
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fees.
§ 96-3 BEACHES § 96-3
89:109

ARTICLE IV
Restrictions on Building Permits
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 10-4-1989]
§ 96-4. Road requirements for subdivisions.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a house on a lot
in an approved subdivision until the road which provides access to said lot
has had the first course of pavement installed.30
§ 96-4.1. Application for building permits. [Amended 10-3-2011;
6-5-2017]
No application to construct, reconstruct, alter or otherwise modify any
building or other structure within the Town of Brookfield shall be approved
by the Brookfield Building Official and no building permit shall be issued
unless one of the following provisions is satisfied:
A. The property owner or his agent obtains from the Brookfield Tax
Collector and delivers to the Brookfield Building Official a written
statement that the real property taxes for the property upon which the
building or other structure is located or proposed are not delinquent.
In addition, if the property is served or to be served by the Brookfield
municipal sewerage system, the property owner or his agent shall also
obtain from the Brookfield Water Pollution Control Authority and deliver
to the Brookfield Building Official a written statement that the applicable
sewer use charges, benefit assessment and outlet capacity charges, if
any, for the property upon which the building or other structure is
located or proposed are current to the date of the application.
B. The property owner or his agent obtains from the Brookfield Fire
Marshal and delivers to the Brookfield Building Official a written
statement that the building for which the permit is requested has been
damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty loss and that the work
for which the building permit is requested is necessary to repair said
damage or to reconstruct said destroyed building.
30.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 234, Subdivision of Land.
§ 96-4 BEACHES § 96-4.1
89:111

ARTICLE V
Demolition of Buildings
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 2-3-1992]
§ 96-5. Compliance required.
No person shall demolish any building in the Town of Brookfield except in
strict compliance with the provisions of Sections 29-402 through 29-415
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and in strict compliance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 96-6. Application for demolition permit.
A. Any person who desires to demolish any building or part thereof within
the Town of Brookfield shall make application to the Building Official
for a demolition permit. Said application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The address of the property upon which the building is situated and
a legal description of the property.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the property.
(3) The name and address of the person or firm who or which is
undertaking the demolition.
(4) The reason for the proposed demolition.
B. Said application shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) A certificate of insurance issued in accordance with the
requirements of Section 29-406(a)(1) of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
(2) A certificate of notice executed by all public utilities having service
connections within the building proposed to be demolished setting
forth that such utilities have severed such connections and service.
(3) A copy of the certificate of registration issued by the Department
of Public Safety of the State of Connecticut to the person or firm
proposing to demolish said building or part thereof, which certificate
shall have been issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 29-402
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, or a statement by
said person or firm that he or it is exempt from said registration
pursuant to the provisions of Section 29-406(a)(3)(A) or (B) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
(4) A statement issued by the Tax Assessor of the Town of Brookfield
setting forth the age of the building as determined from the
Assessor's records and setting forth the assessed value of the
building.
(5) A list of the names and addresses of all adjoining property owners,
together with a statement by the applicant that, within three days
of the date of the filing of the application, he or it will notify each
adjoining property owner by registered mail or certified mail of the
application for a demolition permit and will send each adjoining
property owner a copy of said application. The identity and the
address of each adjoining property owner shall be as set forth in the
records of the Tax Assessor of the Town of Brookfield.
§ 96-5 BEACHES § 96-6
89:113
(6) A permit application fee.31
§ 96-7. Issuance of permit. [Amended 2-6-2012]
The Building Official shall not issue a demolition permit except upon receipt
of a completed application signed by the property owner and the person
or firm who or which is to undertake said demolition, together with all
required supporting documentation, the required application fee and proof
that all adjoining property owners have been notified of the proposed
demolition. With respect to any building which is more than 50 years of age
and not located within an historic district as defined by C.G.S. § 7-147d(b),
no demolition permit shall be issued until thirty (30) days after the date that
the application is filed with the Building Official and published as herein
provided. The Building Official may waive said thirty-day waiting period
with respect to buildings more than 50 years of age upon finding that
immediate demolition of the building is required in the interest of public
health or public safety. The Building Official shall increase the waiting
period to a total of 90 days, upon receipt of a certification accompanied by a
written narrative and description of the historic significance of the building
signed by the Chair of the Historic District Commission or designee.
§ 96-8. Buildings more than fifty years of age.
In addition to the requirements contained in §§ 96-5, 96-6 and 96-7 of this
article, no building more than 50 years of age shall be demolished and no
demolition permit therefor shall be issued until the following requirements
have been fulfilled:
A. The Building Official has caused a legal notice of said application to
be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town
of Brookfield. Said notice shall contain the address of the property, the
names and addresses of the applicants and the date of the application.
Said notice shall be published within 14 days of the date that the
application is filed with the Building Official.
B. Proof that the applicant has notified all persons, firms and other entities
who or which have on file with the Building Official a written request
that they receive said notice. The form, contents and method of notice
shall be the same as is required for notice to adjoining landowners.
C. Thirty days (or 90 days if certification by the Chair of the Historic District
Commission or designee shall been received as set forth hereinbefore)
have elapsed since the date of the filing of the application and published
as herein provided, unless the Building Official has found that immediate
demolition of the building is required in the interest of public safety or
public health. [Amended 2-6-2012]
§ 96-9. Request for notice.
Any person, firm or other entity may file a written request with the Building
Official requesting written notification of all applications for permits to
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fees.
§ 96-6 BROOKFIELD CODE § 96-9
89:114
demolish any building which is more than 50 years of age. Said request shall
remain effective for a period of five years from the date that it is filed.
§ 96-10. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, a "building" is defined as any structure having a
roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals
or materials.
§ 96-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more
than $500 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
§ 96-9 BEACHES § 96-11
89:115

ARTICLE VI
Swimming Pool Fences
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-6-2000]
§ 96-12. (Reserved)32
§ 96-13. Enforcement by Building Official.
The Building Official shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions
of this article in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut Basic
Building Code (BOCA), as amended, and in accordance with the
enforcement by citation procedure established pursuant to Chapter 84 of
the Code of Ordinances, which shall not be mutually exclusive.
§ 96-14. Applicability; building code; retroactivity.
Swimming pool enclosures shall be constructed in accordance with the
technical requirements and specifications of the provisions of this chapter
and the Connecticut State Building Code (BOCA), as amended, and shall
apply to any pool presently in existence and any pool built within the
Town subsequent to the date hereof. It is the specific intent hereof that
this legislation be deemed expressly retroactive in order to accomplish the
intent of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the community.
§ 96-15. Swimming pool defined.
For the purpose of this article, "outdoor swimming pool" means a body of
water in an artificial or natural receptacle or other container, in-ground,
above ground, designed to contain water having a depth of two feet or more,
used publicly or privately by adults or children, or both, whether or not any
charge or fee is imposed for such use and whether or not the user is an
owner, lessee, operator, licensee, concessionaire, invitee or guest.
§ 96-16. Time frame for compliance.
All unenclosed outdoor swimming pools must be properly enclosed not later
than 90 days from the effective date of this article or 60 days from the date
of notification from the Building Official, whichever is earlier.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 96-12, Enclosure of swimming pool required, was repealed by the
Board of Selectmen 2-2-2004.
§ 96-12 BEACHES § 96-16
89:117
Chapter 99
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 96. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
§ 99-1. Establishment of numbering system.
A. Map Number 3C24, entitled "Brookfield, Connecticut, Street Numbering
Sequence Map," filed at the office of the Town Clerk, shall be employed
as the basis for establishing number flow of all existing and future
streets.
B. Route 25 from the Newtown Town line north to its junction with Route 7
and then north on Route 7 to the New Milford Town line shall constitute
the base line for numbering.
C. Numbering shall be consecutive, with even numbers on the north and
west side and odd numbers on the south and east side of the streets.
In the case of a curvilinear street, the odd and even numbers shall be
determined by the direction of the major portion of the street.
D. Numbering shall start at the base line and emanate east and west from
this line for all east/west oriented streets. North/south oriented streets
shall be numbered starting at the southernmost portion. An exception
would be when a street ends in a cul-de-sac, in which case the number
shall start at the head of the street or where it initially junctions with
another street.
E. Corner lots at intersections shall be assigned a number on each street.
Those lots with a structure shall use the number assigned on the street
facing the main entrance.
§ 99-2. Determination of numbers.
Numbers shall be determined by the foot frontage:
A. For commercial and industrial zones, all numbers shall be assigned
on the basis of one number per each 50 feet, except where existing
structures dictate the necessity of numbering to be on a greater or lesser
footage.
B. For residential zones, all numbers shall be assigned on the basis of
one number per 150 feet, except where existing lot sizes dictate the
necessity of numbering to be on a greater or lesser footage.
§ 99-3. Shopping centers.
Shopping centers shall be assigned one number for the total complex. This
number shall be determined by the location of the main entrance to the
complex. If this cannot be readily determined, then that number which
corresponds with the approximate center of the structure shall be assigned.
§ 96-16 BROOKFIELD CODE § 99-4
99:118
§ 99-4. Professional buildings.
Professional buildings shall be assigned one number per building. This
number shall be determined by location of the main entrance to the building
with respect to the street-numbering sequence.
§ 99-5. Apartment and condominium complexes.
Apartment and condominium complexes shall have their own distinct
identification or street name and shall be numbered consecutively.
§ 99-6. Display of numbers.
A. When street numbering has been completed, the owner, occupant or
agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or building
controlled by him the number or numbers assigned.
B. Such number or numbers shall be placed on existing buildings within 30
days. The cost of the numbers shall be paid for by the property owner.
The numbers used shall not be less than three inches in height and shall
be made of a durable and clearly visible material. Failure to install the
proper number or numbers on existing buildings on or before the thirtyday
limit provided herein will subject violators to a fine of $25.
C. The number shall be conspicuously placed above, on or at the side of
the proper door of each building, so that the number can be seen plainly
from the street line. Whenever a building is set more than 75 feet from
the street line, the number shall be placed near the walk, drive way or
common entrance to such building and upon a gate post, fence, post or
other appropriate place so as to be discernible easily from the street line.
§ 99-7. Responsibility for procuring numbers.
Whenever any house, building or structure is erected, in order to preserve
the continuity and uniformity of numbering, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner or agent to procure the correct number or numbers as designated
on the Assessor's maps and/or field cards for the said property and
immediately fasten the said number or numbers so assigned as provided
in § 99-6C of this chapter. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall assign
numbers when none appear on the Assessor's map or on the field cards.
§ 99-8. Enforcement authority.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is the designated authority for the Town of
Brookfield to enforce this chapter.
Chapter 115
DOGS
§ 99-4 DOGS § 99-8
115:119

ARTICLE I
Agreements for Enforcement
[Adopted 3-12-1965]
§ 115-1. Authority to enter into agreements for enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 22-331(a) of the General Statutes of Connecticut, 1958
Revision, as amended, the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brookfield be
and it hereby is authorized on behalf of said Town to:
A. Enter into agreements with a contiguous town or towns in order to
be served by a regional Dog Warden and such assistants as may be
necessary to administer and enforce laws relating to dogs.
B. Provide on behalf of said town or towns for the establishment of a
regional dog pound.
§ 115-1 DOGS § 115-1
115:121

ARTICLE II
Canine Control
[Adopted 6-1-1992]
§ 115-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the word "street" shall mean any public or
private street, road or highway, whether or not paved.
§ 115-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person owning, keeping or having custody of any dog shall permit
such dog on any property of a person other than the owner, keeper or
custodian of said animal or on any street or sidewalk unless such animal
is accompanied by such owner, keeper or custodian and is firmly under the
control of such owner, keeper or custodian, either by being on a leash held
by such owner, keeper or custodian or by being inside an enclosure.
§ 115-4. Impoundment.
A. The local or regional animal control officer may take into custody any
animal found not accompanied by its owner, keeper or custodian or
otherwise in violation of this article and shall impound such dog at the
regional animal control shelter. Such local or regional animal control
officer shall immediately notify the owner, keeper or custodian of any
dog so taken, if known, of its impoundment. If the owner, keeper or
custodian of any such dog is unknown, such local or regional animal
control officer shall immediately tag or employ such other suitable
means of identification of such dog as may be approved by the Chief
Canine Control Officer of the State of Connecticut and shall promptly
cause a description of such dog to be published once in the lost and
found column of a newspaper having a circulation in the Town of
Brookfield.
B. If such dog is not claimed by and released to the owner, keeper or
custodian within seven days after the date of publication, the local
or regional animal control officer, upon finding such dog to be in
satisfactory health, may sell such dog to any person who satisfies the
local or regional animal control officer that he is purchasing it as a
pet and that he can give it a good home and proper care. The local or
regional animal control officer may retain possession of such dog for
such additional period of time as he may deem advisable in order to
place such dog as a pet. If, within said period, any dog is not claimed
by and released to the owner, keeper or custodian or purchased as a
pet, the local or regional animal control officer shall cause such dog to
be mercifully destroyed by a licensed veterinarian or disposed of as the
state veterinarian may direct.
C. Redemption fees.
(1) Any dog taken into custody or impounded pursuant to this article
shall be redeemed by the owner, keeper or custodian thereof, or the
agent of such owner, keeper or custodian, upon proper identification
§ 115-2 DOGS § 115-4
115:123
and payment by such owner, keeper or custodian, or his agent, of the
following fees:
(a) The cost of advertising incurred under the provisions of
Subsection A above.
(b) A redemption fee which shall be established by the Board of
Selectmen by resolution.
(c) All costs of detention and care of said impounded dog pursuant
to a schedule of costs to be adopted by the Board of Selectmen
by resolution.
(2) All of the above redemption fees are in addition to any fines that may
have been levied pursuant to § 115-5 of this article.
D. Any owner, keeper or custodian of any impounded dog who fails to
redeem such dog within 120 hours after receiving notification to do so
shall have committed a violation of this article.
§ 115-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall, for the first offense, be issued a
written warning, for the second offense, be fined not more than $25 and, for
the third and each subsequent offense, be fined not more than $100.
§ 115-6. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article rests with the local and regional animal control
officers.
§ 115-7. Appeals.
Any person who is cited for a violation of this article may appeal to the
Board of Selectmen within 30 days after the issuance of a notice of violation
by the local or regional animal control officer by giving written notice
thereof to the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall, within
30 days of its receipt of a written notice of appeal, consider and act on
the appeal. The Board of Selectmen shall give the accused violator written
notice of the date, place and time in which the Board of Selectmen will
hear his or her appeal, and the accused violator shall have the right to be
present at said time and to present and cross-examine witnesses. The Board
of Selectmen shall issue its decision on the appeal within 15 days of the time
it considers the appeal and shall give written notice of its decision to the
accused violator.
§ 115-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 115-7
115:124
Chapter 119
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 184.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 284.
§ 119-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMON DRIVEWAY — Any driveway servicing more than one dwelling
with access on a Town highway.
CONSTRUCT — Includes the words "build," "reconstruct," "alter," "enlarge"
"move" and "establish."
PERSON — Includes a partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
TOWN HIGHWAY — Includes the words "Town street," "Town road,"
"proposed Town highway," "proposed Town road" and "proposed Town
street."
§ 119-2. Permit required.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to construct a new driveway
or to relocate or add to the number of dwellings serviced by an existing
driveway abutting, adjoining or leading onto a Town highway without first
filing a written application with the Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Brookfield and receiving a permit therefor. In determining the advisability
of issuing such permit, the Selectmen shall include in their consideration
the location of the driveway with respect to its effect on highway drainage,
highway safety, the width and character of the highway affected, the density
of the traffic thereon and the character of such traffic.
§ 119-3. Information required to be submitted.
Said application shall show the location, width, length and grades of the
proposed driveway; the number of dwellings to be serviced by the proposed
driveway; the affect it will have on the highway drainage and the public
safety; the materials to be used in the construction; the time when the work
will commence and terminate; and the party or parties to perform the work.
§ 119-4. Bond required.
Before any such permit shall be issued, the Board of Selectmen will require
a cash bond to be filed with said Board to guarantee the satisfactory
§ 115-7 DRIVEWAYS § 119-4
119:125
completion of the driveway, the amount of bond to be determined by the
Selectmen.
§ 119-5. Release of bond.
Said bond shall be released only after the work has been completed to the
satisfaction of said Board.
§ 119-6. Materials.
Except as stated in § 119-8 hereof, any such proposed driveway abutting
a highway shall be constructed of bituminous concrete two inches deep
on a six-inch gravel base or nine inches of reinforced concrete on a sixinch
gravel base from the edge of the traveled portion of the highway
to the applicant's property line or the highway right-of-way, whichever is
greater. The Board of Selectmen, or its designated agent, may alter these
requirements if good cause is shown.
§ 119-7. Maximum width.
The maximum width of the driveway at the highway gutter line or edge of
the pavement shall not exceed the following:
A. Residential, single- or multifamily: 30 feet.
B. Commercial: 50 feet.
§ 119-8. Grade; berm required for descending driveways; driveways
entering unpaved roads.
The grade of the proposed driveway shall not exceed 10% for a distance
of 30 feet from the edge of the traveled portion of the highway. If the
proposed driveway is descending, a four-inch berm of bituminous concrete
or reinforced concrete shall be constructed to protect the property from
surface water entering. If a driveway is on an unpaved road, then the
Selectmen shall determine the point at which the pavement will end
adjacent to the highway.
§ 119-9. Location.
The proposed driveway shall be confined between lines drawn from the
frontage corners of the property to a point perpendicular to the center line
of the highway.
§ 119-10. Restrictions on curves.
The center line of the proposed driveway shall not deviate more than 30°
from a right angle for a distance of 30 feet from the edge of the traveled
portion of the highway.
§ 119-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 119-11
119:126
§ 119-11. Town officials not liable; responsibility for maintenance.
The applicant agrees to hold harmless the Town of Brookfield and the Board
of Selectmen and their duly appointed agents and employees against any
action for personal injury or property damage and for the cost of any repair
of the highway which may result from the exercise of this permit. The
maintenance of the proposed driveway from the edge of the traveled portion
of the highway shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property
served by the driveway.
§ 119-12. Culverts.
When culverts have to be installed to control the flow of water, such culverts
shall extend to an established drainage right-of-way, or the owner shall
provide a deeded drainage easement at the outfall of the culvert. No
culverts shall outlet into the gutter or a ditch on the highway right-of-way
except with the permission of the Selectmen.
§ 119-13. Special requirements authorized under certain
conditions.
If the Board of Selectmen finds that unusual drainage or traffic conditions
might result from the construction of a common driveway, the Selectmen
may require the construction thereof to conform to any special conditions
or directions which the Director of Public Works or the Town Engineer may
specify, including but not limited to the recording of a written maintenance
agreement between the parties sharing the common driveway.
§ 119-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense; and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which the
violation occurs and continues.
Chapter 122
EMERGENCY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 54.
§ 119-11 DRIVEWAYS § 119-14
119:127

ARTICLE I
Benefit for Certain Emergency Services Volunteers
§ 122-1. Statutory authority.
The provisions of this article are adopted pursuant to the general municipal
authority pursuant to General Statutes Chapter 98.
§ 122-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE — Certified by the Chief of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company,
Inc. and the Chief of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Department, Candlewood
Company, Inc., as to members of their respective organizations, on or before
the certification date, as eligible for a stipend under this article.
BENEFIT — A stipend in the amount of $1,500.
BENEFIT YEAR — The benefit year is the Town's fiscal year from July 1
through June 30.
CERTIFICATION DATE — Certification of eligible volunteers shall be
completed on or before April 15 of the benefit year, commencing July 1,
2017, and each benefit year thereafter. The "year" used for the purpose
of certified record keeping will be the twelve-month period beginning on
January 1 and ending December 31, immediately preceding the April 15
certification date, which is the year used for the fire companies' service
awards plans.
ELIGIBILITY — Any person who volunteers his or her services to the Town
of Brookfield:
§ 122-3. Benefit.
Each volunteer, properly certified as eligible in accordance with this article,
shall be entitled to a stipend of $1,500 for the fiscal year during which the
volunteer was certified as eligible.
§ 122-4. Submission of certifications.
The respective Chiefs of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company, Inc. and
the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Department, Candlewood Company, Inc. shall,
on or before the certification date:
A. As an active firefighter for the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company, Inc.
As an active firefighter for the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Department,
Candlewood Company, Inc.
B.
As an active emergency medical technician, paramedic or ambulance
driver for the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company, Inc.
C.
§ 122-1 DRIVEWAYS § 122-4
119:129
A. Submit their original certifications of eligibility to the First Selectman of
the Town of Brookfield; and
B. Forward a copy of their certifications to:
(1) The Board of Finance;
(2) The Office of Human Resources;
(3) The Board of Directors of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company,
Inc.;
(4) The Executive Board of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Department,
Candlewood Company, Inc.
§ 122-5. Eligibility.
The Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company, Inc. and the Brookfield Volunteer
Fire Department, Candlewood Company, Inc. shall determine the criteria
for certification of eligibility for their respective members, which criteria
shall not be less stringent than the criteria for attendance at emergency
responses, training and drills for yearly credit toward the respective service
awards plan for each company.
§ 122-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 122-5
119:130
Chapter 127
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 171.
Sewers — See Ch. 184.
§ 127-1. Building permits. [Amended 5-1-1989]
A. Schedule of fees for building permits. The schedule of fees required
for basic building permits issued in accordance with the terms of the
Building Code shall be as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference.33 Said fees shall be based on the
valuation of the work, and said valuation shall be established in
accordance with the provisions of Schedule B attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference.34
B. Additional building permit fee.
(1) In the event that the structure exceeds the threshold limit, as defined
in Section 4 of Public Act No. 88-359, an additional building permit
fee shall be paid, which fee is equal to the cost incurred by the
Town of Brookfield in hiring an independent engineering consultant
to review the plans and specifications of the structure prior to its
construction to determine its compliance with the requirements of
the Connecticut Basic Building Code and to conduct such field
inspections as said consultant deems necessary. In addition to the
foregoing, if the structure exceeds the threshold limit described
above, an additional building permit fee shall be required in an
amount equal to the cost of any independent laboratory tests which
may be required by the Brookfield Building Official or the
independent engineering consultant for the purpose of testing
structural components to ensure that such components conform to
approved design specifications and drawings.
(2) In those instances where, in the opinion of the Brookfield Building
Official, a proposed structure may meet or exceed the threshold
limit described in Section 4 of Public Act No. 88-359, the property
owner, or his agent, at the time of the application for the building
permit, shall provide the Building Official with an estimate prepared
by the architect or professional engineer who designed the structure
setting forth a good-faith estimate of the cost of providing the
independent engineering consultant services and the independent
laboratory testing services required by the provisions of said Public
Act. The additional building permit fee required by Subsection B(1)
above shall be based upon said estimate and shall be paid before
33.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 122-5 DRIVEWAYS § 127-1
119:131
the building permit is issued. In the event that the actual cost to
the Town of Brookfield incurred in providing said services is greater
than said estimate, then the difference shall be paid to the Town of
Brookfield by the property owner prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy for the structure. In the event that said actual cost is
less than said estimated cost, the difference shall be refunded to the
property owner or his agent by the Town of Brookfield within 60 days
after the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the
structure.
C. Partial refunds of building permit fees.
(1) In the event that no construction or other work has been commenced
pursuant to a building permit issued in accordance with the
provisions of this section and the Basic Building Code of the State
of Connecticut, the property owner or his agent may surrender the
building permit to the Building Official and request a partial refund
of the basic building permit fee. Upon the surrender of the building
permit and certification by the Building Official that no work has
been performed thereunder, the Town of Brookfield shall issue a
partial refund of the basic building permit fee, which partial refund
shall be computed as follows:
(a) The fee paid for the first $7,000 in value of work shall not be
refunded.
(b) Sixty-six and two-thirds percent of the fee paid for that portion
of the work which exceeds $7,000 in value shall be refunded to
the property owner or his agent by the Town of Brookfield. Said
refund shall be made within 60 days after the date of request
for a refund and the certification by the Building Official that no
work has been commenced pursuant to the building permit.
(2) Any additional building permit fee paid in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection B above shall be refunded at the same time
that the basic building permit fee is refunded. The amount of the
refund for the additional building permit fee shall be the amount paid
less all sums which the Town of Brookfield has paid or is obligated
to pay for an independent engineering consultant or independent
laboratory testing with reference to the proposed structure.
D. Waiver of fees.
(1) No building permit fees shall be payable with respect to any building
constructed by the Town of Brookfield for school purposes or any
other municipal purpose.
(2) The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brookfield is hereby
empowered, in its discretion, to waive the building permit fees
imposed by this section with respect to buildings and other
structures to be constructed by a nonprofit, tax-exempt organization
when said buildings or other structures are intended to benefit the
public and are within the scope of the public purposes for which the
organization was created.
§ 127-1 BROOKFIELD CODE § 127-2
119:132
§ 127-2. Demolition permits. [Amended 2-3-1992; 9-10-2001;
5-3-2004]
A permit application fee of $30 for the first $1,000, plus $10 for each
additional $1,000, based on the value of demolition, shall be required.
§ 127-3. Peddling licenses.
The fee for a peddling license shall be $5 per year.
§ 127-4. Sewers.
The fee which shall accompany an application for approval of sewage
facilities shall be $15.
§ 127-5. Land use agency fees. [Added 5-1-201735]
Pursuant to the authority set forth in General Statutes Section 8-1c and
other statutory authority, the Inland Wetlands Commission, Planning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Zoning Commission are hereby
authorized to establish fee schedules for, and to collect reasonable fees
for, the processing and review of land use applications for the various
zoning permits, special permits, design review approvals, subdivisions and
resubdivisions of land, petitions for variances, appeals, site plans,
applications for approvals and/or permits from the Inland Wetlands
Commission, and for such other applications, approvals, appeals, or permits
as may be within the jurisdiction of the above-referenced board and
commissions. Fees shall be as duly determined and set by such board and
commissions. Fees may be duly amended from time to time by the board
and commissions and may include required state fees and may include
additional fees to cover the cost of legal notices and for consultants to assist
the board and commissions in the review of an application or other pending
matter before the board or commissions.
§ 127-6. through § 127-7. (Reserved)36
§ 127-8. Health Department Fee Schedule. [Added 5-3-2004]
The following Health Department fees are due upon application for the
following permits or licenses.37
§ 127-9. Fire Marshal fees. [Added 9-12-2016]
A. Inspection fees. Fees for all required inspections shall be paid prior to the
inspection by the Fire Marshal. Inspection shall be annual for the following uses or
activities:
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 127-5, Subdivision applications,
added 5-5-1986.
36.Editor's Note: Former § 127-6, Zoning Fees, and § 127-7, Inland Wetlands Fee Schedule,
were repealed 6-5-2017. See now § 127-5.
37.Editor's Note: The Health Department fee schedule is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 127-2 DRIVEWAYS § 127-9
119:133
Proposed Occupancy/Use Fee
1 Liquor permits $100
2 Place of public assembly $50
3 Educational N/A
4 Institutional (group homes) $100
5 Nursing/convalescent $100
6 Lodging/rooming/bed-and-breakfast $50
7 Residential board and care — small $50
8 Residential board and care — large $100
9 Day-care facility $50
10 Group day care $50
11 Residential building (3-family or
more)
$25/unit
12 Business $50
13 Mercantile $50
14 Storage building $50
15 Industrial $50
16 Hotels/motels/dormitories $100
17 Dry-cleaning plants $50
18 Fuel delivery vehicles $50 per vehicle
$25 per reinspection
19 Flammable/combustible liquid/LPG
installations
$50
20 Blasting permit State set
21 Exhibitions $25
22 Explosives/fireworks storage/sales $100
23 Fireworks $50
24 Underground flammable tank
removal
$50/commercial
$25/residential
25 Fuel tank installations (commercial) $50
26 Tents for assembly/100 people $25
27 Carnivals $50
28 Vendor LP system concession
equipment
$25
29 Open burning $10 in place currently
B. Plan review fees.
§ 127-9 BROOKFIELD CODE § 127-9
119:134
(1) General.
(a) The plan review fees set forth in this section shall be paid in full prior to the Office the Fire Marshal taking any action to review or approve submitted or resubmitted
plans. All such fees paid to the Office of the Fire Marshal shall be nonrefundable.
(b) No plan review fees set forth in this section shall apply to plans submitted resubmitted by municipal or state governmental agencies, subdivisions, or entities.
(2) Site plan reviews. The following fees shall be paid by the applicant upon submitting resubmitting any site plans for review and approval by the Office of the Fire Marshal ensure compliance with State Fire Safety Code provisions relating to Fire Department
access and water supply fire lanes:
Site Plan Fee
Building less than 5,000 square feet $75
Building equal to or greater than 5,000
square feet
$125
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
(3) Building plan reviews. The following fees shall be paid by the applicant upon submitting
or resubmitting any building plans for review and approval by the Office of the Marshal to ensure compliance with State Fire Safety Code provisions:
Building Plan Fee
Building less than 2,000 square feet $50
Building equal to or greater than 2,000
square feet, but less than 5,000 square
feet
$250
Building equal to or greater than 5,000
square feet, but less than 10,000 square
feet
$350 plus costs*
Building equal to or greater than 10,000
square feet, but less than 52,000 square
feet
$750 plus costs*
For each additional 52,000 square feet or
fraction thereof
$200 plus costs*
For each additional building using an
identical floor plan on the same site add
$275 plus costs*
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
§ 127-9 DRIVEWAYS § 127-9
119:135
Note:
* Any building plans for buildings 5,000 square feet or greater may be required
to have an independent plan review, as determined at the sole discretion of the
Office of the Fire Marshal. The independent plan review shall be conducted by
a plan reviewer chosen and hired by the applicant from a list of preapproved
plan reviewers compiled by the Office of the Fire Marshal. The applicant shall
pay all costs associated with the contracted plan reviewer's independent
review. The applicant shall submit the plan reviewer's written report, along
with documentation that the reviewer's costs have been paid in full, prior to the
Office of the Fire Marshal's review and approval of any such plan.
(4) Fire alarm plan review. The following fees shall be paid by the applicant upon
submitting or resubmitting any fire alarm plans for review and approval by the Office
of the Fire Marshal to ensure compliance with State Fire Safety Code provisions (i.e.,
NFPA 72 review).
Fire Alarm Plan Fee
Area protected by alarm system (square feet)
Less than 5,000 $150
5,001 to 10,000 $275 plus costs*
10,001 to 52,000 $750 plus costs*
For each additional 52,000 or fraction
thereof
$300 plus costs*
For each story above or below the first story
add
$400
For each additional building using an
identical floor plan on the same site add
$375 plus costs*
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
Note:
* Any fire alarm plans for protecting areas of 5,000 square feet or greater may be
required to have an independent plan review, as determined at the sole
discretion of the Office of the Fire Marshal. The independent plan review shall
be conducted by a plan reviewer chosen and hired by the applicant from a list
of preapproved plan reviewers compiled by the Office of the Fire Marshal. The
applicant shall pay all costs associated with the contracted plan reviewer's
independent review. The applicant shall submit the plan reviewer's written
report along with documentation that the reviewer's costs have been paid in
full, prior to the Office of the Fire Marshal's review and approval of any such
plan.
(5) Fire protection systems and equipment plan review. The following fees shall be paid by
the applicant upon submitting or resubmitting any plans for review and approval by the
Office of the Fire Marshal to ensure compliance with State Fire Safety Code provisions
relating to the installation or modification of any of the following fire protection
§ 127-9 BROOKFIELD CODE § 127-9
119:136
systems, equipment, and components (i.e., NFPA 13 review). Fees for each system, type
of equipment, and component set forth below shall be cumulative. Any fire protection
system and equipment plan not supplied by a public water main may be required have an independent plan review, as determined at the sole discretion of the Office the Fire Marshal. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with the contracted plan
reviewer's independent review, in addition to the fees specified below. The applicant
shall submit the plan reviewer's written report, along with documentation that reviewer's costs have been paid in full, prior to the Office of the Fire Marshal's review
and approval of any such plan.
(a) Sprinklers.
Fee
Area protected (square feet)
Up to 12,000 $275
12,001 to 40,000 $350
For each additional 40,000 or fraction
thereof add
$350
For each story above or below the first story
add
$350
For each additional building using an
identical floor plan on the same site add
$100
For each special system, including pre-action,
deluge, foam-water or in-rack sprinkler, add
$225
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
(b) Sprinkler modifications.
Fee
1 to 100 heads $175
101 to 500 heads $275
For each additional 500 heads or fraction
thereof add
$100
For each story above or below the first
story add
$100
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans
(c) Standpipes (including wet or dry standpipes).
Fee
Number of standpipe outlets
1 to 4 $150
Each additional 1 to 4 add $100
§ 127-9 DRIVEWAYS § 127-9
119:137
Fee
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
(d) Fire pumps (including all fire pumps, jockey pumps, limited-service fire pumps,
controllers, and generators).
Fee
Each pump $300
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
(e) Underground fire lines (including the installation or modification of underground fire
lines which serve fire protection systems, fire hydrants, or any combination thereof).
Fee
Each connection to a water main
including up to 500 linear feet of pipe
$275
Each additional 500 linear feet or fraction
thereof add
$100
Each fire protection system lead-in add $75
Each stub-out permitted separately from
building's underground
$75/fire line
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
(f) Fire hydrants.
Fee
Each hydrant $100
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
(g) Halon, dry chemical, carbon dioxide extinguishing systems, FM 200, and other special
extinguishing systems.
Fee
Area protected (square feet)
Up to 5,000 $250
5,001 to 10,000 square feet $350
10,001 to 52,000 $450
For each additional 52,000 or fraction
thereof
$350
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
§ 127-9 BROOKFIELD CODE § 127-9
119:138
Fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
(h) Automatic hood systems (i.e., exhaust systems with built-in fire suppression capability).
Fee
Each system $100
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approved plans 1/3 base fee
Note: If an automatic hood system is connected to a building fire alarm or monitoring
system, an additional fire alarm system fee applies.
(i) Flammable and combustible liquids, liquefied petroleum gases, liquefied natural and hazardous chemicals.
Fee
Install, construct, alter or operate
equipment, tanks, plants, terminals, fueldispensing
station, refineries, distilleries,
or similar facilities
$50
Underground tank installation (including
any required piping valves and dispensing
equipment)
$175
Aboveground tank installation (including
any required piping valves and dispensing
equipment)
$225
Resubmittal of previously rejected plans 1/2 base fee
Resubmittal of modified approval plans 1/3 base fee
(6) All other inspections shall be per request of the property owner.
C. Fee schedule modification. The Board of Selectman is hereby authorized to modify
the fees set forth in this section pursuant to a Fee Schedule, after securing a
recommendation from the Fire Marshal, without the need to formally amend this
section.
Chapter 131
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking — See Ch. 168. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
§ 127-9 FIRE LANES § 131-1
131:139
§ 131-1. Authority to establish fire lanes or zones; erection of signs.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby designated as the Traffic Authority for
the Town of Brookfield. Said Traffic Authority and/or the Fire Marshal of
the Town of Brookfield are authorized to designate fire lanes and fire zones
pursuant to the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes and the Fire
Safety Code of the State of Connecticut. Whenever such a fire zone or fire
lane is so designated, the Traffic Authority and/or Fire Marshal shall cause
to be erected or installed adequate signs, markings and other devices to
delineate such fire zones and fire lanes. Such signs and markings shall be
installed, if the premises are privately owned, at the expense of the owner
and shall be erected by the owner within 30 days after receipt of written
notice from the Fire Marshal or Traffic Authority directing the installation of
such signs and markings. Such signs and markings shall conform to federal
and state requirements for uniform traffic control devices.
§ 131-2. Parking prohibited.
No person shall park or permit to stand a motor vehicle in a fire lane or fire
zone.
§ 131-3. Removal of vehicle; notification.
A. Whenever any vehicle is found parked or standing in a fire zone or fire
lane, it may be removed by or under the direction of a State Trooper,
Brookfield Constable or Brookfield police officer, by means of towing
or otherwise, to a public or private parking facility located within the
Town of Brookfield. Such removal of any vehicle shall be deemed the
abatement of a nuisance and shall be at the risk of the owner or person
entitled to the possession of such vehicle. Any vehicle so removed shall
be impounded and shall continue to be impounded until the fees and
charges provided in this chapter shall be paid by the owner or person
entitled to possession thereof.
B. The State Trooper, Constable or police officer directing the impounding
of any such vehicle shall make a prompt report to the Chief of Police and
shall cause notice of the impoundment to be sent to the owner of record
of such vehicle within 48 hours from the time of such removal, indicating
the place to which such vehicle has been removed and the reason for its
removal and impounding.
§ 131-4. Redemption procedure.
A. No person shall be permitted to remove from a public or private parking
facility any vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter
unless such person reports to the office of the Chief of Police and:
(1) Furnishes satisfactory evidence of his identity and ownership of the
vehicle or agency on behalf of the owner or other right to immediate
possession.
(2) Pays a violation fee of $50 for the parking violation to the Town of
Brookfield. [Amended 2-5-1996]
(3) Exhibits a receipt and authorization from the Chief of Police or his
designated representative indicating that the violation fee has been
§ 131-1 BROOKFIELD CODE § 131-4
131:140
paid and pays for the storage of the vehicle and the costs of towing
or removing the vehicle, which storage and towing charges shall be
retained by the person or firm who did the towing.
B. The removing, towing and storage charges provided in this chapter shall
be a lien upon such impounded vehicle, and the payment thereof shall
not release or relieve the owner or his agent from prosecution for any
violation of law which may have been involved from the circumstances
which resulted in the impounding of such vehicle.
C. When any impounded vehicle is returned to its owner or any person on
behalf of the owner, such person or owner shall sign a receipt for the
vehicle.
§ 131-5. Fee for illegally parked vehicles not removed. [Amended
2-5-1996]
In the event that a vehicle is parked or found standing in a designated fire
zone or fire lane but has not been removed by towing, the owner or driver
shall pay a violation fee of $50 to the Town of Brookfield for such illegal
parking or standing.
§ 131-6. Owner presumed to be responsible.
In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, there shall be a prima facie
presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked
such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred.
§ 131-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter and fails to pay all
fines, fees and charges resulting from said violation within seven days from
the date of the violation shall be prosecuted and shall be fined not more than
$100 or be imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, and shall be subject
to the provisions of Section 14-111 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
Chapter 134
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 134-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Food Establishment Licensing
Ordinance."
§ 131-4 FIRE LANES § 134-2
131:141
§ 134-2. License required.
No person(s), corporation(s), or other business entities shall operate or
maintain within the Town of Brookfield any food establishment, including
temporary food establishments, or food store/market unless licensed by the
Director of Health or an agent so designated by the Town.
§ 134-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FARMERS' MARKET — A formally organized and regularly scheduled event
for the sale of food produce and products under the general guidelines and
auspices of the State Department of Agriculture, to permit and encourage
farmers to sell produce and products at a designated location. Farmers'
markets will not be required to obtain a license from the Brookfield Health
Department, unless the market, individual persons or food establishments
engage in temporary event food services or food preparation as defined
in Chapter 1, Section 1-201.10 of the FDA Food Code. Section 22-6s(b) of
the Connecticut General Statutes allows that any permit issued by a local
health department (LHD) in a certified farmers’ market is valid at any other
certified farmers’ market with the provision that the operation is the same
as was approved by the LHD that issued the original license.
FDA FOOD CODE — The Food Code of the United States Food and Drug
Administration, as amended from time to time, and as adopted by the State
of Connecticut.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT —
An operation that:
Stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends directly to the consumer
or otherwise provides food for human consumption, including, but
not limited to, a restaurant, catering food service establishment,
food service establishment, temporary food service establishment,
itinerant food vending establishment, market, conveyance used to
transport people, institution or food bank; or
(1)
Relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly or indirectly
through a delivery service, including, but not limited to, home
delivery of grocery orders or restaurant takeout orders or a
delivery service that is provided by common carriers.
(2)
A.
"Food establishment" does not include a vending machine, as defined in
Section 21a-34 of the General Statutes, a private residential dwelling in
which food is prepared under Section 21a-62a of the General Statutes
or a food manufacturing establishment, as defined in Section 21a-151
of the General Statutes.
B.
§ 134-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 134-3
131:142
FOOD STORE/MARKET — Any person, firm or corporation who sells or
keeps for sale any groceries, bakery products, confectioneries, meats, fish,
vegetables, or fruit.
ITINERANT FOOD VENDING ESTABLISHMENT — A vehicle-mounted, selfcontained,
mobile food establishment.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A food establishment that
operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction
with a single event or celebration.
§ 134-4. Application; fees.
A. Application for a license to maintain or operate a food establishment
shall be made to the Director of Health, or his designated agent, on
forms furnished by the Department of Health. No permit to operate a
food establishment shall be issued by a Director of Health unless the
applicant has provided the Director of Health with proof of registration
with the Department of Public Health and a written application for a
permit in a form and manner prescribed by the Department. Temporary
food establishments and certified farmers' markets, as defined in Section
22-6r of the General Statutes, as amended by this act, shall be exempt
from registering with the Department of Public Health. No application,
or reapplication submitted after December 31, 2018, can be approved
by the local health department, without first registering the food
establishment with the Commissioner of Public Health, through the
State Food Protection Program. The annual fee payable to the Town of
Brookfield for each license shall be set, from time to time, by the Board
of Selectmen. [Note: Fees for temporary food events may be waived, at
the discretion of the Director of Health, for not-for-profit organizations
holding a valid 501(c) 3 exemption.]
B. All food establishments, temporary food events and farmers' market
vendors shall be classified per the guidelines of the FDA Food Code
as elucidated in the State of Connecticut Public Act 17-93 (2017). No
food service provider may change classification without the permission
of the Director of Health or his/her designated agent. Food service
establishments will be checked and reclassified as necessary at the
time of the licensing inspection. The fee and application form shall be
collected prior to licensing. All licenses, except for temporary events
and farmers' markets, shall expire one year from date of issue and
are nontransferable. The licensing fee shall be waived for bona fide
charitable, religious and other nonprofit organizations.
C. No license to maintain or operate a food service establishment, food
store/market, farmers' market or temporary food event within the Town
of Brookfield shall be issued by the Director of Health, or the Town's
designated agent, unless such application is accompanied by a
certification from the Tax Collector that all real property and personal
property taxes due and owing to the Town are paid or not delinquent
more than one year. See Connecticut General Statutes §12-146a.
§ 134-3 FIRE LANES § 134-5
131:143
§ 134-5. Incorporation of FDA Food Code.
All relevant sections of the FDA Food Code in their entirety, and as they
may be amended from time to time, are hereby made a part of this chapter
and shall apply in all cases except where the provisions of this chapter shall
prescribe a more stringent requirement.
§ 134-6. Penalties for offenses.
If any licensed or unlicensed food establishment is found to be operated,
maintained, or equipped in violation of existing health codes and ordinances
or is found to be operated, maintained, or equipped so as to jeopardize
the public health, the Director of Health, or his designated agent, shall
order the removal or abatement of the violation of the existing health codes
and ordinances, within such time as the Director or agent may institute
and maintain a civil action for injunctive relief pursuant to the provisions
of Section 19a-206 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Such violation
may constitute a Class C misdemeanor, and the Director may suspend or
revoke the license of such food service establishment until such time as the
violation is removed or abated. Food service operations at the establishment
will cease until such time that the violation is removed or abated and the
Director reinstates said license and authorizes food service operations to
resume.
§ 134-7. Approval of plans and specifications required.
Whenever a food service establishment is constructed or substantially
remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a
food service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for
construction, remodeling, or alteration shall be submitted to the Director
of Health, or his authorized agent in the Health Department, for review
and approval before construction, remodeling or alterations are begun. The
plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement,
and construction materials of work areas and the type and model of
proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The Director of Health or his/
her agent shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the
requirements of the FDA Food Code and this chapter. No food service
establishment shall be constructed, remodeled, or altered except in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Director of Health
or his/her agent. Approval by the Director of Health or his agent shall
be separate from and independent of any other review, permit, inspection
or approval which may be required by the Town of Brookfield or State
of Connecticut. Applicable fees as set from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen for such plan review may apply.
§ 134-8. Inspections.
Whenever plans and specifications are required by the provisions of this
chapter, to be submitted to the Director of Health, the Director of Health or
his authorized agent shall inspect the food service establishment, farmers'
§ 134-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 134-8
131:144
market or temporary food event prior to its beginning operation to
determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications, and with
the requirements of this chapter and the FDA Food Code.
§ 134-9. Water analysis.
A. All food service establishments supplied by on-site private wells (noncommunity
water supplies) shall submit to the Director of Health an
analysis of their water supply prior to the issuance of their yearly license
to operate, and annually thereafter. The analysis must be performed by
a water-testing laboratory licensed by the State of Connecticut. A test
for E. coli bacteria will be required on a yearly basis. All water supplies
must be from a public water system regulated by the State Department
of Public Health.
B. In addition, the Director of Health may require testing for uranium and
arsenic on any newly drilled or modified wells under the authority of
Connecticut’s Public Health Code, Section 19a-37F.
C. Failure to submit such water analyses shall subject the owner or
operator of such establishment to a fine of $100 and the suspension of
the establishment's license to operate. Such food service establishment
shall remain closed until submission of the water test results.
§ 134-10. Reinspections; fees.
A. All food establishments which demonstrate violations of the FDA Food
Code will require correction of said violations within the time period
as set by the FDA Food Code. Priority violations must be corrected
within 72 hours; priority foundation items within 10 days. Violations
which threaten the immediate health of consumers will be corrected on
site at the time of the inspection. Persisting violations may constitute a
Class C misdemeanor. Reinspection will be conducted at the discretion
of the Brookfield Health Department depending on the severity of the
violation. The Department may approve a compliance schedule that
extends beyond the time limits specified by the FDA Food Code if a
written schedule of compliance is submitted by the license holder and no
health hazard exists or will result from allowing an extended schedule
for compliance.
B. Persisting violations may constitute a Class C misdemeanor.
Reinspection will be conducted, at the discretion of the Brookfield
Health Department, depending on the severity of the violation. If a
facility fails its reinspection, the Director of Health shall act to close the
facility. This action will be initiated by a Hearing between the owner
and/or manager of the facility and the Director of Health or his/her
authorized agent. The hearing shall be scheduled within five working
days of the failed reinspection, or at a time agreeable to the Director
of Health, with the purpose of establishing a timeline for correction
of debited items. Failure to meet the timeline of correction may result
in suspension of the establishment’s food permit and/or closure of the
facility.
§ 134-8 FIRE LANES § 134-10
131:145
C. The fee for reinspection will be $75, or as set from time to time by the
Board of Selectmen and payable to the Town of Brookfield at the time of
reinspection.
§ 134-11.
A late fee of 1/2 the annual fee shall be assessed if the annual fee is not paid
within 30 days of the date due. Thereafter, interest at the rate of 18% per
annum will be assessed on any outstanding balance.
§ 134-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Director of Health or his/
her agent may, within 48 hours after the issuance of such order, appeal to
the Commissioner of Public Health of the State of Connecticut, pursuant to
the provisions of Section 19a-229 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Said
appeal shall not stay said order unless a stay is requested of and issued by
the Commissioner of Public Health.
Chapter 159
NOISE
§ 134-10 BROOKFIELD CODE § 134-12
131:146
ARTICLE I
Noise Pollution
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 7-16-2001]
§ 159-1. Purpose.
It is the intention of this article to carry out and effectuate the public
policy of the State of Connecticut, the federal government and the Town of
Brookfield concerning the regulation of those activities causing measurably
excessive noise and noise disturbance within the Town of Brookfield. It is
recognized that excessive noise is a serious hazard to the health, welfare
and quality of life of all citizens and that each person has a right to an
environment free from noise that may jeopardize their health, safety or
welfare.
§ 159-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article.
BACKGROUND NOISE — Noise which exists at a point as a result of
the combination of many distant sources, individually indistinguishable. In
statistical terms, it is the level which is exceeded 90% of the time (L90) in
which the measurement is taken.
COMMERCIAL ZONE — Those areas designated for commercial use in the
Zoning Regulations of the Town of Brookfield.
DAYTIME HOURS — Hours between 7:30 a.m. and 7:30 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, and the hours between 10:00 a.m. and 7:30 p.m. on
Sundays and holidays.
DECIBEL — A unit of measurement of the sound level.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence involving actual or imminent danger to
persons or damage to property which demands immediate action.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the
standard set forth in § 159-3 of this article.
IMPULSE NOISE — Noise of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
INDUSTRIAL ZONE — Those areas designated for industrial use in the
Zoning Regulations of the Town of Brookfield.
INTRUSION ALARM — A device with an audible signal which, when
activated, indicates intrusion by an unauthorized person. Such alarm may
be attached to, or within, a building, structure, property or vehicle.
LAWN CARE AND MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT — All engine- or motorpowered
garden or maintenance tools intended for occasional use in
residential districts, typically capable of being used by a homeowner,
including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, riding tractors, snowblowers,
and including equipment intended for infrequent service work in inhabited
§ 159-1 FIRE LANES § 159-2
131:147
areas, typically requiring skilled operators, including, but not limited to,
chainsaws, log chippers or paving rollers.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall be given that meaning which is provided for by
Connecticut General Statutes, § 14-1(a)(47).38
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between 7:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m., Sunday
evening through Saturday morning, except that "nighttime hours" shall
mean the hours between 7:30 p.m. Saturday and 10:00 an. on Sunday and
7:30 p.m. of the day preceding a recognized national holiday and 10:00 a.m.
on said holiday.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency or political or
administrative subdivision of the State or other legal entity of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including
all appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards and
real properties without buildings or improvements owned or controlled by a
person.
PROPERTY LINE — That real or imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled
by any person from contiguous real property owned or controlled by
another person, and separates real property from the public right-of-way.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Those areas designated for residential use in the
Zoning Regulations of the Town of Brookfield.39
SOUND — A transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media
in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure or position
of the particles in the medium and which, in air, evoke physiological
sensations, including, but not limited to, an auditory response when
impinging on the ear.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument, including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the
measurement of sound levels. The sound level meter shall conform to the
ANSI Specifications for Sound Level Meters, S1.4-1971.
§ 159-3. Noise levels and guidelines.
A. Noise zones within the Town of Brookfield shall be classified according to
the zoning applicable to the parcel or tract of land from which noise is
emitted and the surrounding parcels or tracts on which noise is received,
provided that any parcel whose use is lawfully nonconforming to its zone
at the time this article is enacted shall be classified for noise emission
purposes according to the zone appropriate for the nonconforming use. It
shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any noise
beyond the boundaries of his/her premises in excess of the noise levels
established in this section. Measurements shall be taken at a point that
is located approximately one foot beyond the boundary of the emitter's
38.Editor's Note: See now Connecticut General Statutes, § 14-1(53).
39.Editor's Note: The Town of Brookfield Zoning Regulations are on file in the Town offices.
§ 159-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 159-3
131:148
premises within the receptor's premises. The emitter's premises includes
his/her individual unit of land or ground or contiguous parcels under the
same ownership, as indicated by the public land records.
Zone In Which
Emitter is
Located Zone in Which Receptor is Located
Residential
Industrial
(dBA)
Commercial
(dBA)
Daytime Hours
(dBA)
Nighttime Hours
(dBA)
Industrial 65 60 55 45
Commercial 60 60 55 45
Residential 55 55 55 45
B. No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of 80
decibels' peak sound pressure level during the night time to any residential
zone. No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess
of 100 decibels' peak sound pressure level at any time to any zone.
C. A person conducting sound measurements shall have been trained in the
techniques and principles of sound measuring equipment and
instrumentation. Instruments used to determine sound level measurements
shall be sound level meters as defined by this article.
§ 159-4. High background noise areas.
In those individual cases where the background noise levels caused by
sources not subject to this article exceed the standards contained herein, a
source shall be considered to cause excessive noise if the noise emitted by
such source exceeds the background noise level by five dBA, provided that
no source subject to the provisions of § 159-3 shall emit noise in excess of
80 dBA at any time, and provided that this section does not decrease the
permissible levels set forth in any other section of this article.
§ 159-5. Exclusions.
Maximum noise levels established pursuant to § 159-3 hereof shall not apply
to any noise emitted by or related to:
A. Natural phenomena.
B. Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church.
C. Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any
other alarm system used in an emergency situation. This exclusion
does not include, however, intrusion alarms attached to any building,
structure, or property not terminating within 30 minutes after being
activated or any intrusion alarm attached to a vehicle not terminating
within 10 minutes after being activated. The repetition of activation
of the audible signal of an intrusion alarm due to malfunction, lack
of proper maintenance, or lack of reasonable care shall be considered
excessive noise.
§ 159-3 FIRE LANES § 159-5
131:149
D. Warning devices required by OSHA or other state or federal safety
regulations.
E. Noise created as a result of an emergency, including, but not limited to,
the use of emergency generators.
F. Noise created by lawn care and maintenance equipment utilized during
daytime hours, as that term is defined in this article, provided that noise
discharged from exhausts is adequately muffled to prevent loud and/or
explosive noises therefrom,
G. Activities specially licensed or under permit from the Town of Brookfield,
including, but not limited to, parades, sporting events, conceit and
firework displays. This exclusion applies only if noise discharged from
exhausts is adequately muffled to prevent loud and/or explosive noise
therefrom. Moreover, patriotic or public celebrations may not extend
longer than one calendar day.
H. Noise from snow removal equipment, provided that such equipment
shall be maintained in good repair so as to minimize noise, and noise
discharged from exhausts shall be adequately muffled to prevent loud
and/or explosive noises therefrom.
I. Utility maintenance, including, but not limited to, the removal of fallen
trees and the installation and repair of utility wires and poles.
J. Town of Brookfield construction, road repair, and tree removal
operations.
K. The repair of buildings owned by the Town of Brookfield.
L. Activities conducted by the Town of Brookfield in a governmental
capacity or by the State of Connecticut or by the government of the
United States.
§ 159-6. Motor vehicle noise.
A. All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the Town of Brookfield
shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels act forth by
Connecticut General Statutes, §§ 14-80 and 14-80a, and the regulations
issued thereunder.
B. No sound-amplifying devices on or within motor vehicles shall emit noise
in excess of the noise levels as specified in § 159-3 hereof.
§ 159-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined
in the amount of $25 for his or her first violation; $50 for a subsequent
violation occurring within 30 days of his or her first violation; and $75
for any subsequent violation occurring within 30 days of any previous
violations, not including his or her first violation occurring pursuant to this
section. Each day such violation continues after the time for correction of
the violation has been given in an order shall constitute a separate violation.
Notification of violation shall be given at the time of the occurrence of the
noise or shortly thereafter in the form of a written notice of violation,
§ 159-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 159-8
131:150
§ 159-8. Enforcement.
The Brookfield Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this article
pertaining to the measurement of noise levels and the issuance of notices of
violation.
§ 159-9. Variances.
Any person living or doing business within the Town of Brookfield may
apply for a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article in
accordance with the procedures established by this chapter.40 No variance
shall be issued unless it has been demonstrated that the proposed activity
will not violate any provisions of the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection regulations as set forth in Connecticut General
Statutes, § 22a-69 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: The phrase "this Chapter" refers to the Town of Brookfield Zoning
Regulations, which are on file in the Town offices.
§ 159-8 FIRE LANES § 159-9
131:151
Chapter 162
OFF-TRACK BETTING BRANCH FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 162-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Ordinance Prohibiting Off-Track Betting
Branch Facilities."
§ 162-2. Prohibition; when effective.
A. No off-track betting branch facility or similar facility and no location for
such a facility within the Town of Brookfield shall be approved by the
legislative body of the Town of Brookfield so long as this chapter is in
effect.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall become effective on the 21st day
following its adoption and publication as required by law.
Chapter 164
OPEN SPACE USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
46.
Beaches — See Ch. 89.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 210.
Waterways — See Ch. 216.
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Open Space Use
Ordinance of Brookfield."
§ 164-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for the
use and control of land dedicated to open space and owned by the Town
of Brookfield in order to promote the safety and protection of the persons
using the property, and of the property.
§ 164-3. Hours of use.
Open space land shall be open from one hour before sunrise until one hour
after sunset. Town officials may close any portion of open space land or the
§ 159-9 BROOKFIELD CODE § 164-3
162:152
use of its facilities when it appears that the capacity of any area has been
exhausted or the use of same would endanger the public safety.
§ 164-4. Fishing.
Fishing is permitted on any open space land under the rules and regulations
established by the State of Connecticut Board of Fisheries and Game.
§ 164-5. Hunting and trapping.
Hunting and trapping is not permitted on any open space land without
permission of the Conservation Commission.
§ 164-6. Firearms.
Carrying and/or discharging of firearms is permitted only in areas
designated for such use under adequate supervision.
§ 164-7. Swimming and wading.
Swimming or wading is permitted only in such areas approved by the Health
Officer of the Town of Brookfield, provided that these areas are properly
supervised with the approval of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 164-8. Dogs and other pets.
Dogs and other pets are permitted on open space land, provided that such
pets are under the control of their owners or keepers at all times.
§ 164-9. Riding of horses and bicycles.
The riding of horses or bicycles is permitted on areas set aside for such
purposes.
§ 164-10. Overnight camping.
Overnight camping is permitted only in areas designated for camp use by
special permission of the Police Department. Sanitary facilities must be
provided by campers in accordance with the procedures of the Boy Scouts
of America.
§ 164-11. Fires.
Fires may be kindled only in designated areas.
§ 164-12. Damage or injury to surroundings prohibited.
No person shall deface, remove, destroy or otherwise injure in any manner
whatsoever any structure, rock, tree, flower, shrub or any other plant life
nor disturb or molest any bird or animal.
§ 164-3 OPEN SPACE USE § 164-13
164:153
§ 164-13. Removal of refuse; littering prohibited.
Refuse must be removed by those who bring it in. No person shall litter the
grounds or waters of open space land.
§ 164-14. Use of motorized vehicles.
Motorized vehicles may not be operated or parked on any open space land
except on roadways and areas designated for such use.
§ 164-15. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter is sufficient cause for eviction, and
any person who violates any provision shall be fined not more than $25 for
each violation.
Chapter 166
PAINT, LEAD-BASED AND DETERIORATED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blighted buildings — See Ch. 83. Building construction — See Ch. 96.
§ 166-1. Paint condition.
All portions of buildings used in whole or in part for residence, as well
as any accessory structures on the premises thereof, shall be kept free of
deteriorated paint, including but not limited to conditions such as cracking,
chipping, blistering, flaking, or loose paint. Such deteriorated paint
conditions shall be properly prepared, treated, and corrected in accordance
with the standards of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies (RCSA)
§ 19a-111-1 et seq. (the Lead Poisoning Prevention and Control
Regulations), when applicable, and otherwise in a safe manner such that
any existing lead hazards will be eliminated and new lead hazards will
not be created. Any paint that will be used to repaint such surfaces shall
conform to the standards of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act,
Chapter 63 of the Social Security Act, the RCSA § 19a-111-1, and the RCSA
§ 21a-336-1.
§ 166-2. Lead-based paint testing (general).
The Director of Health may require the owner of a dwelling where leadbased
paint may be present to engage the services of a State of Connecticutlicensed
lead consultant contractor at the owner's expense. The licensed
lead consultant contractor shall utilize a State of Connecticut-certified lead
inspector or lead inspector/risk assessor to conduct paint testing, document
paint conditions, and evaluate compliance with the requirements of the
provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS) §§ 19a-111c and
§ 164-13 BROOKFIELD CODE § 166-2
164:154
47a-54f, and the RCSA § 19a-111-1 et seq. The owner shall provide a copy
of the report that is generated by the lead consultant contractor to the
Director of Health within a time frame that is specified by the Director of
Health.
§ 166-3. Lead-based paint testing, abatement, and lead hazard
elimination associated with lead-poisoned children.
A. Inspection and testing. Whenever the Director of Health receives a
report of lead poisoning or otherwise determines that a child under the
age of six has an abnormal body burden of lead, the Director of Health
may require the owner of the dwelling in which such child resides to
engage the services of a State of Connecticut-licensed lead consultant
contractor to inspect and test the paint, soil, water, and dust on the
premises for toxic levels of lead at the owner's expense. The owner shall
provide a copy of the lead inspection report that is generated by the
lead consultant contractor to the Director of Health within a time frame
that is specified by the Director of Health. The licensed lead consultant
contractor shall utilize a State of Connecticut-certified lead inspector or
lead inspector/risk assessor to conduct the lead inspection and testing.
B. Abatement and lead-hazard elimination. The Director of Health shall
order the abatement or elimination of hazardous conditions if the lead
content of paint, soil, water, and dust on such premises exceeds the
permissible limits thereof as established and/or referenced in this
subsection.
(1) Paint: Abatement shall be required if the lead content and condition
of paint on the premises do not conform to standards established in
the RCSA § 19a-111-1 et seq.
(2) Soil: Abatement shall be required by the Director of Health if the
lead content of bare soil areas on the premises exceeds 400 mg/kg
[400 parts per million (ppm)] or any applicable standard as may be
established in the RCSA § 19a-111-1 et seq.
(3) Dust: The Director of Health shall require the elimination of
hazardous lead dust conditions. Hazardous lead dust conditions are
lead dust levels greater than or equal to 40 micrograms per square
foot (ug/ft2) on floors, 250 ug/ft2 on window sills, and/or 400 ug/ft2 on
window wells, or any applicable standard as may be established in
the RCSA § 19a-111-1 et seq. The Director of Health may determine
that hazardous lead dust conditions exist on surfaces other than
those listed above.
(4) Water: The Director of Health shall require appropriate action to
reduce the potential for lead exposure when the lead content of
potable water exceeds 0.015 milligrams per liter [15 parts per billion
(ppb)].
§ 166-4. Lead abatement contractor.
The Director of Health may require the owner of a dwelling to engage the
services of a State of Connecticut-licensed lead abatement contractor, at
the owner's expense, to ensure compliance with standards established in
§ 166-2 OPEN SPACE USE § 166-4
164:155
the RCSA § 19a-111-1 et seq. and to abate and eliminate lead hazards as
described in § 166-3 above where, in the sole discretion of the Director of
Health, the scope of work will exceed the capability of the owner and the
owner's regular employees.
§ 166-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, or entities who are found in violation of any provision
of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of $100 per day or per occurrence.
§ 166-6. Rationale of purpose.
Per various Connecticut statutes and regulations, local health departments
are designated as responsible parties for the comprehensive public health
oversight and management of lead-poisoned children. Additionally, local
health departments must assume a proactive role in the development and
implementation of measures that reduce the potential for lead exposure and
promote the primary prevention of lead poisoning (i.e., prior to an individual
becoming lead-poisoned). In the event that a child is lead-poisoned, the local
health department must require that appropriate measures be instituted
to prevent further lead exposure. This amendment will enable the Health
Director at the Town of Brookfield to provide these services and fulfill these
obligations in a more-effective manner.
Chapter 168
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
§ 168-1. Notice of violation.
A. Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or rule or regulation of the
Town of Brookfield which relates to parking, a police officer shall attach
to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof stating that
such vehicle has been parked unlawfully and advising such owner or
operator of the amount of the fine or penalty.
B. Said notice shall advise such owner or operator of his right to mail or pay
said fine to the Town of Brookfield within five days of the date when such
notice is attached to such vehicle, the fine or lines for the designated
violation or violations to be in accordance with the fines or penalties
hereinafter set forth.
§ 166-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 168-2
164:156
§ 168-2. Restriction on all-night parking. [Amended 2-5-2018]
No person shall park any vehicle on any public street or highway for a
period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. This section shall not apply to a professional call, vehicles parked in
designated parking spaces in the Town Center District, or to the operators
of police, fire or other emergency vehicles.
§ 168-3. Parking during storms.
A. Speedy and official removal of snow from the streets and public
highways of the Town is hereby declared to be vital to the public health
and safety.
B. No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
within the limits of any public highway so as to create a nuisance or
hazard during the time of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain or to
obstruct or interfere with snow removal and/or sanding.
C. Any motor vehicle left so unattended may be impounded and removed to
a suitable pound, to be determined by the traffic authority.
D. The Chief of Police, or his duly authorized representative, shall cause a
record to be kept of all cars so impounded, together with the name of the
registered owner thereof, the location from which taken, the name of the
authority directing its removal and the location to which taken.
E. The owner of such vehicle may reclaim such vehicle upon showing
proper evidence of ownership and upon paying both the fine therefor and
all towing and storage charges.
§ 168-4. Parking restrictions.
A. No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
in any place where, or during any period when, parking is prohibited by
the traffic authority as indicated by appropriate signs and/or markings.
B. No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
for a longer period of time than permitted by the traffic authority as
indicated by appropriate signs and/or markings.
C. No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon, nor shall any motor
vehicle be left parked, standing or stopped on or across, any public
sidewalk, except to cross such sidewalk for ingress and egress from
adjacent areas or to perform necessary sidewalk construction,
maintenance or snow removal.
D. No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
E. Unless in a designated parking space, no person shall park any motor
vehicle or permit it to remain stationary within 25 feet of a marked
crosswalk, an intersection or a stop sign.
F. No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
within the limits of any public street or highway in such a manner as
to constitute a traffic hazard or to obstruct the free movement of traffic
thereon; nor shall any person double park any motor vehicle.
G. The owner of any motor vehicle which has become disabled so that it is
impossible or impractical to remove it under its own power may notify
the Police Department of such fact, and, after notification, it may be
§ 168-2 OPEN SPACE USE § 168-4
164:157
permitted to remain for a reasonable time for the purpose of making
repairs thereto or of obtaining assistance to remove it.
§ 168-5. Violations and penalties.
A. The penalty for the violation of any provision of this chapter, except
illegal parking during a snowstorm, shall be a violation fee of $50,
payable to the Town of Brookfield. [Amended 2-5-1996]
B. The penalty for violation of the prohibition against parking on public
streets or highways during a snowstorm shall be a violation fee of $75,
payable to the Town of Brookfield. [Amended 2-5-1996]
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter and fails to pay
all fines, fees and charges resulting from said violation within five days
from the date of said violation shall be prosecuted and fined not more
than $100 or be imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, and shall
be subject to the provisions of Sec. 14-111 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
§ 168-6. Special regulations during emergencies.
The Board of Selectmen or Chief of Police is authorized to suspend
permitted parking under parking regulations and to prohibit parking
temporarily in any areas where, in his opinion, it is necessary in order
to facilitate the removal of snow, the construction of public works
improvements or for other good and sufficient purposes, and he shall give
notice of such temporary prohibition by causing to be placed thereat
suitable signs indicating that parking is prohibited, and also, if practicable,
by radio and/or newspaper notices.
§ 168-7. Owner presumed to be responsible.
In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, there shall be a prima facie
presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked
such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred.
Chapter 171
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 127.
§ 171-1. License required.
No person may peddle, vend, hawk or sell upon any public street or from
house to house within the Town of Brookfield without a license.
§ 168-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 171-2
164:158
§ 171-2. Issuance of license.
The Board of Selectmen shall, upon presentation of satisfactory evidence
that the applicant is of good character and upon full disclosure of the
goods, wares or other products to be sold and upon payment of the fee as
hereinafter provided, issue a license to such applicant.
§ 171-3. Term of license; fee.
Said license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue.
The fee for such license shall be as established from time to time by the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 171-4. Exhibition of license upon request required.
Any person possessing such license shall, upon request, exhibit it.
§ 171-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-21-2010]
Any person who shall fail to comply with the terms of this chapter shall be
liable to a fine of not more than $199 for each offense.
§ 171-6. Activities not regulated. [Amended 7-21-2010]
This chapter shall not apply to farmers and gardeners selling the produce of
their farms and gardens, nor to those selling, distributing and delivering ice,
milk, teas, coffees, spices, groceries, meats, baker's goods and merchandise
on conditional sale where full payment is not required at the time of
solicitation, nor to bona fide charitable organizations recognized by the
State of Connecticut and exempt from federal taxation under Section 501 of
the Internal Revenue Code. Veterans, who have been Connecticut residents
for at least two years and are principals of the organization seeking the
permit, are exempt.
Chapter 174
POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches — See Ch. 89.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 171-2 OPEN SPACE USE § 171-6
164:159

ARTICLE I
Public Pools
[Adopted 3-3-2008]
§ 174-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POOL OPERATOR — A person at least 18 years of age who is responsible
for the daily operation of a public pool and who shall be held responsible
for compliance with the provisions of the Public Health Code of the State
of Connecticut and all other applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, rules
and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the Town of Brookfield
pertaining to the operation of a public pool.
PUBLIC POOL — An artificial basin as defined in Section 19-13-B33b of the
Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
§ 174-2. Operation of public pools, permits; fees.
A. No person shall operate, maintain or permit the operation of any public
pool in the Town of Brookfield without having a permit from the Director
of Health or his/her authorized agent.
B. Any person or entity desiring to operate a public pool in the Town of
Brookfield shall, at least 10 days before the opening date, or any person
or entity presently operating a public pool shall, make application for
such a permit on the forms provided by the Director of Health. Such
application shall include the name and address of the pool, the name
and mailing address of the owner(s) of the pool, including the names
and residences of the corporate officers, if applicable. The applicant
shall also provide the name and current contact information of the pool
operator who shall be legally responsible for the daily operation of the
pool and for compliance with all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances,
rules and regulations, and such other information as shall be deemed
necessary by the Director of Health. The application shall be
accompanied by the annual permit fee.
C. Prior to issuance of the final approval for a permit, the Director of
Health, or his/her authorized agent, shall inspect the pool to determine
compliance with the provisions of the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut and any other applicable statutes, codes, ordinances, rules
and regulations.
D. The Director of Health shall issue a permit to the applicant if the
inspection reveals that the pool meets the requirements of this section
and the Public Health Code and any other applicable statutes, codes,
ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to such public pool
operation and that the pool has a competent pool operator.
E. Permits shall be renewed annually and shall be valid from the date they
are issued until April 30, unless revoked by the Director of Health, or
until such time as the pool changes ownership, closes or goes out of
business.
§ 174-1 OPEN SPACE USE § 174-2
164:161
F. Permits shall not be transferable.
G. The valid permit shall be posted in a location easily observed by patrons.
H. Each pool at a single location, which has its own recirculation and water
treatment system, shall be deemed to be a separate pool and shall be
required to have a separate permit.
I. Supervision of public pools. Every person in the employ of or under
the immediate supervision of a pool operator or owner shall be held
responsible for compliance with all provisions and regulations relating
to equipment, pool operation, maintenance, testing and safety of
bathers. The pool operator shall be competent in the operation of the
pool and in pool water chemistry and pool testing. Competency may
be demonstrated by the successful completion of a written exam
administered by, or other training acceptable to, the Director of Health
or his/her authorized agent. Information on how to contact the pool
operator shall be posted at the pool. The name(s) of the pool operator(s)
shall be submitted to the Director of Health at the time of application for
a pool permit and shall be kept updated whenever there is a change in
personnel.
§ 174-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 174-2
164:162
Chapter 178
SALONS AND SPAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 174-2 OPEN SPACE USE § 174-2
164:163

ARTICLE I
Licenses, Fees, Inspections and Technical Standards
[Adopted 5-2-2012]
§ 178-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE — A locally issued license to open and run any
personal care service as listed in the definition of "shop, salon or studio,"
Subsections A and B, below. Such license is in addition to any personal
care license required by state statute and applies to the establishment or
business itself.
NAIL TECHNICIAN — A person who, for compensation, cuts, shapes,
polishes or enhances the appearance of nails of the hands or feet, including,
but not limited to, the application and removal of sculptured or artificial
nails.
OPERATOR — Any person who owns and/or operates a personal care
business in the Town of Brookfield for profit, including salons, spas, barber
shops, hairdressers, manicuring studios (both hand and foot), saunas,
massage parlors or body piercing establishments.
SHOP, SALON or STUDIO —
§ 178-2. Authority of Director of Health.
Under Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 368e, Section 19a-231, the
Director of Health shall, on an annual basis, inspect all salons within the
Director's jurisdiction regarding their sanitary condition. The Director of
Health or the Director's authorized representative shall have full power to
enter and inspect any such salon during usual business hours.
Any place where the art or practice of dressing, arranging, curling,
waving, weaving, cutting, styling, bleaching or coloring of the hair,
beards are trimmed or shaved, and/or treating the scalp by massaging,
cleansing, stimulating, antiseptics, tonics, lotions, creams, powders,
oils, or clay and doing similar work on the face, neck, arms and
manicuring the nails, both hands and feet, of any person for
compensation, as well as saunas, provided that nothing in this definition
shall prohibit an unlicensed person from performing facials, eyebrow
arching and manicuring of the fingernails.
A.
Includes but is not limited to the following: barber shops, beauty salons
or studios, coiffeurs and hair designers, fashioners and schools for
same, manicure and pedicure businesses, massage parlors, bodypiercing
establishments and day spas.
B.
§ 178-1 OPEN SPACE USE § 178-3
164:165
§ 178-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to safeguard the health and well-being of
persons who patronize barber shops, beauty salons, day spas, manicurist/
pedicurist establishments, massage parlors, body-piercing establishments
and the like, in the Town of Brookfield, through a system of inspection,
regulation, education and licensing of said establishments, their owners and
employees. Some owners and employees are licensed through the state but
actual facilities are never inspected.
§ 178-4. License required; posting of license.
A. All operators shall possess and display an appropriate current license or
registration to practice, from the State of Connecticut, as required.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, etc., to operate
a shop, salon or studio, or offer services of same within the Town of
Brookfield, without a valid establishment license issued by the Director
of Health. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
article and the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut shall be
entitled to receive or retain such license. Licenses are not transferable. A
valid license shall be conspicuously posted in every shop, salon or studio.
§ 178-5. Issuance of establishment licenses.
A. Any firm, person, corporation, etc., desiring to operate a shop, salon or
studio shall, at least 30 days prior to opening or change of ownership
of such establishment, make written application for a license on forms
provided by the Director of Health. All currently existing salons, shops
or studios shall be licensed by the Town of Brookfield, within 30 days of
the effective date of this article. Such application shall include but not
be limited to the name and address of each applicant, the location and
type of each establishment and the applicant's signature.
B. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee as
set forth below41 and a set of plans for the establishment.
C. Prior to the issuance of final approval for a license, the Director of
Health or his authorized agent shall inspect the proposed establishment
to determine compliance with the provisions of this article, the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut and any other applicable statutes,
ordinances or rules and regulations.
D. If the Director of Health fails or refuses to issue a license to the applicant
under this section of the article, the applicant may appeal pursuant to
§ 178-8B, herein.
§ 178-6. Fees.
Annual fees for operating a personal care establishment, annual renewal,
late fees for nonpayment or for required plan review for new construction or
for reconstruction or alteration shall be set from time to time by the Board
of Selectmen.42
41.Editor's Note: A copy of the required fees is available at the Brookfield Department of
Health.
§ 178-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 178-7
164:166
§ 178-7. Expiration of license.
All licenses shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed for another year, upon reapplication and payment of annual fee,
provided the establishment is in compliance with this article, the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut and any other applicable statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations.
§ 178-8. Suspension of license.
A. The Director of Health may suspend any license to operate a shop, salon
or studio, if the license holder does not comply with the requirements
of this article or the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. If the
Director of Health finds unsanitary or other conditions which, in his/
her judgment, constitutes an immediate and substantial hazard to public
health, he may immediately issue a written notice to the license holder or
operator, citing such conditions, specifying the reasonable period of time
within which such action will be taken and, if deemed necessary, order
immediate correction. If correction is not completed in the stated time,
the license shall be suspended. Suspension is effective upon service of a
notice as stated in § 178-9 of this article. When a license is suspended,
all operations shall immediately cease.
B. Whenever a license is suspended, the license holder or person in charge,
or applicant, may, within 48 hours after issuance of such order, appeal to
the Commissioner of Public Health of the State of Connecticut, pursuant
to Connecticut General Statutes Section 19a-229, who shall thereafter
immediately notify the authority from whose order the appeal was taken
and examine the merits of such case, and may vacate, modify or affirm
such order.
C. During the process of any appeal, the license shall remain suspended.
§ 178-9. Revocation of license.
A. The Director of Health may revoke a license for repeated or serious
violations of this article or for interference with the Director of Health
or his/her authorized agent in the performance of their duties. Prior
to revocation, the Director of Health shall notify the license holder or
person in charge of the establishment in writing, of the reasons for which
the license is subject to revocation and that said license will be revoked
at the end of 14 days following service of such notice.
B. Whenever a license is revoked, the license holder or person in charge
of the establishment or applicant may, within 48 hours after issuance of
such order, appeal to the Commissioner of Public Health of the State of
Connecticut, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 19a-229,
who shall thereupon immediately notify the authority from whose order
the appeal was taken and examine the merits of the case and may vacate,
modify or affirm such order.
C. During the process of any appeal, the license shall remain revoked.
42.Editor's Note: A copy of the required fees is available at the Brookfield Department of
Health.
§ 178-7 OPEN SPACE USE § 178-10
164:167
§ 178-10. Service of notices.
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered
to the license holder or person in charge, or when it is sent by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of
the license holder. A copy of any notice shall be filed in the records of the
Director of Health.
§ 178-11. Reapplication for license.
A. Suspension. Whenever a license has been suspended, the holder of the
suspended license, whether there is an appeal pending or not, may make
a written request for reinstatement of the suspended license. Within 10
days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed
by the applicant that, in his/her opinion the conditions causing the
suspension have been corrected, the Director of Health or his authorized
agent shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is complying with
the requirements of this article, the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut and other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations, the license shall be reinstated.
B. Revocation. Whenever a license has been revoked, the holder of said
revoked license may, after a period of 10 days from the date of
revocation, make written application for reinstatement of a license, as
provided in § 178-4 of this article and payment of annual fee, whether
or not an appeal is pending. Within 10 days following the receipt of
a written request for reinstatement of a revoked license, including a
statement signed by the applicant that, in the opinion of the applicant,
the conditions causing the revocation have been corrected, the Director
of Health or his authorized agent shall make a reinspection. If the
applicant is in compliance with the requirements of this article, the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and any other applicable
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, the license shall be
reinstated upon payment of the appropriate fee.
§ 178-12. Submission of plans.
Whenever a shop, salon or studio is constructed or remodeled and,
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as such an
establishment, properly prepared plans showing, in particular, plumbing
fixtures and schedules of equipment, finish schedules, station areas and
specifications for construction, remodeling or alteration of same, shall be
submitted to the Director of Health or his authorized agent for review and
approval, before construction, remodeling or alteration is begun. The plans
and specifications shall assess design flow of existing subsurface disposal
(septic) system if applicable, indicate the proposed layout, arrangement and
construction materials of work areas, expansion of the subsurface sewage
disposal system, if necessary, and protection of water supply as necessary.
A statement of the type and model of the proposed fixed equipment and
facilities shall be provided along with the plans. The Director of Health
or his authorized agent shall approve the plans and specifications, if they
§ 178-10 BROOKFIELD CODE § 178-12
164:168
meet the requirements of this article, prior to the issuance or renewal of a
license.
§ 178-13. Preoperational inspection.
Whenever plans and specifications as required by § 178-12 of this article are
to be submitted to the Director of Health or his authorized agent, he shall
inspect the establishment prior to its commencing or resuming operation,
to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and
within the requirements of this article.
§ 178-14. Inspection, enforcement and access.
A. The Director of Health or his authorized agent, as required by
Connecticut General Statutes, Section 19a-231, shall make inspections
and reinspections as necessary, to enforce this article, but not less than
once per year (except in the case of required reinspections) and shall be
permitted to enter any establishment, licensed or applying for a license
under this article, during regular working hours.
B. Compliance with this article shall not relieve the owner or operator of
responsibility to conform to all applicable regulations and procedures,
under the Connecticut and Brookfield Building Codes and Fire Safety
Codes, as well as municipal zoning and land use ordinances and
regulations.
§ 178-15. Technical standards.
A. Technical standards including those governing location, equipment,
facilities, sanitation, prohibited practices, operators, animals and pets,
as well as acceptable methods of disinfection are set forth in a separate
document available in the Brookfield Department of Health. (See Annex
A.43)
B. These technical standards shall comply with the Connecticut General
Statutes, Chapter 368e, Section 19-231, and may be updated or modified
by the Director of Health, from time to time, to ensure the safety and
health of all personal care clients.
§ 178-16. Penalties for offenses.
A. Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this
article shall be fined not more than $100 for each violation.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate any violation as
ordered by the Director of Health.
C. Each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
43.Editor's Note: The annex is available at the Brookfield Department of Health.
§ 178-12 OPEN SPACE USE § 178-16
164:169
Chapter 179
SCENIC ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District — See Ch. 26. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
§ 179-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Scenic Road Ordinance" of the Town
of Brookfield.
§ 179-2. Delegation of authority.
The authority to designate a Town road or any portion of a Town road as
a scenic road is hereby delegated to the Planning Commission of the Town
of Brookfield in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-149a(b) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 179-3. Requirements for designation.
No road or portion thereof shall be designated as a scenic road unless
the Planning Commission affirmatively finds that each of the following
requirements has been satisfied:
A. The owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the road or portion
thereof to be designated as a scenic road have filed a written statement
of approval of said designation with the Town Clerk and the Assessor
has certified that the owners who signed the designation do, in fact,
constitute the owners of a majority of said lot frontage.
B. The road is free of intensive commercial development and intensive
vehicular traffic.
C. The road is in a safe condition for travel by the motoring public and does
not require any repairs or improvements to accommodate existing traffic
volume and projected traffic volume over the next five years.
D. The road is at least 1/2 mile in length.
E. The road possesses at least one of the following characteristics:
(1) It passes through agricultural land.
(2) It abuts land on which is located an historic building or structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Register of Historic Places.
(3) It affords vistas or marshes, shoreline, forests with mature trees or
notable geologic or other natural features.
F. The road possesses at least one of the following characteristics:
(1) It is unpaved.
(2) It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls.
(3) The traveled portion of the road is no more than 20 feet in width.
(4) It offers scenic views.
(5) It blends fully into the surrounding terrain.
§ 178-16 BROOKFIELD CODE § 179-3
179:170
(6) It parallels or crosses either brooks, streams, lakes or ponds.
G. The combination of features possessed by the road make it distinct from
other roads in the Town of Brookfield.
§ 179-4. Procedure for designation.
A. Application. An application for designation of a Town road or a portion
of a Town road as a scenic road must be signed by the owners of a
majority of the lot frontage abutting the road or a portion thereof and
must be submitted to the Planning Commission. Simultaneously, certified
copies of said application shall be filed with the Town Clerk, the Assessor
and the Board of Selectmen. Said application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name of the road or a description of the portion of a road which
is proposed for designation as a scenic road.
(2) A written statement of approval of the designation of the road or
portion thereof as a scenic road signed by the owners of a majority
of the lot frontage abutting the road or portion thereof.
(3) A report providing pertinent information on the road or portion
thereof proposed for designation as a scenic road. Said report shall
include such facts and other information as are sufficient to satisfy
the requirements contained in § 179-3 of this chapter.
(4) The names and addresses of all owners of lot frontage abutting the
road or portion thereof and the length of the lot frontage of each
owner.
B. Duties of Assessor. Within 21 days from the date of the filing of the
application, the Assessor of the Town of Brookfield shall prepare and
submit to the Planning Commission a report stating that, based upon
information contained in the Assessor's records, the persons who signed
the application and statement of approval do or do not constitute the
owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting said road or portion thereof.
The Assessor shall also state in said report the total lot frontage abutting
said road or portion thereof and the total lot frontage of the owners who
have signed the application and statement of approval.
C. Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
said application within 65 days from the date that the application is filed.
Notice of said public hearing shall be given by the Commission in the
same manner as notices of public hearings on resubdivision applications.
In addition, the Planning Commission shall notify all of the lot owners
listed in said application. Said notice shall be sent by regular mail.
D. The Planning Commission shall act upon the application within 65 days
of the conclusion of the public hearing. The Commission shall state in
its decision its findings and the reasons therefor with respect to each
requirement contained in § 179-3 of this chapter. Notice of the decision
shall be published in the same manner as the notice of a decision on an
application for resubdivision of land.
§ 179-5. Rescission of designation.
A. The Planning Commission, either on its own initiative or upon an
application filed by owners of a majority of the lot frontage abutting the
§ 179-3 SCENIC ROADS § 179-5
179:171
scenic road, may rescind the designation of the road as a scenic road.
Prior to rescinding said designation, the Commission shall hold a public
hearing thereon. The Commission shall not rescind such designation
except upon an affirmative finding that said road no longer satisfies the
requirements set forth in § 179-3 of this chapter.
B. The provisions regarding verification of ownership, notice of public
hearing, notice of decision and time frame for the making of a decision
for rescission of the designation of a road as a scenic road shall be the
same as set forth in § 179-4 of this chapter.
§ 179-6. Repair, alterations and improvements.
A. Routine maintenance, repairs and alterations. The following types of
maintenance, repair and alteration of a scenic road may be performed by
the Director of Public Works of the Town of Brookfield without the need
of approval by the Planning Commission:
(1) Trimming of trees and removal of brush and other material which
either encroaches upon the traveled portion of the road or obstructs
the site lines which are required by the provisions of the Town Road
Ordinance.44
(2) Trimming of trees and trimming and removal of shrubs which is
necessary for protection of utility wires and poles.
(3) Correction of road drainage problems.
(4) Repaving and repair of existing road surfaces.
(5) Emergency repairs required to restore the road to a safe and
passable condition for motor vehicles.
B. Other maintenance, repairs and alterations. Except for the types of
work described in the preceding subsection, all repairs, alterations and
improvements of a scenic road shall require the prior approval of the
Planning Commission. Upon receipt of an application for permission
to make said repairs, alterations and improvements, the Planning
Commission shall schedule a public hearing concerning said application.
Notice of said public hearing shall be given in the same manner as set
forth in § 179-4 of this chapter. The Planning Commission shall not grant
such approval unless it finds that the work is required in the interest of
public safety.
§ 179-7. Prohibited activities.
The following activities shall be prohibited within the right-of-way of a
scenic road and upon property which abuts a scenic road:
A. All signs, except a sign not more than one square foot in size setting forth
the name of the owner of the property and temporary signs advertising
the property for sale in accordance with the limitations contained within
the Brookfield Zoning Regulations.45
B. Brush piles, dirt piles, garbage and trash, except that refuse containers
may be placed next to the traveled portion of the road on the day
designated for refuse removal by the refuse removal company.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Streets and Sidewalks.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Zoning.
§ 179-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 179-8
179:172
§ 179-8. Fees.
Any application for designation of a scenic road or portion thereof as a
scenic road and any application for rescission of said designation shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of $150.
§ 179-9. Enforcement violations and penalties.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Planning Commission through its
designated enforcement officers.
B. Violators of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 per
day for each day that the violation continues.
Chapter 182
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, ON-SITE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
71.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Sewers — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision water and sewer systems — See
Ch. 234.
§ 179-8 SCENIC ROADS § 179-9
179:173

ARTICLE I
Design, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of On-Site
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
§ 182-1. Purpose.
There is hereby enacted an On-Site Subsurface Sewage Disposal System
(SSDS) Ordinance to regulate and control the design, construction,
operation and maintenance of on-site sewage disposal systems serving
single-family and multiple-family homes or small commercial business with
an SSDS having a capacity of 5,000 gallons per day or less in the Town
of Brookfield. The purpose of this article is to promote the health and
welfare of the residents of the Town of Brookfield by requiring tracking and
maintenance of said sewage disposal systems to prevent their malfunction
and to provide for the correction of malfunctioning sewage disposal
systems.
§ 182-2. Adoption of Public Health Code; Conformance.
Sections 19-13-B103a through 19-13-B103f and Section 19-13-B100a of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and all amendments thereto
hereinafter adopted, are hereby incorporated by reference in this article
and made a part hereof. Said sections are hereinafter referred to as the
"Public Health Code."46 However, no on-site sewage disposal system which
is in existence on the effective date of this article shall be required to
conform to the design and construction provisions of the Public Health Code
unless said system malfunctions. In the event of malfunction, all portions
of the system which require repair shall be repaired in accordance with
all requirements of the Public Health Code, subject to variances which
may be granted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 19-13-B103d and
19-13-B100a (f) of said code.
§ 182-3. Malfunctioning of systems.
An on-site sewage disposal system shall be deemed to be a malfunctioning
system if sewage is allowed to discharge or flow from it into any storm
drain, stream, gutter, street, roadway or a public place or if sewage
discharges from said system to the surface of any private property so as to
create a nuisance or condition detrimental to health.
§ 182-4. Standards for operation.
A. All on-site sewage disposal systems constructed after the effective date
of this article shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all
requirements of the Public Health Code, subject to variances which may
be granted to the provisions of Section 19-13-B103d of said code.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any single-family or
multifamily home or small commercial business with an SSDS having
a capacity of 5,000 gallons per day or less to discharge sewage into
46.Editor's Note: Said Public Health Code is on file in the Town offices.
§ 182-1 SCENIC ROADS § 182-4
179:175
an SSDS unless an operating permit authorizing said discharge has
previously been obtained from the Health Director of the Town of
Brookfield, or his duly authorized representative.
C. For all new and repaired systems, a permit to discharge shall be issued,
following an on-site inspection of the sewage disposal system by the
Health Director or his representative, which inspection discloses proper
installation and/or repair.
D. The Health Director and his representatives, under authority of
Connecticut Public Health Code Section 19a-206, shall have the right
of entry onto any land in the Town of Brookfield for the purposes of
conducting inspections of sewage disposal systems and performing such
tests as the Health Director or his representative, in his discretion,
determines are advisable for the purpose of disclosing whether or not
said system is malfunctioning and, hence, there is just cause to suspect
that a public nuisance may exist.
§ 182-5. Oversight.
A. A comprehensive wastewater compliance management system will be
instituted for the purpose of electronically monitoring compliance with
this chapter. It will include secure public and contractor access,
tracking, notifications and periodic reports. A regulatory management
company will be selected at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen,
upon recommendation of the Director of Health.
§ 182-6. Enforcement.
A. Enforcement of this chapter and of the Public Health Code shall be the
responsibility of the Director of Health of the Town of Brookfield and
his duly authorized representative. Said representatives shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the Sanitarian of the Town of Brookfield,
the Director of Public Works of the Town of Brookfield and such field
inspectors as are employed by the Town of Brookfield for purposes of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
B. If a sewage disposal system is determined by the Health Director or his
representative to be malfunctioning, the following actions shall be taken
by said Health Director or his representative:
(1) The permit to discharge for said sewage disposal system shall be
revoked and the owner of the premises served by said sewage
disposal system shall be given notice of said revocation and of said
violation and shall be ordered to immediately abate said violation.
(2) The Health Director or his representative shall immediately cause
the notice of violation and a copy of the abatement order to be
recorded on the Brookfield Health Department records. Said notice
of violation shall be released and discharged of record by the Health
Director or his representative when the abatement order has been
fully complied with and the sewage disposal system is no longer
malfunctioning. At such time, a new operating permit shall be issued.
(3) The Health Director or his representative shall have the right to
seek judicial relief to enforce his orders for the abatement of any
§ 182-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 182-6
179:176
violations of the provisions of the Public Health Code or of this
article.
(4) Failure on the part of a septic hauler to obtain and/or pay for a permit
to pump may result in the loss of registration to pump septic systems
within the Town of Brookfield. See Section 182-11(D) below.
§ 182-7. Right of appeal.
Any property owner who has issued a notice of violation and abatement
order by the Health Director or his representative shall have the right to
appeal said notice of violation and abatement order to the Commissioner
of Health of the State of Connecticut pursuant to the provisions of Section
19a-229 of the Connecticut General Statutes, a copy of which is attached
hereto as Exhibit A.47
§ 182-8. Temporary operating permits.
The Health Director or his representative is hereby authorized to issue a
temporary permit to discharge allowing the discharge of sewage into a
subsurface sewage disposal system which is in violation of the provisions
of this article. Said temporary permit shall not be issued unless the Health
Director or his representative makes a finding that the use of said
malfunctioning system will not be detrimental to the health and welfare of
the residents of the Town of Brookfield. Said permit shall be immediately
revoked upon noncompliance with said conditions and stipulations. Said
permit shall remain in effect only for such period of time as the Health
Director or his representative deems necessary to effect the required
repairs to said sewage disposal system to bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the applicable sections of the Connecticut
Public Health Code. In no event shall a temporary permit to discharge
be issued for a period in excess of six months. Renewal of said permit
shall be discretionary with the Health Director or his duly authorized
representative.
47.Editor's Note: Exhibit A reads as follows: "§ 19a-229. (Formerly Sec. 19-103.) Appeal. Any
person aggrieved by an order issued by a town, city or borough director of health may
appeal to the Commissioner of Public Health, not later than three business days after the
date of such person's receipt of such order, who shall thereupon immediately notify the
authority from whose order the appeal was taken, and examine into the merits of such
case, and may vacate, modify or affirm such order."
§ 182-6 SCENIC ROADS § 182-8
179:177

ARTICLE II
Septage Management
§ 182-9. Purpose; minimum standards.
This article governs the removal, transportation and disposal of all
materials removed from any septic tank, cesspool, privy and/or subsurface
sewage disposal system, hereafter known as "septage," generated in the
Town of Brookfield. This article provides minimum operating and
administrative standards for the removal and disposal of septage per
Section 19-13-B103c or Sections 19-13-B104b through 19-13-B104c of the
Connecticut Public Health Code.
§ 182-10. Permits required; application information; permit
renewal.
In accordance with Section 19-13-103(c)(2)(B) or 19-13-B104c(b)(2)(B) of
the Connecticut Public Health Code, all organizations pumping septage
within the Town of Brookfield shall first obtain necessary permits from
the Director of Health of the Town of Brookfield or his agent. Application
for said permits shall require presentation of a valid license to transport
septage issued by the State of Connecticut in accordance with Section
20-341 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Application for the permit shall
also require presentation of a valid permit for transport and disposal of
septage issued by the City of Danbury Health Department or proof of lawful
right to dispose of septage in some other approved facility. Renewal of
permits shall be on a yearly calendar basis, and applications shall be made
on a form furnished by the Town. There is no registration fee for this permit.
§ 182-11. Stickers; vehicle requirements; approvals required;
septage discharge permits.
A. Once a septic hauler is registered, the Town shall issue a sticker that
shall be displayed by the vehicles of each pumper permitted by the Town.
The sticker shall include the name of the Town of Brookfield, the name
of the permittee, the date of expiration of the permit, the number of the
permit and the current State of Connecticut motor vehicle registration
number of the permittee's vehicle.
B. All vehicles used for the collecting and transporting of septage shall bear
the name of the organization conducting such activities. Such vehicles
shall be maintained in a clean exterior condition at all times.
C. Disposal of all septage shall be approved by the Brookfield Director
of Health or his/her agent. Disposal of material other than domestic
septage will require joint approval of the Director of Health and the
Danbury Public Utilities Department. All permittees are required to
allow spot sampling and inspection of truck tank contents by employees
or agents of the City of Danbury.
D. Permit to pump and septage discharge permit.
(1) Organizations authorized to pump septic systems in the Town of
Brookfield and use the Danbury disposal facility shall obtain a permit
to pump an individual septic system, and pay the required fee as set
§ 182-9 SCENIC ROADS § 182-11
179:179
from time to time by the Board of Selectmen, as well as a separate
septage discharge permit from the Brookfield Director of Health or
his/her agent. The permit to pump shall include the date and time
of pumping, a notation as to any visible evidence of septic system
failure, as well as the total gallonage withdrawn.
(2) Within three business days of pumping, the permittee shall deliver
to the Brookfield Health Department a copy of the permit to pump,
so that it may be entered into the records of the Health Department,
or submit such information as required electronically on the tracking
system. With regard to the septage discharge permit, two of the
four copies of each permit shall be turned in to the operator of the
disposal facility in the City of Danbury prior to discharge. All permits
shall be numbered and bear the name of the Town of Brookfield.
§ 182-12. Payment procedures for Danbury disposal facility.
A. Upon completion of pumping, the pumper shall sign the septage
discharge permit and certify the number of gallons pumped. A copy of
the permit is retained by the pumper, a copy is forwarded by the pumper
to the property owner pumped, and two copies are turned in to the
operator of the disposal facility in Danbury. At the end of each calendar
month, copies of all permits issued by the Town of Brookfield for septage
pumped in the Town of Brookfield will be returned by the City of Danbury
to the Town of Brookfield.
B. Pumpers shall be billed monthly by the City of Danbury for their use of
the Danbury disposal facility to dispose of septage generated in the Town
of Brookfield.
C. Fees charged to pumpers by the City of Danbury for their use of the
Danbury disposal facility shall be based upon permit copies documenting
Town of Brookfield septage processed at the Danbury disposal facility
and a formula used to calculate the City of Danbury's cost to process
septage as agreed to by the Town of Brookfield in Schedule A of the
Interlocal Agreement for Disposal of Septage Waste, dated November 6,
1984.48
§ 182-13. Penalties for offenses.
A. The owner of any organization which pumps or disposes of septage
without obtaining permits as described in this article and by instruction
of the Director of Health is in violation of this article and shall be subject
to a fine of $50 for the first violation. Owners holding annual permits to
pump who violate this article after the first violation shall be subject to
termination of their permit for one year.
B. If a pumper licensed by the Town of Brookfield delivers to the Danbury
disposal facility any discharge of material collected in the Town of
Brookfield prohibited by Section 2.2 of the Interlocal Agreement for
Disposal of Septage Waste,49 then the Town of Brookfield shall hold
harmless and indemnify the City of Danbury from any and all claims,
48.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Town offices.
49.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Town offices.
§ 182-11 BROOKFIELD CODE § 182-13
179:180
damages, losses, expenses or enforcement actions, including reasonable
attorney's fees, which may arise from said discharge.
C. Any septage pumping organization that fails to pay, within 30 days,
invoices for septage disposed of at the Danbury disposal facility shall
have its permit to pump septage in the Town of Brookfield revoked.
§ 182-13 SCENIC ROADS § 182-13
179:181
Chapter 184
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
71.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Fees — See Ch. 127.
Subdivision water and sewer systems — See
Ch. 234.
§ 182-13 BROOKFIELD CODE § 182-13
179:182
ARTICLE I
Legislative Intent
§ 184-1. Legislative intent.
This chapter establishes the procedures for making connections to the
public sewer in the Town of Brookfield sanitary sewer system. It also
establishes specific limits for pollutant discharges which by their nature
or by their interaction with sewerage will be detrimental to the public
health, cause damage to the public sewer or the water pollution control
facility, pollute the waters of the state or otherwise create a public nuisance.
This chapter is intended to inform the public as to the technical and
administrative procedures to be followed in obtaining connection to the
Town of Brookfield sanitary sewer system; prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the sanitary sewer system which will interfere with the
collection and/or treatment system; prevent the introduction of pollutants
into the treatment system which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into the waters of the state or the atmosphere, or otherwise be
incompatible with the system; and improve the opportunity to recycle and
reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system. This chapter shall apply
to the Town of Brookfield and to persons outside the Town of Brookfield
who are users of the public sewer. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of Brookfield shall otherwise
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 184-1 SCENIC ROADS § 184-1
179:183

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
§ 184-2. Water Pollution Control Authority rules and regulations.
[Added 4-23-200250]
A. No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
alter, repair, disturb, use or. discharge to any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Water Pollution Control Authority.
B. No person shall increase the volume of sewage, change the use category
or change the character of pollutants discharged to the public sewer
system without first obtaining a written permit from the Water Pollution
Control Authority.
C. All sewer connections, including the construction of all facilities
necessary to such connection, and all sewer discharges shall comply with
the administrative and technical rules and regulations adopted from time
to time by the Brookfield Water Pollution Control Authority.
50.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 184-2, Definitions.
§ 184-2 SCENIC ROADS § 184-2
179:185

ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers
[Amended 4-23-2002]
§ 184-3. Connection to public sewers; when required.
The Water Pollution Control Authority, in accordance with the requirements
of § 7-256 of the General Statutes, may order the owner of any building
to which a sewerage system is available to connect such building to the
sewerage system.
§ 184-4. Unlawful to construct sewage disposal facilities if public
sewers available.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or repair any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, leaching fields, cesspool, package treatment plant,
community sewerage system or any other facility intended for the disposal
of sewage if public sewers and public sewer treatment capacity are
available. The Water Pollution Control Authority, however, shall have the
sole authority to determine whether public sewers and public sewer
treatment capacity are available with respect to any property for which a
sewer connection or sewer discharge is proposed.
§ 184-3 SCENIC ROADS § 184-4
179:187

ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 184-5. (Reserved)51
§ 184-6. (Reserved)52
§ 184-7. (Reserved)53
§ 184-8. Revocation of permits. [Amended 4-23-2002]
Sewer connection permits and sewer discharge permits issued by the Water
Pollution Control Authority may be revoked by the Authority following
notice to the property owner and a right to be heard for any of the following
reasons: nonpayment of applicable fees, assessments or charges; failure to
comply with the conditions of the applicable sewer connection or sewer
discharge permit; failure to comply with the technical requirements of the
sewer connection permit or the discharge requirements set forth in the
Authority's rules and regulations; lapse or termination of any applicable
DEP discharge permit issued to the property owner. Upon revocation of any
such sewer connection or sewer discharge permit, the Authority may take
such steps as are necessary to discontinue and terminate sewer service.
§ 184-9. Expenses to be borne by property owner. [Amended
4-23-2002]
All cost and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer or any other facilities shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify and hold the Town of Brookfield and the Authority harmless
from any loss or damage that may be sustained as a result of the installation
by the owner or applicant of the building sewer or such other facilities.
§ 184-10. Separate sewer for each building required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer that provides service for the building which fronts on the public
sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as
one building sewer; but the Town of Brookfield does not and will not assume
any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any
such aforementioned connection.
51.Editor's Note: Former § 184-5, Disturbance of public sewers by unauthorized persons
prohibited, was repealed 4-23-2002.
52.Editor's Note: Former § 184-6, Adoption of additional rules and regulations, was repealed
4-23-2002.
53.Editor's Note: Former § 184-7, Prior notification of new discharges required, was repealed
4-23-2002.
§ 184-5 SCENIC ROADS § 184-11
179:189
§ 184-11. (Reserved)54
§ 184-12. (Reserved)55
§ 184-13. (Reserved)56
§ 184-14. Connection of surface runoff sources to sewer prohibited.
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sewer.
§ 184-15. (Reserved)57
§ 184-16. (Reserved)58
§ 184-17. (Reserved)59
54.Editor's Note: Former § 184-11, Existing sewers, was repealed 4-23-2002.
55.Editor's Note: Former § 184-12, Construction to conform to applicable requirements, was
repealed 4-23-2002.
56.Editor's Note: Former § 184-13, Building sewer to be below basement floor, was repealed
4-23-2002.
57.Editor's Note: Former § 184-15, Excavations to be adequately guarded; disturbed property
to be restored, was repealed 4-23-2002.
58.Editor's Note: Former § 184-16, Construction of building sewers near water supply wells,
was repealed 4-23-2002.
59.Editor's Note: Former § 184-17, Building sewers to be installed by licensed drain layers,
was repealed 4-23-2002.
§ 184-11 BROOKFIELD CODE § 184-17
179:190
ARTICLE V
Discharges
§ 184-18. Discharge of unpolluted waters to sanitary sewers
prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or
cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
§ 184-19. Unpolluted drainage to be discharged to storm sewers.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
and discharged to a watercourse in accordance with all applicable state and
federal laws and regulations.
§ 184-20. (Reserved)60
§ 184-21. (Reserved)61
§ 184-22. (Reserved)62
§ 184-23. (Reserved)63
§ 184-24. (Reserved)64
§ 184-25. (Reserved)65
§ 184-26. (Reserved)66
§ 184-27. (Reserved)67
§ 184-28. (Reserved)68
60.Editor's Note: Former § 184-20, Contribution of certain substance to WPCF prohibited,
was repealed 4-23-2002.
61.Editor's Note: Former § 184-21, Discharges of certain substances to be limited, was
repealed 4-23-2002.
62.Editor's Note: Former § 184-22, Permit required for certain discharges, was repealed
4-23-2002.
63.Editor's Note: Former § 184-23, Deleterious discharges, was repealed 4-23-2002.
64.Editor's Note: Former § 184-24, Additional requirements, was repealed 4-23-2002.
65.Editor's Note: Former § 184-25, Grease, oil and gross particle separators, was repealed
4-23-2002.
66.Editor's Note: Former § 184-26, Pretreatment facilities to be maintained at owner's
expense, was repealed 4-23-2002.
67.Editor's Note: Former § 184-27, Installation of sampling structure, was repealed
4-23-2002.
68.Editor's Note: Former § 184-28, Monitoring of discharges by industries required, was
repealed 4-23-2002.
§ 184-18 SCENIC ROADS § 184-29
179:191
§ 184-29. (Reserved)69
§ 184-30. (Reserved)70
§ 184-31. (Reserved)71
§ 184-32. (Reserved)72
§ 184-33. (Reserved)73
69.Editor's Note: Former § 184-29, Standards for analysis, was repealed 4-23-2002.
70.Editor's Note: Former § 184-30, Special agreements not precluded, was repealed
4-23-2002.
71.Editor's Note: Former § 184-31, Federal standard to supersede less stringent limitations,
was repealed 4-23-2002.
72.Editor's Note: Former § 184-32, Dilution of discharge as substitute for treatment
prohibited, was repealed 4-23-2002.
73.Editor's Note: Former § 184-33, Accidental discharges, was repealed 4-23-2002.
§ 184-29 BROOKFIELD CODE § 184-33
179:192
ARTICLE VI
Protection from Damage
§ 184-34. Tampering with equipment prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage collection system
or water pollution control facility.
§ 184-34 SCENIC ROADS § 184-34
179:193

ARTICLE VII
Inspection and Maintenance
§ 184-35. Right of entry.
The Water Pollution Control Authority and any duly authorized employees of
the Town of Brookfield bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 184-36. Inspectors to observe safety rules; Town to indemnify
user.
While performing the necessary work in private properties referred to in
§ 184-35 above, the Water Pollution Control Authority or duly authorized
employees of the Town of Brookfield shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the user. The user shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the Town of Brookfield employees and the Town of
Brookfield shall indemnify the user against loss or damage to its property by
Town of Brookfield employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the user and growing
out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused
by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe conditions as required
in § 184-27.
§ 184-37. Entry and work to be in accordance with elements.
The Water Pollution Control Authority and other duly authorized employees
of the Town of Brookfield bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Town of
Brookfield holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to
the private property.
§ 184-35 SCENIC ROADS § 184-37
179:195

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 184-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-23-2002]
Any person who violates, and any property owner whose property gives
rise to a violation of, any provision of the rules and regulations adopted by
the Water Pollution Control Authority pertaining to the use of or discharge
to the Town sewerage system, or any provision of the ordinances of the
Town of Brookfield pertaining to the sewerage system, or any requirement
of any connection or discharge permit issued by the Water Pollution Control
Authority shall be subject to a fine of $100 for each day that such violation
continues; and shall also be subject to any and all civil remedies, including
temporary and permanent injunction, which may be available to the Town
or the Authority to abate such violation. In addition and without limitation,
the Authority shall have all powers set forth in § 184-8 concerning the
revocation of applicable permits and the termination of sewer service.
§ 184-39. Notice of violations. [Amended 4-23-2002]
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 184-38, in the event of any such
violation as described therein, the Water Pollution Control Authority may
serve a written notice upon the property owner stating the nature of the
violation and ordering the date by which such violation shall be abated.
Such person, within the period of time specified in such notice, shall
permanently cease such violation. Any person or property owner who shall
continue any violation beyond the time limit specified shall be subject to a
fine of $100 for each day thereafter that such violation continues; and shall
also be subject to all other remedies specified in §§ 184-8 and 184-38 of the
Code of the Town of Brookfield.
§ 184-40. Violators liable for Town expenses. [Amended 4-23-2002]
In addition to the penalties and other remedies provided in §§ 184-8, 184-38
and 184-39 of the Code of the Town of Brookfield, any person or property
owner who violates or whose property gives rise to a violation of any
provision of the rules and regulations adopted by the Water Pollution
Control Authority pertaining to the use of or discharge to the Town
sewerage system, or any provision of the ordinances of the Town of
Brookfield pertaining to the sewerage system, or any requirement of any
connection or discharge permit issued by the Water Pollution Control
Authority shall be liable to the Water Pollution Control Authority for all costs
and expenses, including attorney's fees, and for all other loss, damage or
injury sustained by the Town or the Authority by reason of such violation.74
74.Editor's Note: Former § 184-41, Violation of statute, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 4-23-2002.
§ 184-38 SCENIC ROADS § 184-40
179:197
Chapter 186
SEX OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented businesses — See Ch. 78.
§ 186-1. Purpose.
The Town of Brookfield (the "Town") has a compelling interest in protecting
children from the threat of sexual abuse from child sex offenders. Therefore,
it is hereby resolved that, to preserve and promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the children of the Town, it is in the common interest to
enact reasonable regulations restricting child sex offenders from entering
Child Safety Zones.
§ 186-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the terms, phrases, words and derivations shall
have the meanings set forth thereafter. When not inconsistent with the
context, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory. Terms not defined below shall have the meanings
set forth in Section 54-250 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
CHILD SAFETY ZONE — Any park, school, playground, recreation center,
bathing beach, swimming pool or wading pool, gymnasium, sports field,
or sports facility, which is: 1) under the jurisdiction of any department,
agency, or authority of the Town, including, but not limited to, the Board of
Education of the Town of Brookfield; or 2) leased by the town to another
person or entity for the purpose of operating a park, school, playground,
recreation center, bathing beach, swimming pool or wading pool,
gymnasium, sports field, or sports facility. "Child Safety Zone" also includes
any and all buildings, land, parking areas or other improvements located on
the same parcel on which each of the aforementioned facilities is located,
but does not include any public street, and also does not include any public
sidewalk which is located on the outside boundary of a Child Safety Zone.
CHILD SEX OFFENDER —
A person who:
Has been convicted or found not guilty by reason of mental disease
or defect of any one or more of the following offenses as defined in
Section 54-250 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended:
(a) A "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor";
(b) A "nonviolent sexual offense";
(1)
A.
§ 184-40 BROOKFIELD CODE § 186-2
179:198
§ 186-3. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to be present in a Child Safety
Zone.
§ 186-4. Exclusions.
This chapter shall not apply:
A. To any person whose name has been removed from the Connecticut
Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Registry ("Sex Offender
Registry") or from the registry of any other state or in the federal or
military system by act of a court or by expiration of the term such person
is required to remain on such registry.
B. To any child sex offender who enters into a facility in a Child Safety Zone
for the sole purpose of voting in any municipal, state or federal election
or referendum, provided that the person leaves the facility immediately
after voting.
C. To any child sex offender who enters a Child Safety Zone for the purpose
of dropping off or picking up his or her own child, provided that the child
sex offender leaves the zone immediately after dropping off or picking
up his or her child.
D. To any child sex offender who enters a Child Safety Zone for the purpose
of meeting with an adult, such as a teacher, administrator or nurse, to
discuss his or her own child's medical or educational issues, provided
that the child sex offender leaves the zone immediately after completing
the meeting or discussion.
E. To the extent that the conduct prohibited by this chapter is in conflict
with any sentence or order of probation or parole imposed upon a sex
offender.
§ 186-5. Notice.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee shall make reasonable efforts to
provide prompt, actual written notice of the enactment of this chapter
(c) A "sexually violent offense"; or
Any felony that the court finds was committed for a "sexual
purpose"; and
(d)
Is required to register with the Commissioner of Public Safety
pursuant to Section 54-251, 54-252, 54-253 or 54-254 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended; or
(2)
A person who has been convicted or found not guilty by reason of
mental disease or defect in any other state, in a federal or military
court or in any foreign jurisdiction, of any crime, the essential elements
of which are substantially the same as any of the crimes specified in
Subdivisions (2), (5) and (11) of Section 54-250 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, and which requires registration as a
sexual offender in such other state or in the federal or military system,
and who resides in this state on and after October 1, 1998.
B.
§ 186-2 SCENIC ROADS § 186-5
179:199
(which notice shall contain a copy of the chapter) to all persons who
are listed on the Sex Offender Registry as of the effective date of this
chapter, as well as those persons who are added to the Sex Offender
Registry thereafter, which persons' addresses (as shown on the Sex
Offender Registry) are within the Town. Such notice requirement may
be satisfied by the mailing of such notice by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person as
listed on the Sex Offender Registry or as otherwise known to the Chief
of Police. The failure of any person to receive such actual written notice
shall not be a defense to a violation of this chapter.
B. Each Child Safety Zone shall be identified by a sign conspicuously posted
at the primary entrance to the zone and any building within the zone.
§ 186-6. Enforcement, penalties for offenses.
A. If a police officer reasonably believes that a child sex offender is in a
Child Safety Zone in violation of this chapter, the officer shall require
the suspected child sex offender to provide his/her name, address, and
telephone number. If it is established that the individual is a child sex
offender, then the officer may issue a citation to the offender and shall
require the offender to leave the Child Safety Zone.
B. Any person in violation of this chapter shall be fined in the amount of
$250 for each violation.
§ 186-7. Severability.
Any provision of this chapter held to be unconstitutional or superseded
by state law or regulation shall not serve to invalidate the remaining
unaffected provisions hereof. No provision of this chapter shall serve to
validate any activity otherwise prohibited by state or local law or lawfully
enacted zoning regulations.
Chapter 188
SOLID WASTE
§ 186-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 186-7
179:200
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 2-4-1991]
§ 188-1. Purpose.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
recyclables from garbage or rubbish within the Town of Brookfield to
comply with Public Act No. 90-220 and its subsequent regulations
mandating recycling, thereby providing for the health and welfare of the
citizens of the Town of Brookfield.
§ 188-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein
defined:
BOARD — The Board of Selectmen of Brookfield. When used in reference to
a voting body, it shall be taken to include the phrase "or a majority thereof."
CARDBOARD — Corrugated boxes and similar material and kraft paper
materials which are unwaxed and have a minimum of contamination by food
or other material.
COLLECTOR — Any person who holds himself out to collect refuse or
solid waste or recyclables from residential, commercial, industrial or other
establishments.
COMMINGLED — Mixed recyclables that are collected together.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the State of
Connecticut.
DRY-CELL BATTERY — Any device used in generating electric current
through a chemical reaction, including but not limited to nickel-cadmium
batteries, carbon batteries and alkaline batteries.
GLASS FOOD CONTAINER — A glass bottle or jar of any size or shape used
to package food products suitable for human or animal consumption with a
minimum of contamination by food or other materials.
HDPE CONTAINER — Any high-density polyethylene bottle or container of
any size or shape used to store food, household laundry detergent or other
nonhazardous or toxic materials.
HOUSATONIC RECYCLING REGION — A region consisting of those
municipalities which are participating in a regional recycling program
under the management of HRRA.
HRRA — The Housatonic Resources Recovery Authority.
IPC — An intermediate processing center which receives, processes and
markets recyclables.
LEAVES — The foliage of trees.
§ 188-1 SCENIC ROADS § 188-2
179:201
MANDATED RECYCLABLES — Those recyclables which have been
designated by the DEP and any additional items which have been
designated by the Board that are mandated to be recycled within the
municipality. Those items currently designated as mandated are as follows:
METAL FOOD CONTAINER — An aluminum, bimetal, tin-plated, steel or
other metallic can, plate or tray of any size used to package food for human
or animal consumption which has a minimum of contamination by food or
other materials.
MUNICIPAL AGENT — The person designated by the Board to administer
the notice and enforcement provisions of this article.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Brookfield.
NEWSPAPER — Used or discarded newsprint, including newspaper
advertisements, supplements, comics and newsprint-type enclosures, which
has a minimum of contamination by food or other material.
OFFICE PAPER — Any used or discarded high-grade white paper and manila
paper, including but not limited to paper used for file folders, tab cards,
writing, typing, printing, computer printing and photocopying, which is
suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination. For
purposes of this article, the foregoing definition of "office paper" shall
exclude any such paper generated from residential sources.
OPTIONAL RECYCLABLES — Those recyclables which may be designated
to be recycled by the DEP or Board to be recycled through a voluntary
or mandatory pilot recycling program. Those items currently designated as
"optional recyclables" are as follows:
A. Cardboard.
B. Glass food containers.
C. Leaves.
D. Metal food containers.
E. Newspapers.
F. Office paper.
G. Scrap metal.
H. Storage batteries.
I. Waste oil.
A. Dry-cell batteries.
B. Grass clippings.
C. HDPE plastic containers.
D. PET plastic containers.
§ 188-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 188-2
179:202
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity or organization, either public or private, of any kind.
RECYCLABLES — Any item designated by the DEP or Board which can be
separated or diverted as defined below under the definition of "recycle."
RECYCLE — To separate or divert an item or items from the solid waste
stream for the purposes of processing it, causing it to be processed or
storing it for later processing into a material product, including the
production of compost, in order to provide for disposition of the item or
items in a manner, other than incineration or landfilling, which will best
protect the environment. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the use of
waste oil as a fuel in an oil burner or scrap tires as fuel in an incinerator.
RECYCLING CENTER — The municipality's recycling dropoff facility, area
or areas as designated by the Board.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — Any container designated by the Board for use
as a residential curbside recycling container for the storage and curbside
collection of recyclables.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Real estate containing one or more dwelling
units, but shall not include hospitals, motels, hotels or nursing homes.
SCRAP METAL — Used or discarded items which consist predominantly
of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, lead, chromium, iron, nickel or alloys
thereof, including but not limited to white goods and metal food containers.
SCRAP TIRES — Discarded rubber or synthetic rubber tires used by or
manufactured for vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks,
buses, tractors and trailers.
STORAGE BATTERY — Lead-acid batteries or other batteries used in motor
vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles,
tractors and like applications.
WASTE OIL — Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines.
§ 188-3. Separation and collection.
A. Separation. On or after January 1, 1991, each person who generates
solid waste from residential property within the municipality shall
separate from other solid waste those items designated as mandatory
recyclables and every other person who generates solid waste shall
make provision for the separation from other solid waste of those items
designated as mandatory recyclables.
B. Glass and metal food and beverage containers. Glass and metal food
containers shall be treated as a single product for collection and shall
be placed commingled in the residential recycling container rinsed and
E. Magazines and other nonmagazine printed matter.
F. Scrap tires.
G. Yard waste.
§ 188-2 SCENIC ROADS § 188-3
179:203
free of contamination, but without requiring the removal of lids, labels,
etc. Glass shall be unbroken and shall not include dishes, crockery, spark
plugs or plate or window glass.
C. Newspaper. Newspaper shall be tightly packed in kraft grocery bags or
tied in bundles not exceeding 50 pounds in weight.
D. Corrugated cardboard. Corrugated cardboard must be flattened and tied
into bundles not exceeding 50 pounds in weight and set next to or under
the residential recycling container.
E. Only recyclables generated from residential sources shall be placed for
residential curbside collection. The collector shall deliver all recyclables
from residential properties to such locations as shall be designated by
the Board from time to time.
F. Multifamily collection.
(1) With respect to multifamily residential dwellings which are common
interest communities or condominiums, it shall be the responsibility
of the unit owners' association to educate the unit owners with
reference to the need and techniques for recycling and to either
establish a residential curbside collection program for recyclables
for each dwelling unit or to provide, at a convenient location,
containers of sufficient size and quantity to receive recyclable
materials to be collected from the dwelling units they are intended
to serve and to clearly label said containers for their intended use.
(2) With respect to multifamily residential dwellings which are rental
units, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to
educate the tenants with reference to the need and techniques for
recycling and to either establish a residential curbside collection
program for recyclables for each dwelling unit or to provide, at
a convenient location, containers of sufficient size and quantity to
receive recyclable materials to be collected from the dwelling units
they are intended to serve and to clearly label said containers for
their intended use.
G. Other residential collection. All residents who are not served by a
collector shall arrange to dispose of their recyclables at such dropoff
locations as the Board shall prescribe. Occupants of premises within
the municipality must apply for a permit to be able to dispose of these
recyclables, and said permit shall be displayed in a manner as the
Director shall prescribe. Said permit may be revoked or suspended for
the reasons and in a manner prescribed for commercial licenses, and
appeals therefrom may be taken in the same manner.
H. Other residential recyclables. All other mandatory recyclables
generated from residential properties and not collected by residential
curbside collection shall be delivered to such dropoff locations as the
Board shall prescribe.
I. Recyclables from outside the municipality. The dumping or disposal of
recyclables at any location as designated by the Board from a source
outside of the municipality shall be prohibited. Any dumping or disposal
of recyclables from a source outside the municipality at a regionally
designated IPC in the name of the municipality shall be prohibited.
§ 188-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 188-3
179:204
J. Collection, handling and disposal. Collection, handling and disposal of
recyclables within or on behalf of the municipality shall only be carried
out by persons licensed by the municipality and in accordance with all
state and federal laws, including but not limited to the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut as it shall be amended from time to
time, and in a manner as not to pose a hazard or potential hazard to
public travel, health or safety or to become a nuisance of any sort.
Any recyclables collected or transported within the municipality shall be
carried in tightly covered vehicles or in tightly covered containers in or
on such vehicles. Any recyclables which are collected or transported in
open-top vehicles shall be suitably covered so as to prevent scattering
litter upon the streets. All vehicles used for collection or transportation
of recyclables within the municipality shall be subject to approval of the
municipal agent.
K. Antiscavenging.
(1) Upon placement of recyclables out for residential curbside collection
or upon delivery to any disposal location designated by the Board
pursuant to provisions of this article, it shall be a violation of this
article for any person other than the collector or the authorized
agents of the municipality acting in the course of their employment
to collect or pick up any such recyclables or cause the same to be
collected or picked up.
(2) In addition to the fine imposed for violation of this provision, the
violator may be required to make restitution to the municipality for
the value of any materials illegally removed. Each and every such
collection or pickup in violation of this section from one or more
locations shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
L. Nothing in this article shall abridge the right of any person to give or sell
their recyclables, including deposit beverage containers, to any person,
provided that such materials have not been set out for residential
curbside collection or delivered to any disposal location designated by
the Board.
§ 188-4. Authority and powers.
A. The municipality shall, through the Board, designate where the
following items generated from residential properties shall be taken
for processing or sale: cardboard, glass food and beverage containers,
leaves, metal food and beverage containers, newspapers, storage
batteries and waste oil. The processing or sale of such items at any other
area shall be prohibited.
B. The Board shall not give less than 60 days' notice of its intent to
designate where these items from the residential properties shall be
taken for processing or sale to all licensed collectors hauling solid waste
or such items of the municipality. At the conclusion of such period, the
Board shall cause notice of such designation to appear in a newspaper
of general circulation in the municipality and shall conduct a public
hearing thereon.
C. The Board is hereby authorized to enact, from time to time, by
resolution, such regulations as it shall deem in the public interest
§ 188-3 SCENIC ROADS § 188-4
179:205
regarding separation, collection, recovery, removal and storage of
recyclables and enforcement of this article.
D. The First Selectman shall, and is granted the authority to, designate a
person to be contacted by the DEP with inquiries regarding the recycling
program.
E. The First Selectman shall, and is granted the authority to, designate a
municipal agent to receive complaints and notices of violations of the
separation requirements set forth in the Public Act No. 90-220 and this
article.
F. The Board is hereby authorized to add or delete, from time to time,
items on the list of mandatory and optional recyclables so long as
such action is not in conflict with the Connecticut General Statutes,
Department of Environmental Protection regulations or the Municipal
Recycling Service Agreement signed with the HRRA.
G. The Board is hereby authorized to adopt a fee schedule and a method(s)
for ensuring payment of the fees and for depositing any and all
recyclables at any municipal or municipally designated disposal facility
for recyclables.
H. The Board, through resolution, shall adopt rules and regulations, from
time to time, governing any practice or procedures contained in this
article, provided that such rules and regulations are not inconsistent
with the Connecticut General Statutes, Department of Environmental
Protection regulations or any provisions of this article.
I. The Board is hereby authorized to employ or make contracts with
persons, including the HRRA, for the separation, collection,
transportation, processing and/or marketing of recyclables, as provided
for in Section 2(d) of Public Act No. 90-220, Section 22a-220(g) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, to carry out the provisions of this article.
§ 188-5. Licensing.
A. Any person collecting refuse or recyclables generated by residential,
business, commercial or other establishments in the municipality shall
annually register his business and each collection vehicle separately
with the municipality on forms prescribed by the municipal agent upon
or before the first day of July. Upon registration and payment of an
annual permit fee to be established by regulation by the Board, each
such collector shall be permitted to collect or continue the collection of
solid waste within the municipality.
B. Each such collector shall disclose the name of any other municipality
in which such collector hauls such solid waste. The door of any private
vehicle used to haul solid waste shall be clearly marked with the
business name and address of the collector. Registrations shall not be
transferable from vehicle to vehicle.
C. The Board is authorized and empowered prior to issuing a license to
require evidence of liability insurance in effect covering all vehicles to
be used to collect recyclables.
D. The Board may further require that any collector tipping recyclables
at the IPC or other recycling facility designated by the Board shall
§ 188-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 188-5
179:206
maintain a performance bond or other means to ensure payment with
the vendor of that IPC or the municipality.
E. When any licensee shall sell or transfer all or part of his route to another
refuse collector presently licensed to collect refuse in the municipality,
he shall forthwith give written notice to the Director at least seven days
before the date of the sale or transfer stating the name of the buyer or
transferee and the date of such sale or transfer.
F. No collector shall be required to provide collection services to any
customer who is more than 30 days delinquent in the payment of the
collector's fee. If the delinquent customer shall discharge his
delinquency, the collector shall immediately resume collection services
to the customer.
G. No license shall be issued to any refuse or recyclables collector whose
permit has been previously revoked twice. For purposes of this section,
the ownership of collectors shall be determined pursuant to the
standards set forth in this article in Subsection I of this section.
H. During the period of any licensee suspension, no license shall be issued:
(1) To any person who is or was an owner of or partner in any
unincorporated business whose license, during the period of said
ownership, was revoked under the terms of this article or who owns
or owned 50% or more of the stock of any corporation whose license,
during the period of said ownership, was revoked under the terms
of this article.
(2) To any partnership or unincorporated business in which any owner
or partner is or was the owner of or partner in any unincorporated
business whose license, during the period of said ownership, was
revoked under the terms of this article or in which any partner or
owner owns or owned 50% or more of the stock of any corporation
whose license, during the period of said ownership, was revoked
under the terms of this article.
(3) To any corporation in which the owner of 50% or more of the stock
is or was the owner of 50% or more of the stock of any corporation
whose license, during the period of said ownership, was revoked
under the terms of this article or is or was the owner of or partner
in any unincorporated business whose license, during the period of
said ownership, was revoked under the terms of this article.
I. For purposes of the computation of the ownership of stock in any
corporation or the interest in any partnership or unincorporated
business under the provisions of this section, the interest of any person
shall include:
(1) Any beneficial interest held for the benefit of said person or for the
benefit of any person of the type set forth in Subsection I(2) or (3)
hereof, whether in trust or otherwise.
(2) Any interest owned by the spouse of said person, if said person and
said spouse shall file a joint tax return for purposes of federal and
state tax.
(3) Any interest owned by any person whom said person shall claim as
a dependent upon his or her federal or state tax return.
§ 188-5 SCENIC ROADS § 188-5
179:207
J. The Board may require of any licensee or license applicant such
information, under oath, as it deems necessary for purposes of
enforcement of this section. To the extent permitted by law, such
information shall not be disclosed, except to the extent necessary for
the determination by the appropriate municipal authorities as to the
compliance with the provisions of this article.
K. The license of any collector shall, after notice and hearing pursuant
to this article, be revoked for the violations listed in this article. In
addition, said collector shall be prohibited from dumping or depositing
any recyclables at the regional IPC or any other recycling facility
designated by the Board for a period of 30 days from the date of such
license revocation.
L. It shall be a violation of this article for any collector to deposit
recyclables at any location other than a recycling facility which has been
designated by the Board.
M. It shall be a violation of this article if any collector makes any
misrepresentations or omits any pertinent information from his permit
application or fails or refuses to provide the Board with any information
required by the Board or by the DEP.
N. It shall be a violation of this article for any collector to deposit at
the recycling facility any material other than mandated recyclables
and optional recyclables which have been designated by the Board for
recycling.
§ 188-6. Investigations; hearings.
A. Prior to any action pursuant to the provisions of this article, the Board
shall hold a hearing, pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(1) The First Selectman may cause the municipal agent to investigate
any allegation of a violation of the provisions of this article, and if he
or she shall determine that there is probable cause to believe that
such a violation has occurred, he or she shall refer said matter to the
Board for a hearing.
(2) The First Selectman, who, pursuant to the provisions of this section,
shall preside at said hearing, shall give notice of the time and place
of said hearing and a general statement of the alleged violation,
including the date thereof, to the licensee by mailing such notice
by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than seven days
prior to the date of said hearing, to the address of the licensee or
person.
(3) The First Selectman shall preside at said hearing unless said First
Selectman shall be disqualified, in which event a Selectman shall
preside.
(4) The licensee or person and the municipality shall have the right to
be represented by counsel.
(5) All witnesses at said hearing shall be placed under oath, and each
party shall have an opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses to be
presented by the other.
(6) Unless both the municipality and the licensee or person shall waive
the keeping of a transcript, a verbatim record of said proceeding
§ 188-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 188-6
179:208
shall be kept. Either party shall have the right to order a copy of said
record upon the payment, in advance, of the cost thereof.
(7) The rules of evidence shall not apply to any proceeding hereunder,
and, subject to the provisions of this section, the presiding
Selectman shall be permitted to accept such evidence as he or she
shall deem appropriate.
(8) In the event that any member of the Board shall be a witness in
the proceedings, he or she shall be disqualified to act upon said
complaint.
(9) In the event that any member of the Board shall be disqualified to
act upon said complaint for any reason, the remaining members of
the Board shall select an elector of the municipality to replace said
disqualified member at said hearing.
B. In the event that the Board shall determine, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the licensee or person is in violation of any section of
this article, the First Selectman shall take such action as may be proper
under the provisions of this article. Notice of such action shall be given
to the licensee or person, in writing, by mailing thereof by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to said licensee or person not less than five
days prior to the effective date of said action.
§ 188-7. Compliance required.
On or after January 1, 1991, any collector who has reason to believe that
a person from whom he collects solid waste has discarded recyclable items
with such solid waste in violation of the provisions of this article or of
Section 22a-241b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, shall
promptly notify the municipal agent of the alleged violation. Upon the
request of the municipal agent, a collector shall provide warning notices
by the placement of tags to any person suspected by the collector or the
municipality of violating the separation requirements of state law or this
article. Each collector shall also be required to assist the municipality in
the identification of any person responsible for creating loads containing
significant quantities of items subject to the separation requirements of
state law or this article which are delivered to a resources recovery facility
or solid waste facility by the collector and detected by the owner or operator
of such a facility pursuant to Subsection (b) of Section 22a-220 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 188-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Any collector found to have violated the separation and collection
requirements of this article shall be subject to a fine in the amount of
$100 for each offense. In addition, the municipality reserves the right to
suspend or revoke the license of any such collector. Any collector whose
license is either suspended or revoked as provided for herein shall be
entitled to a hearing in accordance with the provisions of the Code of
Ordinances.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to
the following penalties:
§ 188-6 SCENIC ROADS § 188-8
179:209
(1) Upon a first or second offense, the violator shall receive a written
warning.
(2) Upon a third offense occurring within a period of one year from the
date of the original offense, the violator shall be subject to a fine in
the amount of $50.
(3) Upon any subsequent offense occurring within the period of one year
from the date of the original offense, the violator shall be subject to
a fine of $100 and, in addition, shall be refused recycling collection.
C. In accordance with the authority provided in Section 2 of Public Act
No. 90-249, any commercial establishment that is found to have violated
the provisions of Subsection (c) of Section 22a-241b of the Connecticut
General Statutes shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $500 for each
such violation.
D. Any person who violates any other provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine of $100 for each such offense.
§ 188-8 BROOKFIELD CODE § 188-8
179:210
ARTICLE II
Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 6-21-1993]
§ 188-9. Purpose.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory disposal of
acceptable waste generated within the Town of Brookfield in compliance
with Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-220, thereby providing for
long-term disposal of wastes and providing for the health and welfare of the
citizens of the Town.
§ 188-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — All household garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse and
combustible agricultural, commercial, governmental and light industrial
waste now normally or which may be hereinafter collected and disposed of
by or on behalf of the Town, but excluding:
Explosives and ordinance materials, pathological wastes, chemicals,
radioactive materials, oil, sludges, highly inflammable substances,
cesspool or other human wastes, human and animal remains, motor
vehicles or parts thereof, farm or other large machinery, nonburnable
construction materials and demolition debris (but home remodeling
waste and debris in reasonable quantities are not considered
demolition debris) and hazardous refuse of any type or kind
[including those addressed by regulations adopted by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the
Resource Conservation Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, or other
federal statutes or adopted by the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), such as, but not limited to, cleaning
fluids, crankcase oils, cutting oils, hazardous paints, acids, caustics,
poisons, drugs, radioactive materials, fine powdery earth used to filter
cleaning fluid and refuse of similar nature].
A.
Any item of waste exceeding six feet in any one of its dimensions or
being in whole or in part of a solid mass, the solid mass portion of which
has dimensions such that a sphere with a diameter of eight inches could
be contained within such solid mass portion.
B.
All large household appliances, commonly referred to as "white goods,"
including, without limitation, refrigerators, stoves, washing machines,
drying machines and the like.
C.
All items designated from time to time by the Commissioner of the
Connecticut DEP pursuant to the provisions of Section 22a-241b(a) of
D.
§ 188-9 SCENIC ROADS § 188-10
179:211
AUTHORITY or HRRA — The Housatonic Resources Recovery Authority.
COLLECTOR — Any person who holds himself out for hire to collect solid
waste from residential, business, commercial or other establishments
within the Town.
DESIGNATED TRANSFER STATION — The transfer station to which the
HRRA participating municipalities shall cause their acceptable waste to be
delivered for transfer by WES to one or more resource recovery facilities.
MANAGER — Such official as may be designated by the Board of Selectmen.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity or organization of any kind.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Real estate containing one or more dwelling
units, but shall not include hospitals, motels or hotels.
SOLID WASTE — Solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material that
is unwanted or discarded, including but not limited to demolition debris,
material burned or processed at a resource recovery facility or incinerator,
material processed at a recycling facility and sludges or other residue from
a water pollution abatement facility, water supply treatment plant or air
pollution control authority.
WES — Wheelabrator Environmental Systems, Inc.
TOWN — The Town of Brookfield.
§ 188-11. Designation of transfer station site.
The Town of Brookfield does hereby designate the Housatonic Resources
Recovery Authority System as described in the Municipal Waste Disposal
Agreement between the HRRA and the Town of Brookfield dated November
21, 1991, including the transfer stations and facilities of that system as
may be designated by the HRRA from time to time, as the location where
acceptable solid waste originating in the Town of Brookfield shall be taken
for disposal.
§ 188-12. Collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste.
the General Statutes as suitable for recycling and such other items as
are actually recycled.
All other items of waste which the Town and the Authority reasonably
believe would be likely to pose a threat to health or safety or the
acceptance and disposal of which may cause damage to the transfer
station or be in violation of any judicial decision, order or action of
any federal, state or local government or any agency thereof or any
other regulatory authority or applicable law or regulations. The Town
recognizes that some substances which are not, as of the date of this
article, considered harmful or of a toxic nature or dangerous may be
determined as such by DEP and/or EPA subsequent to the date hereof
as hazardous, toxic, dangerous or harmful, and at the time of such
determination such substances shall cease to be acceptable waste.
E.
§ 188-10 BROOKFIELD CODE § 188-12
179:212
A. Collectors registered with and holding valid permits issued by the Town
pursuant to the provisions hereof shall deliver all acceptable waste
collected within the Town to the designated transfer station. Only the
Town and collectors so registered and permitted shall be designated
or otherwise authorized to collect and deliver acceptable waste to the
designated transfer station. In case of the temporary unavailability of
the designated transfer station, acceptable waste may be delivered to
another transfer station or site by the HRRA or WES.
B. No solid waste collected from outside the corporate limits of the Town
shall be disposed of at the designated transfer station under a permit
issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
C. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Town
of Brookfield unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded so as to
prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon
any street, alley or other public place.
D. Collectors shall deliver acceptable waste only during the designated
transfer station's scheduled delivery days and hours or during other
published days and hours as agreed upon in advance by HRRA and WES.
E. Collectors shall use only vehicles that are in a safe and clean condition,
in good repair, with the capability of mechanically dumping their
contents, and which have a capacity of three tons or more.
F. Collectors shall use only those highway routes designated by the Town
or by WES with the approval of the HRRA and the Town for the delivery
of acceptable waste to the designated transfer station.
G. Collectors shall deliver acceptable waste in a clean, orderly and safe
manner and adhere to all reasonable rules and regulations as made
known to the collector by the Town or HRRA or by WES with the
approval of the HRRA at all times when vehicles and/or personnel of the
collector are at the transfer station.
§ 188-13. Duties and qualifications of collectors.
A. During the annual registration process required pursuant to the
provisions hereof, each collector shall obtain from the Town registration
plates or stickers which shall be conspicuously displayed on the left
front portion of the body of each vehicle or container to be used by the
collector in the collection and transportation of solid waste or in such
other location on said vehicle or container as the Town shall direct. Each
such registration plate or sticker shall remain the property of the Town
of Brookfield, even when affixed to a collector's vehicle or container.
Each such registration plate or sticker shall be returned to the Town
upon the written request of the Manager.
B. During the annual registration process required pursuant to the
provisions hereof, each collector shall sign an affidavit of origin, under
penalty of false statement, stating that all acceptable waste disposed
of at the designated transfer station in the name of the Town or its
residents shall originate from within the corporate limits of the Town.
C. Prior to the sale or transfer of all or part of a collector's solid waste
collection route to any collector not registered with or permitted by the
Town in accordance with the provisions hereof, the collector shall first
§ 188-12 SCENIC ROADS § 188-13
179:213
notify the Manager, in writing, of his or her intent to sell or transfer all
or a part of the route. The nonregistered collector shall, at the same
time, make application for a permit to operate in the Town.
D. Prior to the annual issuance or renewal of its collection permit, each
collector shall report to the Town the number of tons of acceptable
waste collected monthly within Brookfield and deposited at the
designated transfer station. Said report shall be on a form supplied by
the Manager.
E. Each collector shall present a copy of his or her Town permit and
registration forms to WES and HRRA and shall properly display on each
vehicle or container a registration plate or sticker prior to delivering
applicable waste to the designated transfer station.
F. Each collector shall provide insurance covering his or her operation,
which coverage shall name the HRRA, WES and the Town of Brookfield
as additionally insured. Such coverage shall include, but not be limited
to, general liability, automotive liability, excess liability, workers'
compensation and employer's liability in amounts deemed reasonable
and adequate by the Town. Each collector shall provide the HRRA, the
Town and WES with a certificate of insurance identifying the limits of
available insurance coverage and indicating that the issuing company
shall endeavor to afford the HRRA, the Town and WES not less than 30
days' written notice prior to the cancellation of any such policy.
G. Each collector shall provide to the Town of Brookfield and to HRRA and
WES a suitable performance bond, letter of credit or cash security to
insure the performance of its obligations hereunder.
H. Each collector shall accurately identify for HRRA and WES the tonnage
of all acceptable waste collected by such collector within each
municipality and delivered to the designated transfer station.
I. Each collector shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of, or
the cost of removal and disposal if performed by other than the collector,
of rejected waste, including:
(1) Waste other than acceptable waste;
(2) Waste delivered at other than established receiving hours;
(3) Waste delivered in a manner or by means not in conformity with
the requirements hereof or of the SRRA/WES Waste Supply and
Disposal Agreement; or
(4) Waste which WES is unable to accept as a result of a force majeure
event.
J. Each collector shall be responsible for paying all reasonable costs
incurred in connection with handling, transporting and disposing of
any nonacceptable waste requiring special handling delivered to the
designated transfer station or facility by said collector.
K. Each collector delivering acceptable waste to the designated transfer
station shall be responsible for the payment of all service fees charged
in connection with such delivery of acceptable waste as set forth in the
rules and regulations approved and adopted by HRRA and administered
by WES. All service fees shall be paid within 30 days from the date of
invoicing by the Town or WES. Service fees which are not paid within
30 days shall be subject to interest from the date of invoice at the prime
§ 188-13 BROOKFIELD CODE § 188-13
179:214
rate of interest as established on a periodic basis by the Connecticut
National Bank (now Shawmut Bank).
L. WES may reject any or all deliveries from any collector who has not
made payment of any amounts due within 60 days from the invoice date.
M. The Board of Selectmen may, by resolution, waive or modify any of the
provisions of this section whenever said Board finds that said waiver or
modification is necessary to conform the provisions of this article to the
rules and regulations adopted by HRRA and WES.
§ 188-14. Licensing, hearing and enforcement.
The licensing, hearing and enforcement provisions of the Brookfield
Recycling Ordinance adopted on February 4, 1991,75 are hereby made
a part of and are incorporated by reference in this article, except that
the definitions contained in this article shall apply to said incorporated
provisions.
75.Editor's Note: See Art. I, Recycling, of this chapter.
§ 188-13 SCENIC ROADS § 188-14
179:215
Chapter 192
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commissions — See Ch.
51.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Driveways — See Ch. 119.
Sewers — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
§ 188-14 BROOKFIELD CODE § 188-14
179:216
ARTICLE I
Construction
[Adopted by Town Meeting 5-30-1973]
§ 192-1. Submission to Planning Commission required.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to lay out and construct any
proposed new street, highway or public way in the Town of Brookfield shall
first submit a plan of the proposed facility to the Planning Commission for
its approval as prescribed by Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of the
State of Connecticut. This plan shall conform to the standards set forth
in the Subdivision Regulations76 of the Town of Brookfield as to form and
content.
§ 192-2. Submission of road plans to Town Engineer or Board of
Selectmen.
A. After submission of the subdivision layout to the Planning Commission,
the developer shall submit to the Town Engineer or Board of Selectmen
a detailed plan showing the proposed road profiles and the layout of any
proposed utilities, including storm drainage, water lines, sanitary sewers
and any other underground utilities.
B. Road plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Connecticut. Each sheet of said plan shall bear
his seal and title box.
C. Road plans shall be drawn on plan-profile sheets, the size of which shall
not exceed 24 inches in width and 36 inches in length.
D. The road plans and/or profile shall include the following data:
(1) The scale. Generally the vertical scale should be one inch equals four
feet and the horizontal scale should be one inch equals 40 feet.
(2) The existing center-line profile based upon actual field
measurements taken at intervals no greater than every 50 feet along
the proposed roadway.
(3) The center-line profile of the proposed roadway, showing gradients
and vertical curve data.
(4) The plan portion of the road plan submission shall show the proposed
road layout as submitted to the Planning Commission with lot lines
as they intersect the street lines, as well as lot numbers.
(5) The road plan shall also show roadway stationing as it relates to the
accompanying profile with each proposed road starting at zero plus
zero, 10 plus zero, 20 plus zero, etc.
(6) The plan shall show in detail the location and size of all drainage
lines, including existing pipes which drain onto or off of the proposed
land to be serviced by the roadway. The plan shall also indicate
location of all proposed catch basins, manholes, headwalls and
streams or open ditches which relate to the proposed construction.
The plan shall show invert elevations at inlet points, catch basins,
manholes and discharge points. Proposed storm drainage shall be
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Subdivision of Land.
§ 192-1 SCENIC ROADS § 192-2
179:217
shown on the profile with stations and offsets to the proposed center
line of the roadway.
(7) Proposed underground utilities other than storm drains shall be
shown in the same general detail, including location, size, etc.
(8) Each proposed roadway shall be shown on a separate sheet.
(9) Where streams discharge onto the parcel to be subdivided, the
petitioner shall submit maps and calculations of area of watershed
and estimated flow information. This date shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer and shall be used in the design of all
conduits which relate to the watercourse in question. Design criteria
shall be as follows:
(a) Major culverts: 50 years.
(b) Smaller culverts: 25 years.
(c) Enclosed systems: 10 years.
§ 192-3. Design criteria.
Roads shall meet the following design criteria:
A. Classification:
(1) Arterial.
(2) Industrial.
(3) Collector.
(4) Residential.
B. Right-of-way. The minimum width of the right-of-way shall be as follows:
(1) Arterial: 60 feet.
(2) Industrial: 60 feet.
(3) Collector: 50 feet.
(4) Residential: 50 feet.
C. Pavement width. The minimum width of the paved surface as measured
from face of curb to face of curb shall be as follows:
(1) Arterial: 40 feet.
(2) Industrial: 36 feet.
(3) Collector: 30 feet.
(4) Residential: 26 feet.
D. Curve radius.
(1) The minimum radius of all horizontal curves at the center line shall
be as follows:
(a) Arterial: 750 feet.
(b) Industrial: 250 feet.
(c) Collector: 250 feet.
(d) Residential: 250 feet.
(2) Curve radii shall be based on design speeds as set forth by the State
of Connecticut Geometric Design Standards.
E. Gradient. The minimum gradient of all streets shall be 0.5%. The
maximum gradient shall be as follows:
(1) Arterial: 6%.
(2) Industrial: 6%.
(3) Collector: 8%.
(4) Residential: 10%.
F. Cul-de-sac.
§ 192-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-3
179:218
(1) Where culs-de-sac are permitted, the following minimum radius for
right-of-way shall be used:
(a) Arterial: not permitted.
(b) Industrial: 60 feet.
(c) Collector: not permitted.
(d) Residential: 50 feet.
(2) Dead-end streets with culs-de-sac shall not exceed 1,500 feet in
length unless an alternate means of access for emergency vehicles
is provided which is acceptable to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission may waive the requirement for an alternate
means of access for emergency vehicles if the Commission finds that
such alternate means of access is not required for public safety.
[Amended 12-19-1977]
(3) Where an alternate means of access for emergency vehicles is
required, the Planning Commission shall determine the standards
of construction and impose such conditions as it finds necessary
to insure adequate and proper maintenance of said emergency
accessway. The Planning Commission may require that the applicant
post a permanent maintenance bond in an amount satisfactory to
said Commission to insure adequate and proper maintenance of said
accessway. [Added 12-19-1977]
(4) The diameter for the paved portion of the cul-de-sac shall be as
follows:
(a) Arterial: not permitted.
(b) Industrial: 100 feet.
(c) Collector: not permitted.
(d) Residential: 80 feet.
G. Curbs. Bituminous concrete curbing shall be installed on all roads where
finished center-line grades exceed 5% and are required by the Board of
Selectmen or Town Engineer.
H. Vertical curves. Every change in grade shall be effected with a vertical
curve of sufficient length to ensure adequate stopping sight distance and
to provide for smooth transition. Using the basic formula of L equals KA
where A equals the algebraic sum of grades, the following K factor shall
be used:
(1) Arterial: K equals 55.
(2) Industrial: K equals 40.
(3) Collector: K equals 40.
(4) Residential: K equals 25.
I. Cross slope of pavement. The transverse slope of all paved sections shall
be at the minimum rate of 3/8 inch per foot as shown on the standard
detail.
J. Driveway entrances. Where driveways have been constructed prior to
the petition for acceptance, said driveways shall conform to the standard
detail as to configuration. Driveway entrances shall be paved with
bituminous concrete into the right-of-way line. In all cases the gutter line
of the roadway shall be maintained in a true line and grade.
K. Street signs. Street signs shall be required at all intersections. To ensure
uniformity the developer shall pay to the municipality a sum to be
§ 192-3 SCENIC ROADS § 192-3
179:219
determined by the Board of Selectmen per required sign and his
responsibility under this provision shall end upon payment of this sum.
L. Mailboxes. When homes within a subdivision are occupied prior to
acceptance of the street, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to
erect mailboxes where said street intersects the nearest public highway.
The mailboxes shall be erected as directed by the Postmaster, and they
shall be maintained in good order until the street is accepted as a
public highway. The developer shall remove same when postal service is
supplied to the individual home.
§ 192-4. Construction specifications.
A. Subgrade.
(1) The subgrade shall be prepared in an approved manner by
excavating or filling, as required. Filling shall be done in layers
not to exceed eight inches in depth, using suitable material; each
layer shall be consolidated by rolling before the next layer is placed.
Stones in earth fill shall be well distributed, and no stone over four
inches in diameter shall be left within 12 inches of the finished
subgrade.
(2) Wherever soft clay, spongy or other types of unsuitable soil which
will not compact under rolling are encountered, such soil shall be
removed and replaced with gravel or other material, approved by the
Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer, which shall be compacted as
specified above.
(3) Wherever soil is of such nature that it retains an excessive amount of
moisture, or where conditions do not afford ready natural drainage,
subdrains and underdrains shall be provided, in accordance with the
requirements of the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer.
(4) Preparation of the subgrade shall be performed upon completion of
required excavation, filling and the installation of utilities. Where
roadways are in cut, they shall be brought to subgrade elevation for
a width of at least two feet wider than the finished pavement width,
i.e., one foot on either side.
(5) Where roadways are in embankment, the fill shall extend to
subgrade level, and for a width not less than six feet outside the
curbline, i.e., three feet on each side. The total subgrade area shall
then be thoroughly consolidated by repeated rollings, using a selfpropelled
roller weighing not less than 10 tons. Areas beyond the
above-described lines shall be excavated or filled to the full width of
the right-of-way in a method satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen
or Town Engineer.
(6) Rough tolerance. Rough subgrade shall be formed and compacted
in accordance with Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer approved
drawings, and work shall be performed within tolerance of two
inches of indicated levels.
B. Surface drainage. A complete system of surface drainage, to the
satisfaction of the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer, including catch
basins and manholes, shall be installed, prior to the final construction
of the subgrade. Catch basins and manholes shall comply with
§ 192-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-4
179:220
requirements of the standard detail. All pipe shall comply with the
Highway Specifications of the State of Connecticut.
C. Gravel course.
(1) Upon the prepared subgrade, finished parallel to and 15 inches
below the surface of the finished grade of the street, shall be spread
a layer of the approved run-of-bank gravel to a depth which, when
thoroughly compacted, shall be 10 inches. The largest stone size
permitted in this course is four inches. This course shall be rolled
with a ten-ton roller until thoroughly compacted.
(2) Inequalities in the surface shall be corrected and rolling continued
as may be necessary for a satisfactory result and to the satisfaction
of the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer.
D. Pavement.
(1) Upon the prepared gravel course as herein described (10 inches in
thickness), a two-inch layer of screened gravel shall be placed so as
to effect a fine grade. This gravel shall be carefully spread by means
of a motorized grader and shall be wetted and thoroughly rolled with
a ten-ton roller. When completed, the surface shall be smooth and
true to line and grade parallel to the finished surface.
(2) The final wearing surface shall consist of bituminous concrete placed
in two courses. The compacted thickness of each course shall be 1 1/
2 inches. Material for this course shall conform to the requirements
of Article M.04.01, Class 1 of the Standard Specifications for Roads,
Bridges, and Incidental Construction of the Connecticut State
Highway Department, Form 810, 1969 Revision. This article is
entitled "Bituminous Concrete Mixture." The method of placing shall
conform to all the requirements of Article 4.02.03 of the abovedescribed
Standard Specifications.
E. Inspection. Before commencing any of the herein described roadway
items, it shall be the responsibility of the builder to notify the Board
of Selectmen or Town Engineer at least 48 hours in advance of his
intent to proceed. No construction shall take place without the specific
authorization, after inspection, of the Board of Selectmen or Town
Engineer.
F. Scheduling of roadway construction. In all cases the gravel course shall
weather at least one full winter (November 1 through March 31) in
place. The second of the two wearing surfaces shall be placed only at the
discretion of the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer and only after
all patches and repairs have been made to the first course as directed.
In general, this final surface shall not be installed until a substantial
number of homes have been constructed in the subdivision. In no case
shall bituminous concrete be placed after November 1 unless specific
written approval is granted by the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer.
§ 192-5. Storm drainage design criteria.
Storm drainage shall be provided and designed in accordance with the
following standards:
A. Pipe. Sufficient pipe shall be installed within the subdivision to carry
existing watercourses and to drain the proposed roads and/or easements
§ 192-4 SCENIC ROADS § 192-5
179:221
which may reasonably be expected to be constructed at some future
date on adjoining property which normally drains across the area of the
proposed subdivision or which, in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen
or Town Engineer, would be the most practical course for such drainage.
Cross-lot drainage shall be piped to at least 30 feet behind proposed
buildings and/or leaching systems. If in his judgment there will be no
substantial danger from soil erosion or danger to the public health
and safety, the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer may permit the
discharge of rivers and large streams in their natural courses and may
permit the discharge of stormwater and established watercourses in
open ditches across proposed lots of one acre or larger. All pipe shall
be of such diameter, not less than 15 inches, as will, in the judgment of
the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer, be sufficient to properly carry
stormwater expected to enter the pipe from the proposed subdivision
and from other properties when developed which normally drain across
the area of the proposed subdivision. The minimum slope for fifteeninch
pipe shall be 0.75%. The intent of this subsection is that pipes
shall be installed the full length in all proposed roads to permit the
connection of house storm drains and cellar drains where required by
ground conditions.
B. Manholes. Manholes shall be provided at each change in direction or
grade of the pipe and shall not be spaced more than 300 feet apart.
Manholes shall be constructed as shown on the standard detail. Only
precast concrete units or solid concrete blocks shall be used.
C. Catch basins.
(1) Catch basins shall be provided in order that surface water will not
travel without interception more than as shown in the following
schedule of grades and distances:
(a) Fifty-hundredths percent to 1.00%: 250 linear feet.
(b) One and zero hundredths percent to 5.00%: 300 linear feet.
(c) Five and zero hundredths percent to 10.00%: 250 linear feet.
(2) Each basin shall be connected to a manhole or adjacent catch basin
where no manhole exists. Construction shall conform to the standard
detail. Only precast concrete units or solid concrete blocks shall be
used.
D. Underdrains.
(1) In all roadway areas where a high water table is found to exist, either
before commencing or during actual construction of the roadways,
the developer shall be required to install underdrains as directed
by the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer or his duly authorized
agent, to protect the stability of the roadway.
(2) If required, perforated concrete or metal pipe shall be used,
backfilled with washed gravel or crushed rock 1/2 inch nominal
size to a depth of at least 12 inches over the top of the pipe. The
remainder of the trench shall be backfilled with bankrun gravel as
approved by the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer.
(3) Sufficient pitch shall be provided to allow this underground water to
run freely to a point of discharge. The size and type of conduit shall
be as directed by the Engineer.
§ 192-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-5
179:222
E. Discharge. The discharge of all stormwater shall be into suitable
drainage structures or watercourses. Where the discharge shall be onto
private property within or adjoining the proposed subdivision, property
easements and discharge rights for the Board of Selectmen or Town
Engineer shall be secured by the applicant before approval of the final
map and acceptance of the drainage plan is requested by the developer.
§ 192-6. Storm drainage construction specifications.
The storm drainage system shall be constructed in accordance with the
following standards and procedures:
A. Pipe. All pipe used shall be of reinforced concrete meeting State
Highway Department specifications. In some instances the Engineer may
recommend use of corrugated metal pipe where he feels such pipe will
provide a more satisfactory drainage system.
B. Joints. The joints of all pipe shall be shoved tight. Pipe laid in sandy,
silty or other soil where, in the judgment of the Engineer, there is the
possibility of silting shall have joints thoroughly sealed with 1:3 portland
cement mortar or other approved method.
C. Catch basins and manholes. Catch basins and manholes shall be
constructed in accordance with the approved plans. Manholes shall be
constructed of solid concrete radial manhole blocks eight inches thick or
of precast concrete units. Catch basins shall be constructed of eight-inch
solid concrete blocks or precast concrete units.
D. Headwall, culverts and bridges. Headwalls, culverts and bridges shall
be constructed where required, in accordance with good engineering
practice and as specified by the Engineer.
E. Open ditches. Open ditches may be permitted at the discretion of the
Engineer. The size of the waterway shall be of sufficient size to convey all
water expected to be discharged and shall be suitably stabilized against
erosion. The side banks shall be moderately sloped, not less than three
horizontal to one vertical and then seeded or otherwise stabilized paved
bottom sections and rip-rap slopes shall be provided when directed by
the Engineer to prevent scour and erosion.
§ 192-7. Guard railings.
When, in the opinion of the Engineer, a guard railing is necessary to protect
the traveling public, the subdivider shall install same as directed. The
guard railing shall consist of the two-cable variety and shall conform to the
applicable State Highway Department specification.
§ 192-8. Utilities.
Prior to the placement of the base course, all utilities are to be installed
together with service extensions to each lot within the property line. The
intent of this section is to provide all required underground services to each
lot prior to the placement of base course and finished pavement.
§ 192-9. Submission of as-built drawings.
§ 192-5 SCENIC ROADS § 192-9
179:223
A. Prior to consideration for acceptance as a public highway, the developer
shall submit as-built drawings, at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet
horizontal, one inch equals four feet vertical. Such drawings shall be
on plan-profile sheets and shall not exceed 36 inches by 24 inches in
size. Drawings shall be prepared by a person registered as a professional
engineer in the State of Connecticut and shall show the following detail:
(1) Concrete monuments delineating the right-of-way.
(2) Edge of paved surfaces as they relate to right-of-way.
(3) A center-line profile of the paved surface.
(4) The location and size of all sanitary and storm sewer conduits and
structures, including invert elevation of same.
(5) Bearings and distances on all right-of-way boundaries tied into the
monuments described above.
(6) Drainage easements as shown on the approved subdivision plan.
B. The original of this plan shall be delivered to the Board of Selectmen or
Town Engineer, and said plan shall be reviewed as to conformance with
these standards before submission to the legislative body for approval.
§ 192-10. Street acceptance procedure.
A. All petitions for the acceptance of new streets as public highways shall
be presented to the Board of Selectmen during the month of May. During
the month of June, final inspection shall be made, and a written report
shall be delivered to the petitioner setting forth any repairs which will
be necessary to bring the roadway up to standard.
B. All repairs and/or modifications shall be effected by the developer prior
to September 15, at which time a final determination shall be made as
to the adequacy of the construction. If the Board of Selectmen or Town
Engineer determines that the construction meets the standards as set
forth herein, and provided that all other statutes and requirements are
met, the petition shall be presented to the legislative body for action.
§ 192-11. Naming of streets. [Added 6-26-1975]
The Board of Selectmen shall approve the names of new streets and have
the authority to change the name of any street where confusion exists in
similar sounding names or street-numbering sequences. For the purpose of
this section, streets shall be defined to include any road, highway, avenue,
lane or right-of-way providing access to more than one structure and/or
living unit.
§ 192-9 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-11
179:224
ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-6-1979]
§ 192-12. Permit required; exceptions.
No person other than the Director of the Department of Public Works, Town
employees or agents under his supervision shall dig up or remove any turf,
dirt or stone from, nor make any excavation or opening in or upon, any
portion of any street, highway, park, sidewalk, crosswalk, public place or
right-of-way, except after the acquisition of a permit and subject to the
provisions of this section.
§ 192-13. Permit application and issuance procedure.
In all cases where the work of making any such excavation, opening,
removal, change or repair shall be performed by any person other than
the Director of the Department of Public Works, Town employees or agents
as aforesaid, the person desiring such excavation or change shall make
application to the Director for issuance of a permit, and said Director is
hereby authorized to issue such a permit; provided, however, he shall have
first obtained from such person the location of the intended excavation
or opening, the size thereof, the purpose therefor and the person, firm or
corporation doing the actual excavation work and the name of the person,
firm or corporation for whom the work is being done, together with a signed
acknowledgment by the applicant to save the Town free and harmless from
any injury or claim arising out of the work to be done, and further that he
has knowledge of the existence of this article and intends to comply fully
with its provisions as well as all other ordinances and laws relating to the
work to be done.
§ 192-14. Permit fee; bond required.
The fee for such permit shall be $10 payable to the Town of Brookfield. The
Director of the Department of Public Works may require from the applicant
a bond with suitable surety in an amount of at least double the cost as
estimated by him of making such excavation or opening, which bond shall
be conditioned on the performance of said work in a workmanlike manner
and on the restoration by the applicant of said street, highway, sidewalk,
crosswalk, public place or right-of-way as nearly as can be to its former
condition, and further conditioned that, in the event any part of said work
shall not be done in workmanlike manner or the excavated area shall not be
restored within a reasonable time to the same conditions as it was in prior
to the making of such excavation or opening, the Director of the Department
of Public Works shall, at the expense of the applicant, be authorized to
complete said work and to collect the cost of said work out of said bond
given as aforesaid or out of any cash deposit given in lieu thereof.
§ 192-12 SCENIC ROADS § 192-15
179:225
§ 192-15. Notification of Police Department.
All persons, after obtaining the permit from the Director of the Department
of Public Works to make an excavation or opening in the streets, highways
or public areas of the Town for any purpose, and before beginning work
for said openings or excavations, shall forward a copy of the issued permit
to the Chief of the Police Department, together with a time schedule and
location of the work to be done, and upon completion of such work, the
Chief shall again be notified.
§ 192-16. Lights, barricades and detour signs.
A. Whenever any excavation shall be made in any of the streets or
sidewalks of the Town, the person in charge thereof shall cause large,
well-lighted lanterns or battery-operated amber flashing warning lights
attached to a barricade to be kept burning around the same during the
night, placed in such a manner that a reasonable person would take
notice of such warning device and be prevented from entering such
excavation.
B. Whenever road construction, repair or excavation causes vehicular
traffic to be detoured from that road, the person in charge thereof
shall cause to be placed large signs and arrows indicating such detour
and direction for vehicular traffic to follow. Such barricades shall be
erected in a manner that will completely block vehicular traffic from
such construction, repair or excavation, except that the person in charge
may allow a single lane to be opened for the entrance and exit of
construction equipment or other vehicles allowed to pass. Such
barricades shall be equipped with lighting devices as previously defined
in this section. Signs shall be placed at least 150 feet before such detour,
warning of same.
§ 192-17. Traffic control. [Amended 11-4-2002]
Whenever the normal flow of vehicular traffic is interrupted by construction,
excavation or repair of any nature upon rights-of-way of the Town of
Brookfield, the Chief of Police may order the person responsible for such
work to secure police traffic control to insure the safe and orderly flow
of the traffic and the prompt enforcement of traffic laws. The cost of
such police supervision shall be assumed by the person conducting such
construction, excavation or repair. In exercising his decision of whether or
not to require police personnel for such activities, the Chief of Police shall
take into account the width and condition of the proposed road site and
surrounding roads, the posted speed limit, the time of day during which
activities will occur in relationship to peak volume of traffic, the normal
volume of traffic expected upon said road during said hours, the line of
sight, known traffic patterns including excessive speeds or accidents known
for the site or the vicinity, the scope and length of time of the proposed
construction, excavation or repair activity, and such other factors as may
impact safety at the site as may be appropriate. The Chief of Police or, in
his absence, the next in command, shall render his decision on whether or
not police supervision is required within 72 hours (excluding any portion
§ 192-15 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-17
179:226
of a day the Town Hall is closed for weekend or holidays) of any written
application for a decision on such issue. Absent the rendering of a decision
within such time frame, it shall be assumed that the Chief of Police or his
next in command has determined that police supervision is not necessary
for the site. Any decision of the Chief of Police or his next in command
under this section may be appealed to the Police Commission by any party
aggrieved thereby by filing a written objection within five days of such
decision with the Police Commission in care of the Brookfield Town Clerk.
The Police Commission shall hear such appeal in an open forum and render
a decision thereon within 60 days of filing any appeal. Upon the failure of
the Police Commission to render a decision within 60 days, any appeal by
an applicant shall be deemed to be sustained. Anyone receiving an adverse
decision from the Police Commission may pursue such other appeals or
legal remedies to the Superior Court as may exist under the law.
§ 192-18. Emergency conditions.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility,
without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder,
shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the
dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety
of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility
shall apply for a permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day
during which the office of the Director of Public Works is open for business
and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an
excavation permit hereunder.
§ 192-19. Provisions not applicable to overhead services.
This article shall not be construed to apply to the installation or
replacement by a public utility of overhead services, provided that the limit
of the work area does not disturb nor damage the paved or surfaced streets
or public rights-of-way. Notwithstanding this exemption, no person or firm
so engaged shall park his or its equipment or vehicles in such a manner as
to impede traffic, create any hazardous conditions nor otherwise violate any
provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 192-20. Word usage.
A. For the purposes of this article, night shall be construed to run from 1/2
hour before sunset to 1/2 hour after sunrise.
B. For the purpose of this article, the term person shall mean and include
the singular and plural and shall mean and include any firm, partnership,
corporation or associations.
§ 192-17 SCENIC ROADS § 192-21
179:227
§ 192-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not
more than $100 for each offense. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
§ 192-21 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-21
179:228
ARTICLE III
Road Acceptance Standards
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 7-5-1988]
§ 192-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a method for acceptance as Town
roads of certain existing roads.
§ 192-23. Criteria for eligibility for acceptance.
To be eligible for consideration for acceptance as a Town road, any existing
road must satisfy all of the following requirements:
A. Said road must have been in existence and in use as a public road
continuously for a period of time commencing not later than May 30,
1973, and continuing without interruption from said date to the present.
B. Said road must provide a means of access to at least five existing homes.
C. Said road must be paved to a minimum width of 20 feet for its entire
length.
D. If said road is a dead end, it must have a paved cul-de-sac at the dead
end of sufficient size to permit a full-sized Town Highway Department
truck with plow attached to reverse direction without backing up.
E. The right-of-way for said road must be a minimum of 30 feet in width for
the entire length of the road.
F. Road drainage must be provided which is found to be adequate by the
Board of Selectmen upon the recommendation of the Director of Public
Works.
G. Said road must be in such condition that no work other than normal
maintenance and repairs is required.
§ 192-24. Procedure for acceptance.
A. A petition signed by not less than 75% of the owners of the existing
homes abutting said road and also signed by the owner of the road rightof-
way must be filed with the Board of Selectmen. Said petition must be
accompanied by a Class A-2 survey prepared by a surveyor licensed by
the State of Connecticut. Said survey must be on a scale of one inch
equals 40 feet and must show the location of the road right-of-way and
the paved portion thereof, all drainage structures and required drainage
easements and the names of the owners of the road right-of-way and
all adjacent property owners. Said survey shall also show all proposed
repairs and modifications to the road and the drainage structures. Said
petition must also be accompanied by a fully executed warranty deed
conveying title of the roadway to the Town, a certificate of title from
a Connecticut attorney disclosing no encumbrances and all necessary
drainage easements. All of said documents shall be in a form acceptable
to the Town Attorney and shall be held in escrow by him until final action
on the petition by the Board of Selectmen. If the road is accepted as a
Town road, the documents shall be recorded with the Town Clerk. If the
road is not accepted, the documents shall be returned to the petitioners.
§ 192-22 SCENIC ROADS § 192-24
179:229
B. The Board of Selectmen shall refer the petition to the Planning
Commission for the report required by the provisions of Section 8-24
of the Connecticut General Statutes and shall also refer the petition to
the Director of Public Works for investigation and a report concerning
the physical condition of the road, the adequacy of the existing drainage
system and any repairs or modifications which are required or advisable.
C. If, after receipt of the reports of the Planning Commission and Director
of Public Works, the Board of Selectmen determine that repairs or
modifications are required to the existing drainage system and/or road,
then the Board shall table further action on the petition until said repairs
or modifications are completed. If said repairs or modifications are not
completed in a satisfactory manner within one year from the date that
the petition was tabled, then the Board of Selectmen shall deny the
petition.
D. After the Board of Selectmen have been notified by the petitioners that
all required repairs and modifications have been completed, the Board
shall refer the petition to the Planning Commission and to the Director
of Public Works for a supplemental report concerning the adequacy of
said repairs and modifications.
E. After all required repairs and modifications have been completed and
after all required reports have been received from the Planning
Commission and the Director of Public Works, the Board of Selectmen
shall hold a public hearing to hear testimony from the public concerning
the advisability of accepting the road as a Town road.
F. After the public hearing has been held, the Board of Selectmen shall take
final action on the petition. The Board of Selectmen may accept the road
as a Town road, refuse to accept the road as a Town road or schedule a
Special Town Meeting for the purpose of accepting or refusing to accept
the road as a Town road.
§ 192-25. Final action by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall not accept any road as a Town road under the
provisions of this article unless the Board affirmatively finds, based on the
evidence presented to it, that all of the following requirements have been
met:
A. The road has been in existence and continually in use by the public from
May 30, 1973, or earlier to the present.
B. The road provides the sole means of access to at least five existing
homes.
C. The road right-of-way is a minimum of 30 feet in width for its entire
length, and the road is paved to a minimum of 20 feet in width for its
entire length.
D. The road drainage is adequate and does not require any modification or
repair.
E. If the road is a dead-end road, that the requirements of § 192-23D of this
article have been satisfied.
F. The road is in safe condition for travel by the public.
G. The Planning Commission has recommended that the road be accepted
as a Town road.
§ 192-24 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-25
179:230
H. Acceptance of the road as a Town road is in the best interest of the
Town and its residents and in the best interest of the public safety and
convenience.
I. The road does not require any repairs or modifications.
§ 192-26. Acceptance of Special Town Meeting.
No road shall be accepted as a Town road by a Special Town Meeting,
pursuant to the provisions of this article, unless the Board of Selectmen
have found that all of the requirements contained in § 192-25 hereof have
been satisfied except the requirement set forth in § 192-25G.
§ 192-25 SCENIC ROADS § 192-26
179:231

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal and Maintenance
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-2-2016 77]
§ 192-27. Definitions.
The following words shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be
construed and understood as follows:
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street, usually lying on either side thereof,
between the curb and the adjacent property line, intended for the use and
passage of pedestrians.
STREET — Includes avenues, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, bridges and
the approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares in the Town, and
shall also mean all that part thereof from property line to property line of
the premises abutting thereon.
§ 192-28. Removal of snow by abutting owners.
Any snow or sleet upon any sidewalk in the Town, or any ice upon such
sidewalks, shall be cleared or caused to be cleared by the owner of the land,
building or premises adjoining or fronting upon such sidewalk or connected
therewith.
§ 192-29. Time limit for removal of snow and ice.
The clearance of snow, sleet or ice, as provided for in § 192-28, shall be
completed within 24 hours following the cessation of the fall of snow, sleet
or rain.
§ 192-30. Unremovable portion to be made safe.
If snow, sleet or ice cannot be wholly cleared, as provided in § 192-28, the
owner shall clear so much thereof as is reasonably possible and provide
a passageway for the safe passage of pedestrians, and sprinkle sufficient
sand, salt or other proper substance in such quantity over the passageway
and keep the same in a safe condition for public travel at all times.
§ 192-31. Clearing of sidewalks by Town; collection of costs.
A. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, if any owner or
occupant fails to comply with the provisions of §§ 192-28, 192-29 and
192-30, the Public Works Department and its employees may clear snow
and ice from such sidewalks. The expense of such clearing shall be a
lien upon the premises adjoining and abutting on such sidewalks, and
the Board of Selectmen may cause a certificate of lien therefor to be
recorded in the Town Clerk's office.
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IV, Snow and Ice Removal,
adopted 2-4-2008 by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 192-27 SCENIC ROADS § 192-31
179:233
B. The expenses of clearing snow and ice by the Public Works Department
as provided in Subsection A of this section and the cost of the lien
therefor may be entered in the next succeeding rate bill for taxes against
the owner of the premises with the tax assessed upon such premises, and
if the expense and the cost of the lien is paid with such taxes, the lien
shall be released; and if not so paid, the lien may be foreclosed in the
manner hereinbefore provided.
§ 192-32. Penalty for failure to clear sidewalks.
Any person who violates or refuses or neglects to comply with the provisions
of §§ 192-28 through 192-30 shall be issued a citation by the Brookfield
Police Department and fined $100 for each violation, and each day of failure
to comply with such provisions shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 192-33. Maintenance of sidewalks by abutting owners required.
Any person owning or occupying any lands in the Town abutting or fronting
a sidewalk shall keep such sidewalk, at all times, in safe condition and
repair for the use of the public and free from obstruction and defects.
§ 192-34. Repair of sidewalks by Town; collection of costs.
A. If any sidewalk obstruction or defect exists, the Board of Selectmen shall
notify the owner, agent or occupant of the abutting premises to remove
such obstruction or defect and, if the same is not corrected within 30
days after such notice, the Town may perform the same.
B. The expense of such removal or correction by the Town shall be a
lien upon such abutting property in favor of the Town, which may be
continued if a certificate of lien is filed with the Town Clerk, and the
same may be collected by the Town by any proper form of legal or
equitable action, including foreclosure, in the same manner as for the
collection of real estate taxes.
§ 192-35. Removal of snow, ice and other materials from private
property.
A. This section shall be construed to include, but is not limited to, any
private owner or lawful possessor of property who demands, orders,
directs, instructs, requests or allows any agent(s), employees(s), or
independent contractor(s) to remove snow, ice, or debris from private
property in such a manner that they are found to have violated
Subsection B of this section.
B. No person shall, by any manner or method, place or cause to be placed
any snow, ice, or debris from any privately owned property onto or
into any street, road, public way or sidewalk of the Town. [Formerly
§ 192-27.]
§ 192-36. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this article or refuses to or neglects to comply with
the same shall be issued a citation by the Brookfield Police Department and
§ 192-31 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-36
179:234
fined the sum of $100 for each offense. In case of a continuing violation,
each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
[Formerly § 192-28.]
§ 192-37. Liability for snow and ice on public sidewalks.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of § 7-163a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, notwithstanding the provision of § 13a-149 or any other
general statute or special act, the Town of Brookfield shall not be liable
for any personal injury or property damage caused by the presence
of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the Town of Brookfield is
the owner of and exercises control over land abutting such sidewalk,
provided the Town shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to
such sidewalks.
B. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of
ice and snow on such sidewalk abutting his property as the municipality
had prior to the effective date of this article and shall be liable for any
personal injury or property damage where a breach of said duty is the
proximate cause of said injury.
C. No action to recover damages for personal injury or property damage
caused by the presence of ice and snow on a public sidewalk against a
person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the
injury or damage is first sustained.
§ 192-36 SCENIC ROADS § 192-37
179:235

ARTICLE V
Assessment of Benefits for Sidewalk Improvements
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-2-2016]
§ 192-38. Assessments authorized.
At any time after the Town of Brookfield, by Town Meeting, zoning authority
approval, or by the Board of Selectmen, resolves to or approves the layout
or construction of sidewalks, curbs, other improvements and associated
amenities (hereinafter "improvements") in the Town Center District as
shown on the Town of Brookfield Zoning Map, the Board of Selectmen may
levy benefit assessments upon the lands and buildings in the municipality
which, in its judgment, are especially benefited by the improvements, and
upon the owners of such land and buildings, according to such resolution as
the Board of Selectmen may adopt, subject to any right of appeal allowed
by law and subject to any exemptions mandated by law.
§ 192-39. Determination of cost of improvements.
The Board of Selectmen shall ascertain the cost of the improvements and,
in ascertaining the cost, shall take into account all costs of construction,
including, but not limited to, the cost of construction, land acquisition, cost
connected with financing the project, all engineering and legal expenses
related to the project and any other costs or expenses needed to complete
the improvements.
§ 192-40. Criteria for determination of assessment.
Upon determining the amount to be collected pursuant to the assessment,
which amount may be a fraction of, but shall not exceed 50% of, the cost of
the improvements as determined in § 192-39, the Board of Selectmen shall
assess the benefits upon the properties the Board of Selectmen determines
are benefited by the improvements in proportion to the square footage/area
of the improvements fronting or bounding the properties to be assessed.
The Board of Selectmen may make reasonable allowances whenever, for any
reason, the particular situation of any property requires an allowance (e.g.,
a corner lot).
§ 192-41. Use of Tax Assessor maps for measurements.
For the purposes of any measurements required under these ordinances,
the maps of the Tax Assessor of the Town of Brookfield shall be deemed
applicable and accurate unless shown to be otherwise by a Class A-2 survey
certified by a registered Connecticut land surveyor.
§ 192-42. Authority of Board of Selectmen to provide for
installment payments.
The Board of Selectmen may, by resolution, provide for an installment
method of payment of any assessment levied hereunder, including the
§ 192-38 SCENIC ROADS § 192-42
179:237
number and duration of payments and the interest rate to be charged.
The interest rate shall not exceed the rate of interest the municipality is
obligated to pay to finance the project or the prime rate of interest plus 1%
if the project is not financed.
§ 192-43. Benefit assessment enactment procedure.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall fix in the Assessment of Benefits
Resolution the due date of assessments made and the manner in which
the assessment shall be paid, whether in full or by installment, pursuant
to § 192-42.
B. No assessment shall be made until after a public hearing has been held
before the Board of Selectmen at which the owners of all property to
be assessed shall have had an opportunity to be heard concerning the
proposed assessment. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such
hearing shall be published at least seven days before the date thereof
in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town, and a notice
signed by the Town Clerk shall be mailed to each owner of record of any
property to be assessed at such owner's address as shown in the latest
completed Grand List. A copy of the proposed Assessment of Benefits
Resolution shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk and available
for inspection by the public at least seven days prior to the date of the
public hearing.
C. When the Board of Selectmen has finally determined the amount of
the assessment to be levied, the final resolution shall state the street
address of the properties to be assessed, the names and addresses of the
affected property owners, and the specific assessment amount assessed
against each individual property. The final resolution of the Board of
Selectmen shall be filed in the offices of the Tax Assessor, Tax Collector
and the Town Clerk, and the Town Clerk shall cause the resolution to be
published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town within
14 days after it is filed with the Town Clerk.
§ 192-44. Delinquent assessments.
A. Any assessment of benefits or any installment thereof not paid within
30 days after the due date shall be delinquent and shall be subject to
interest from such due date at the set interest rate. Such interest and
costs shall be collectible as part of such assessment.
B. Any unpaid assessment and any interest due thereon shall constitute
a lien upon the real estate against which the assessment was levied
from the date of such assessment payment due date. Each such lien
may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by
the General Statutes for continuing, recording and releasing real estate
tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens
and encumbrances except taxes and may be foreclosed in the same
manner as for real estate tax liens. The Tax Collector of the municipality
shall collect such assessments, interest and costs in accordance with
all provisions of the General Statutes for the collection of real estate
taxes, and the Town may recover any such assessment, interest and costs
in a civil action against any person liable therefor or by foreclosure in
§ 192-42 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-44
179:238
accordance with the General Statutes pertaining to the foreclosure of
real estate tax liens.
§ 192-44 SCENIC ROADS § 192-44
179:239
Chapter 197
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessor — See Ch. 7. Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
71.
§ 192-44 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-44
179:240
ARTICLE I
Tax Credit for Elderly Homeowners
[Adopted by Town Meeting 2-17-1977; amended in its entirety by
the Board of Selectmen 2-6-2006]
§ 197-1. Tax credit established; purpose.
The Town of Brookfield hereby enacts a tax credit for elderly homeowners,
pursuant to Section 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes, for
eligible residents of the Town of Brookfield on the terms and conditions
provided herein. This article is enacted for the purpose of assisting elderly
homeowners with a portion of the costs of property taxation.
§ 197-2. Conditions for eligibility.
Any person who owns real property in the Town of Brookfield or is liable for
the payment of taxes thereon, pursuant to Section 12-48 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, and who occupies the property as a residence shall be
entitled to credit on the annual taxes for such real property for the following
fiscal year, provided that all of the following conditions are complied with:
A. Such person is 65 years of age or over by December 31 of the prior year,
or his or her spouse is 65 years of age or over by December 31 of the
prior year and resides with said person, or is 60 years of age or over
and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer qualified for tax credit under this
article at the time of his or her death, or 100% Social Security disabled,
regardless of age. [Amended 5-2-2011]
B. Such person has resided at and paid real estate taxes on a residence
located in Brookfield for a period of five years immediately prior to his
or her application for tax credit.
C. The gross assessment on the property for which the credit is claimed
shall not exceed the median assessment value of a principal residence in
the Town of Brookfield. [Amended 5-2-2011]
D. The property for which the credit is claimed must be the legal domicile
of such person and occupied more than 183 days of each calendar year
by such person. Such person must also be an elector of the Town of
Brookfield.
E. Before the tax credit or any portion thereof under this article shall be
given, such person must first apply for tax relief under any state statute
for which he or she is eligible. If such applicant has not applied for tax
relief under any state statute because he or she is not eligible, he or
she shall so certify by filing, on a form acceptable to the Assessor, an
affidavit testifying to his or her ineligibility.
F. An initial application must be filed with the Assessor not earlier than
February 1 nor later than May 15 for tax credit for the next fiscal year.
Subsequent applications to continue to receive said tax credit must be
filed annually with the Assessor between February 1 and May 15 of each
year.
G. Such person shall not have received qualifying income during the
calendar year preceding the fiscal year for which tax relief is claimed in
excess of 140% of the "qualifying income" amounts set forth in C.G.S.
§ 197-1 SCENIC ROADS § 197-2
179:241
§ 12-170aa(b) and adjusted annually by the Secretary of the Office of
Policy and Management as provided for in C.G.S. § 12-170aa(b)(2). For
purposes hereof, "qualifying income" shall be defined to include adjusted
gross income (as defined by the federal income tax) plus tax-exempt
interest plus Social Security benefits not included in adjusted gross
income. No tax credit shall be given if income exceeds the dollar
amounts referenced above.
H. No tax credits shall be given under this article to any persons who have
delinquent taxes owed to the Town of Brookfield.
§ 197-3. Limitations on property for which credit is applicable.
The tax credit for real property as provided herein shall apply to only the
residence itself, the lot on which the residence is located, but not more than
two acres, and the improvements thereon.
§ 197-4. Determination of amount of credit.
A. The Assessor shall determine whether each applying taxpayer is entitled
to tax credit under this article and shall compute the amount of tax
credit to which each qualified taxpayer is entitled and cause a certificate
of tax credit to be issued in such form as to permit the Tax Collector
to reduce the amount of tax levied against the taxpayer or issue a tax
credit and make proper record thereof. The tax credit shall be applied
proportionately to the tax payments.
B. The amount of the tax credit available to a qualifying taxpayer shall be
equal to 1/3 of the following: the applicable median assessment value
of a principal residence in the Town of Brookfield multiplied by the
applicable mill rate for said fiscal year.
C. The tax relief herein provided, together with all tax relief benefits
obtained from the State of Connecticut pursuant to state law, shall not
result in a reduction of the taxpayer's total real estate tax by more than
75% of the amount which would be laid against the taxpayer were no
tax relief of any kind provided. In the event that all tax relief benefits
obtained from the State of Connecticut, together with the benefit
provided for by this article, result in a reduction of the taxpayer's total
real estate tax by more than 75%, then the tax relief provided for by this
article shall be reduced by the amount necessary to prevent all tax relief
from exceeding said 75% in the aggregate.
D. If the taxpayer has qualified and received tax relief under the provisions
of this article and subsequently becomes disqualified for any reason, he
shall notify the Tax Assessor on or before April 1 of the year in which he
becomes disqualified and he shall be denied tax relief under this article
for such fiscal year and until he has again applied and qualified for relief
under this article.78
78.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, grandfathering certain taxpayers who qualified for
the tax credit for the 7-1-2005 tax year, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-2-2011.
§ 197-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 197-5
179:242
§ 197-5. Disposition of credit upon death of eligible person or sale
of property.
A. If any person entitled to the tax credit pursuant to this article dies prior
to June 15, unless his or her spouse is otherwise qualified, no tax credit
shall be given for the next fiscal year. If such person dies after June
15, the tax credit for which such person applied prior to his death shall
be granted, but no additional tax credit shall be allowed for his or her
interest in the property for any fiscal years thereafter.
B. If any person entitled to the tax credit pursuant to this article sells the
property on which the tax credit is granted, no additional tax credit shall
be allowed for his or her interest in the property for any fiscal years
commencing after the date of the sale of the property, and provided
further that the purchaser of such property shall pay the Town a
prorated share of the tax credit as provided by Section 12-81a of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 197-6. Property held in multiple ownership.
Only one tax credit shall be allowed for each parcel of land eligible for the
tax credit under this article. In any case where title to such real property is
recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his or her spouse, who is eligible
for tax credit, and any other person or persons, the tax amount shall be
prorated to allow a tax credit equivalent to the fractional share in the
property of such taxpayer or spouse, and if such property is multiple-family
dwelling, such credit shall be prorated to reflect the fractional portion of
such property occupied by the taxpayer, as provided by state statutes, as
they may be amended. Persons not otherwise eligible shall not receive any
tax credit.
§ 197-7. Limitation on total of credits throughout Town. [Amended
5-2-2011]
The total of all tax credits granted under this article shall not exceed for
each fiscal year an amount equal to 1% of the total real estate property
tax assessed in the Town of Brookfield during the fiscal year immediately
preceding the year the tax credit is effective; in such event, the tax credits
given to eligible persons shall be prorated to keep the total amount of Town
tax relief within the statutory limit.
§ 197-5 SCENIC ROADS § 197-7
179:243

ARTICLE II
Relief for the Elderly from Payment of Sewer Assessments
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-4-1981]
§ 197-8. Relief granted; purpose.
The Town of Brookfield hereby enacts this article to provide relief to elderly
homeowners in the payment of sewer assessments, pursuant to the State
of Connecticut Public Act 80-77.79 Said relief may be obtained by eligible
residents of the Town of Brookfield on the terms and conditions provided
herein. This article is enacted for the purpose of assisting elderly
homeowners with payment of the costs of their sewer assessments.
§ 197-9. Application for approval of payment plan.
Any property owner who is eligible for tax relief for elderly taxpayers under
the provisions of Sections 12-129b and 12-170a of the Connecticut General
Statutes may apply to the Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of
Brookfield for approval of a plan of payment of such property owner's sewer
assessment in a manner other than as provided under Section 7-253 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 197-10. Optional methods of payment.
An eligible property owner may arrange for optional methods of payment
of any sewer assessments, subject to the approval of the Water Pollution
Control Authority, including an option to pay only the annual charge as
provided in said Section 7-253, on any deferred payments or outstanding
balance of principal, provided that in any such optional method of payment,
the outstanding balance of principal deferred under such optional method of
payment shall become due upon any transfer of title to the property subject
to such assessment or upon the death of such property owner.
§ 197-11. Approved plans subject to annual review.
Any such optional method of payment as approved by the Water Pollution
Control Authority shall be subject to annual review by said Authority.
79.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 7-253a.
§ 197-8 SCENIC ROADS § 197-11
179:245

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Retrofitted Handicapped Vehicles
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 6-28-1999]
§ 197-12. Title.
This article, which shall be known as the "Tax Exemption for Retrofitted
Handicapped Vehicle Ordinance," is hereby adopted pursuant to the
provisions of Public Act No. 98-125 of the State of Connecticut.
§ 197-13. Definitions.
A. "Person with disabilities" means an individual who has a physical
impairment or impairments which substantially limit major life activities,
such as seeing, hearing, speaking, walking, breathing, performing
manual tasks, learning, caring for oneself and working. However, an
individual with a minor nonchronic condition of short duration shall not
be considered to be a person with disabilities for the purposes of this
article.
B. The phrase "any motor vehicle owed by a person with disabilities which
is equipped, after the original manufacture, for purposes of adapting
its use to the disability of such person" means any vehicle equipped,
after its original manufacture, with special hand, foot or hand-and-foot
controls, wheelchair lifts or hoists or other adaptation to assist physically
disabled drivers and owned and used by a person with disabilities.
§ 197-14. Personal property tax exemption.
Any motor vehicle which is owned and used by a person with disabilities,
which motor vehicle is equipped, after it original manufacture, for purposes
of adapting its use to the disability of such person, is hereby eligible
for exemption from the personal property tax of the Town of Brookfield,
provided that an application for such exemption is filed with the Brookfield
Tax Assessor in a timely manner pursuant to the provisions of § 197-15 of
this article and the motor vehicle is found by said Assessor to satisfy the
criteria set forth in this article for such an exemption.
§ 197-15. Procedure for application for personal property tax
exemption; when effective.
A. An applicant for a personal property tax exemption pursuant to this
article shall file an application with the Assessor annually on or before
the annual assessment date. Said application shall contain all
information reasonably required by the Assessor to enable him to
determine whether or not the applicant and the vehicle satisfy all of
the requirements set forth in this article. The Assessor may require the
submission of such supplemental information and documentation as he
may reasonably require to enable him to determine if the applicant is
entitled to said tax exemption. The Assessor shall determine whether the
applicant is eligible for said tax exemption pursuant to the provisions
of this article. The Assessor, in making such determination, may inspect
§ 197-12 SCENIC ROADS § 197-15
179:247
said motor vehicle and consider the extent to which the motor vehicle
has been modified, the purpose for which the vehicle is being used and
the exclusively of the use of said vehicle. Failure to file an application for
said exemption annually shall result in the loss of the tax exemption, but
will not preclude any applicant from making application in subsequent
years.
B. The provisions of this article shall become effective on the 21st day
following its adoption and publication as required by law and shall apply
to any applications pursuant to the Grand List of October 1, 1999, and
thereafter.
§ 197-15 BROOKFIELD CODE § 197-15
179:248
ARTICLE IV
Tax Abatement for Certain Emergency Services Volunteers
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-6-2000]
§ 197-16. Statutory authority.
The provisions of Public Act 99-272, Section 6 are hereby adopted, and are
set forth in §§ 197-17 through 197-21.
§ 197-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE — Certified by the Chief of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company,
Inc. and the Chief of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Department, Candlewood
Company, Inc., as to members of their respective organizations, or on or
before the certification date, as eligible for tax abatement under this article.
BENEFIT — The reduction in property taxes described in § 197-18 below.
CERTIFICATION DATE — April 15 of the assessment year commencing
July 1, 2000, and each assessment year thereafter. The "year" used for
the purpose of certified record keeping will be the twelve-month period
beginning on January 1 and ending December 31 which is the year used for
the service awards plan.
ELIGIBLE RESIDENT — Each resident of the Town of Brookfield who
volunteers his or her services:
§ 197-18. Benefit.
A. Each eligible resident shall be entitled to a reduction in property taxes
otherwise due from that resident for the fiscal year next following the
certification date of up to $1,000.
B. The credit/reduction shall be established as follows:
Volunteer Member's Years of
Service
Amount of Benefit
Up to 2 $0
More than 2, up to 4 $250
More than 4, up to 9 $500
More than 9 $1,000
A. As an active firefighter for the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company, Inc.
As an active firefighter for the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Department,
Candlewood Company, Inc.
B.
As an active emergency medical technician, paramedic or ambulance
driver for the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company, Inc.
C.
§ 197-16 SCENIC ROADS § 197-19
179:249
§ 197-19. Limitations.
The benefit shall be subject to the following limitations.
A. Residents who are eligible residents under two or more among the
services listed in the definition of "eligible resident" shall be entitled to
one benefit only.
§ 197-20. Submission of certifications.
The respective Chiefs of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company, Inc. and
the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Department, Candlewood Company, Inc. shall,
on or before the certification date:
A. Submit their original certifications to the Tax Assessor for the Town of
Brookfield; and
B. Forward a copy of their certifications to:
(1) The Board of Finance;
(2) The Office of the First Selectman;
(3) The Office of the Tax Collector;
(4) The Board of Directors of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company,
Inc.;
(5) The Executive Board of the Brookfield Volunteer Fire Department,
Candlewood Company, Inc.
§ 197-21. Eligibility.
The Brookfield Volunteer Fire Company, Inc. and the Brookfield Volunteer
Fire Department, Candlewood Company, Inc. shall determine the criteria
for certification of eligibility for their respective members, which criteria
shall not be less stringent than the criteria for attendance at emergency
responses, training and drills for yearly credit toward the respective service
awards plan for each company.
§ 197-19 BROOKFIELD CODE § 197-21
179:250
ARTICLE V
Veterans' Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-3-2003; amended in its
entirety 3-6-2006]
§ 197-22. Statutory authority.
The provisions of Public Act No. 03-44 are hereby adopted and are set forth
in §§ 197-23 through 197-26, below.
§ 197-23. Definitions.
"Qualifying income" as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section
12-81l, means a "person's total adjusted gross income as determined for
purposes of federal income tax plus any other income not included in such
adjusted gross income, individually, if unmarried, or jointly with spouse, if
married, during the calendar year ending immediately preceding the filing
of a claim for any such exemption."
§ 197-24. Benefit.
A. Veterans entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with
Subdivision (19) of C.G.S. Section 12-81 shall be entitled to an additional
exemption applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount
of $10,000, provided such veteran's qualifying income does not exceed:
(1) For unmarried individuals: $52,700.
(2) For married individuals: $58,900.
B. In accordance with Subdivision (22) of C.G.S. Section 12-81, the
surviving spouse of a veteran shall be entitled to the same property
tax exemption as the veteran spouse as stated in Subsection A above,
provided the surviving spouse's qualifying income does not exceed the
amount for unmarried individuals of $52,700.
C. Any veteran or spouse submitting a claim for this exemption must apply
for such exemption in writing to the Assessor not later than October 1 in
order to receive the exemption in the next tax year and shall be required
to file biennially thereafter. Each application shall include a copy of the
veteran's or spouse's federal income tax return or other such evidence
of income as may be required by the Assessor.
D. If the qualifying income of a person qualified to receive an exemption
under § 197-24A through 197-24C, above, should exceed the maximum
amounts stated in § 197-24A, above, such person shall notify the
Assessor of this fact prior to October 1 and shall be denied the exemption
for the following tax year and any subsequent tax year until such person
has reapplied and again qualified for such exemption. Any person who
fails to notify the Assessor of such disqualification shall make payment to
the Town in the amount of the property tax loss related to the exemption
improperly taken.
§ 197-22 SCENIC ROADS § 197-25
179:251
§ 197-25. Effective date.
The Veteran's Property Tax Exemption is applicable to the assessment years
commencing on and after October 1, 2003.
§ 197-26. Eligibility.
Claimants must be residents of the Town of Brookfield, and registered
voters who are able to prove veteran's status and income eligibility in
accordance with §§ 197-22 through 197-24.
§ 197-25 BROOKFIELD CODE § 197-26
179:252
ARTICLE VI
Tax Deferral for Elderly Homeowners
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 2-6-2006]
§ 197-26.1. Program established, purpose.
The Town of Brookfield hereby enacts a tax deferral program for elderly
homeowners, pursuant to Section 12-129n of the Connecticut General
Statutes, for eligible residents of the Town of Brookfield on the terms
and conditions provided herein. This article is enacted for the purpose of
assisting elderly homeowners with a portion of the cost of property taxation.
§ 197-27. Conditions for eligibility.
Any person who owns real property in the Town of Brookfield or is liable for
the payment of taxes thereon, pursuant to Section 12-48 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, and who occupies the property as a principal residence
shall be entitled to defer a portion of the real property tax on said residence
remaining due after the application of all municipal and state real property
tax credits, provided the following conditions are complied with:
A. Such person is 65 years of age or over at the close of the previous
calendar year, or his or her spouse is 65 years of age or over at the
close of the previous calendar year and resides with such person, or such
person is 60 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer
qualified for tax relief under this article at the time of his or her death.
B. Such person must have a principal residence located in Brookfield and
must have paid taxes in Brookfield for five years immediately preceding
his or her receipt of tax benefits hereunder.
C. The property for which the tax deferral is claimed must be the primary
legal residence of such person and occupied more than 183 days of each
calendar year.
D. An initial application must be filed with the Assessor no later than the
date the first payment of the real estate tax bill is due. Subsequent
applications to continue to receive said tax credit must be filed annually
with the Assessor between February 1 and May 15 of each year.
E. No property tax relief authorized hereunder shall be given under this
article to any persons who owe delinquent taxes to the Town of
Brookfield. The applicant shall submit a certificate from the Tax
Collector to the effect that no such delinquent taxes are owed.
§ 197-28. Limitations on property for which deferral is applicable.
A. The tax credit for real property as provided herein shall apply to only the
residence itself, the lot on which the residence is located, but not more
than two acres, and the improvements thereon.
B. Only one tax deferral shall be allowed for each parcel of real property
eligible for tax deferral under this section. If title to such property is
recorded in the name of an eligible taxpayer or his or her spouse and any
other person or persons, the amount of the deferral shall be prorated to
allow a tax deferral equivalent to the fractional share in the property of
§ 197-26.1 SCENIC ROADS § 197-28
179:253
such taxpayer or spouse. If such property is a multiple-family dwelling,
such deferral shall be prorated to reflect the fractional portion of such
property occupied by the taxpayer.
§ 197-29. Determination of amount of deferral.
A. The total tax deferred shall be equal to 45% of the real property tax
which would be assessed on the median assessment value of a principal
residence in the Town of Brookfield, after the application of all municipal
and state real property tax credits.
B. No property tax relief authorized hereunder, together with any relief
received by any such resident under provisions of Chapter 197 of the
Brookfield Code of Ordinances or under Sections 12-129b to 12-129d,
inclusive, and 12-170aa of the Connecticut General Statutes, shall
exceed, in the aggregate, 75% of the tax which would, except for said
provisions, be laid against the taxpayer.
§ 197-30. Disposition of deferral. [Amended 7-10-2017]
A. The Town of Brookfield shall establish a lien on each property that is
subject to tax deferral hereunder in the amount of the relief granted,
together with interest at a rate equal to the S&P Municipal Bond 20
Year High Grade Rate Index or similar index as approved by the Board
of Selectmen as of January 1 of each calendar year. Said lien shall have
a priority in the settlement of the taxpayer's estate. Each subsequent
annual deferral shall accrue simple annual interest at a rate equal to the
interest rate as of January 1 of the respective calendar year.
B. Each tax deferral granted in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall terminate upon the death of the taxpayer or upon the
transfer, assignment, grant or conveyance of the property subject to
tax deferral hereunder. Upon such termination, the taxpayer or the
taxpayer's estate shall reimburse the Town for the full amount of the
taxes deferred hereunder, together with accrued interest.
§ 197-31. Limitation on total deferral throughout Town.
The total of all tax deferrals granted under this article shall not exceed
for each assessment year an amount equal to 3% of the total real estate
property tax assessed in the Town of Brookfield. In the event this limitation
applies, tax deferrals given to eligible applicants hereunder shall be
prorated in such a manner so that the total amount of property tax relief
hereunder shall remain within the limits fixed herein.
§ 197-32. Determination of eligibility; applicability; disqualification;
transfer of property.
A. Tax Assessor shall determine whether each applying taxpayer is entitled
to a tax deferral under this article and shall compute the amount of the
tax deferral to which each qualified taxpayer is entitled and cause a
certificate of tax deferral to be issued in such form as to permit the Tax
Collector to reduce the amount of tax levied against the taxpayer. The tax
§ 197-28 BROOKFIELD CODE § 197-32
179:254
deferral shall be applied proportionately to the tax payments due during
the course of each tax year.
B. The tax deferral allowed hereunder shall not apply to any water use
charge, sewer use charge or special tax assessments that may be levied
against real property in the Town of Brookfield.
C. If a taxpayer has qualified and received tax relief under the provisions of
this article and subsequently becomes disqualified for any reason, he or
she shall notify the Tax Assessor on or before the next assessment date
and his or her exemption shall cease for such assessment year and such
disqualification shall continue until he or she becomes eligible again and
has filed a new application.
D. If any person with respect to whom a claim for tax relief in accordance
with this article has been approved for any assessment year transfers,
assigns, grants or otherwise conveys in such assessment year the
interest in real property to which such claim for tax relief is related,
regardless of whether such transfer, assignment, grant or conveyance
is voluntary or involuntary, the amount of such tax deferral shall be a
pro rata portion of the amount otherwise applicable in such assessment
year to be determined by a fraction the numerator of which shall be the
number of full months from the first day of October in such assessment
year to the date of such conveyance and the denominator of which shall
be 12. If such conveyance occurs in the month of October, the grantor
shall be disqualified for tax relief in such assessment year. The grantee
shall be required, within a period not exceeding 10 days immediately
following the date of such conveyance, to notify the Assessor thereof,
whereupon the Assessor shall determine the amount of tax deferral to
which the grantor is entitled for such assessment year with respect to
the interest in real property conveyed and notify the Tax Collector of
the reduced amount of tax deferral applicable to such interest. Upon
receipt of such notice from the Assessor, the Tax Collector shall, if such
notice is received after the tax due date in the municipality, within 10
days thereafter, mail or hand a bill to the grantee stating the additional
amount of tax due as determined by the Assessor. Such tax shall be due
and payable and collectible as other property taxes and subject to the
same liens and processes of collection, provided such tax shall be due
and payable in an initial or single installment not sooner than 30 days
after the date such bill is mailed or handed to the grantee and in equal
amounts in any remaining, regular installments as the same are due and
payable.
§ 197-32 SCENIC ROADS § 197-32
179:255

ARTICLE VII
Tax Exemption for Severely Disabled Veterans
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-1-2006]
§ 197-33. Exemption granted; purpose.
The Town of Brookfield hereby enacts a tax exemption for qualifying
veterans pursuant to Section 12-81(21)(C) of the Connecticut General
Statutes. This article is enacted for the purpose of assisting severely
disabled veterans who have received special housing under Title 38 of the
United States Code.
§ 197-34. Definitions.
Pursuant to Section 12-81(21)(A) of the Connecticut General Statutes, a
"disabled veteran with a severe disability" is any person who is a veteran
"who served in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard or Air Force
of the United States and has been declared by the United States Veterans'
Administration or its successors to have a service-connected disability from
paraplegia or osteochondritis resulting in permanent loss of the use of both
legs or permanent paralysis of both legs and lower parts of the body; or
from hemiplegia and has permanent paralysis of one leg and one arm or
either side of the body resulting from injury to the spinal cord, skeletal
structure or brain or from disease of the spinal cord not resulting from
any form of syphilis; or from total blindness as defined in § 12-92; or
from the amputation of both arms, both legs, both hands or both feet, or
the combination of a hand and a foot; sustained through enemy action,
or resulting from accident occurring or disease contracted in such active
service. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to include paraplegia
or hemiplegia resulting from locomotor ataxia or other forms of syphilis of
the central nervous system, or from chronic alcoholism, or to include other
forms of disease resulting from the veteran's own misconduct which may
produce signs and symptoms similar to those resulting from paraplegia,
osteochondritis or hemiplegia."
§ 197-35. Benefit.
A. As permitted under Section 12-81(21)(C) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the dwelling house and the lot whereupon the same is erected,
belonging to or held in trust for any resident of the Town of Brookfield
who is a disabled veteran with a severe disability, occupied as such
person's domicile shall be fully exempt from local property taxation,
if such person has received financial assistance for specially adapted
housing under the provisions of Section 801 of Title 38 of the United
States Code and has applied such assistance toward the acquisition or
modification of such dwelling house.
B. The same exemption may also be allowed on such housing units owned
by the surviving spouse of such veteran (i) while such spouse remains
a widow or widower, or (ii) upon the termination of any subsequent
marriage of such spouse by dissolution, annulment or death, or by
§ 197-33 SCENIC ROADS § 197-35
179:257
such veteran and spouse while occupying such premises as a residence.
During the period of time that the surviving spouse remarries, the house
will be put back on the tax rolls and then upon such time as that
marriage is terminated by dissolution, annulment or death, that house
can then be taken off the tax rolls again if he/she lives in it.
§ 197-36. Effective date.
The exemption authorized hereunder is applicable to the assessment years
commencing on and after October 1, 2006.
§ 197-37. Eligibility.
Claimants must be residents of the Town of Brookfield and registered voters
who are able to prove their eligibility status in accordance with Section
12-81(21)(C) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 197-35 BROOKFIELD CODE § 197-37
179:258
ARTICLE VIII
Business Incentive Tax
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 7-7-2014]
§ 197-38. Purpose and statutory authority.
Pursuant to Section 12-65b of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Connecticut General Assembly authorized municipalities to fix assessments
for construction or improvements to real property. The purpose of offering
a deferral of assessment increases, attributable to new construction or
improvements, is to encourage economic development within the Town of
Brookfield. This program is designed to encourage economic investment by
existing and new business entities within the Town of Brookfield.
§ 197-39. Application; eligibility.
An application to the Town for a deferral of assessment increases for
real property attributable to all improvements thereon or therein, and to
be constructed thereon or therein, may be made by any party owning,
possessing, or proposing to acquire an interest in real property. In order
to be eligible for the benefits provided by this article, upon receipt of a
report from the First Selectman in accordance with § 197-40B, the Board of
Selectmen must find that:
A. The applicant proposes to use the construction or improvements to the
real property for office, retail, manufacturing, warehouse, storage or
distribution, or information technology use, a “mixed-use development”
as the term is defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-13m, or
a hotel with conference center facilities where the cost of improvements
for the hotel with conference center is $3,000,000 or more;
B. The applicant is not delinquent with respect to property taxes or other
obligations owed to the Town of Brookfield or the Water Pollution Control
Authority, such as water and sewer fees and assessments, with respect
to the subject property or any other property owned by the applicant;
C. In its sole and absolute discretion, the Board of Selectmen finds that the
proposed construction and/or improvements will be of sufficient benefit
to the Town of Brookfield and its citizens to warrant approving the
application for tax deferral; and
D. The subject property does not have frontage on Federal Road south of
the junction of Federal Road and Route 133.
§ 197-40. Application procedure.
A. All applications shall be submitted to the Town of Brookfield First
Selectman, or his/her designee, on forms supplied by him/her. Each
such application shall include the applicant’s estimate of the cost of the
construction or improvements subject to a potential deferred assessment
pursuant to this article.
B. The First Selectman, after consultation with the Tax Assessor, Building
Official, Board of Finance Chairperson and Economic Development
Commission Chairperson, shall review each application submitted to
§ 197-38 SCENIC ROADS § 197-40
179:259
him/her and shall forward each such application to the Board of
Selectmen within 45 days of receipt, together with his/her report
concerning whether or not the application meets the eligibility criteria
contained in this article. In the event that the application is for an
agreement that deviates from the minimum fixed assessment schedule
set forth in § 197-41, then the First Selectman shall forward the
application to the Board of Finance and the Economic Development
Commission for their review and comments, to be completed within the
forty-five-day period set forth herein.
C. Upon receipt of an application, the report from the First Selectman, and
comments, if any, from the Board of Finance and Economic Development
Commission, or their Chairpersons, as appropriate, the Board of
Selectmen shall approve the application, reject the application, or return
the application to the First Selectman or the applicant for further
information within two months following the official receipt by the Board
of the application and report from the First Selectman. The date of
“official receipt” is the date of the first Board of Selectmen meeting at
which the proposed assessment deferral agreement is a topic on the
meeting agenda.
D. The Board of Selectmen shall state its findings for approval or its reasons
for rejection upon the record.
§ 197-41. Minimum considerations.
Notwithstanding the authority of the Town of Brookfield to enter into
statutorily authorized individual assessment deferral agreements with
applicants as set forth more fully in § 197-43 below, all qualified applicants,
upon Board of Selectmen approval in its sole and absolute discretion, will
be entitled to receive a minimum fixed assessment, which, expressed as a
percentage of the full additional assessment that would otherwise apply,
shall be as set forth below:
Costs
of
Improvements
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7
$3,000,000
or more
25% 40% 60% 80% X X X
$500,000
to
$2,999,999
30% 50% X X X X X
$100,000
to
$499,999
50% 50% X X X X X
§ 197-42. Effective date of deferral.
The approved tax deferral shall be effective upon the date of the last of all
of the following to occur:
A. Completion of construction or improvements;
§ 197-40 BROOKFIELD CODE § 197-42
179:260
B. The issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the completed
construction and/or improvements; and
C. Certification by the Tax Assessor as set forth in this article. Deferral will
be applied on a pro rata basis, so that any scheduled first-year benefit
commencing on the date of the final certificate of occupancy will be
continued from one assessment year to the next, as required, and for
subsequent assessment years until the scheduled benefit expires. The
continuance of the approved tax deferral shall be subject to the default
provisions set forth in § 197-43 of this article and the contingencies set
forth therein.
§ 197-43. Assessment deferral agreement.
The Board of Selectmen reserves the right, upon the applicant’s request,
to enter into an assessment deferral agreement with individual applicants
for deferral schedules other than the minimum fixed assessment schedule
set forth in § 197-41, within statutorily authorized limits set forth in
Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-65b, as from time to time
amended, and for the uses set forth in § 197-39. Agreements shall be
predicated upon a finding by the Board of Selectmen, with advice from
other Town officials as required, that the public benefit to the Town that is
likely to result from the proposed construction or improvements is sufficient
to warrant consideration for a tax deferral exceeding the minimum fixed
assessment schedule set forth in § 197-41.
A. The assessment deferral agreement to be signed by the applicant and
the First Selectman on behalf of the Town shall refer to and incorporate
the application as approved by the Board of Selectmen, shall reflect the
assessment on the property immediately prior to the commencement of
construction, and shall specify the period of deferral.
B. The assessment deferral agreement shall provide that, upon completion
of construction or improvements made in accordance with the terms of
the agreement, and upon certification by the Tax Assessor, as set forth
in this article and upon issuance of the final certificate of occupancy,
the increase in the assessment on the property due to such construction
or improvements shall be deferred in accordance with a statutorily
authorized schedule, as determined by the Board of Selectmen.
C. The assessment deferral agreement shall provide that such construction
or improvements shall be completed by a date fixed in the agreement.
In the event that on the date so fixed for completion the Tax Assessor
denies certification that the construction or improvements have been
performed in accordance with the eligibility criteria as set forth in this
section and/or in accordance with the terms of the assessment deferral
agreement, or at any time if the Tax Assessor determines that the owner
or lessee of the property is in default under the terms of the agreement,
and has failed to cure said default after notice and an opportunity to
do so within the time stated in the notice from the Tax Assessor, the
agreement shall automatically terminate. In the event of termination, the
owner and/or lessee of the property, as herein provided, shall be liable
for any increase in taxes for which he/she would have been liable in the
absence of such assessment deferral agreement. The agreement shall
§ 197-42 SCENIC ROADS § 197-43
179:261
further provide that a property owner or lessee, as herein provided, may
apply, prior to expiration, to the Board of Selectmen for an extension of
time in which to complete the construction or improvements which, for
good cause shown, the Board of Selectmen may approve, but in no event
shall such extension of time exceed a period of one year.
D. The assessment deferral agreement shall further provide that the
agreement is subject to the following conditions:
(1) That, in addition to the certification requirement of Subsection C
above, the property shall be subject to inspection and certification
by the Building Official and Health Director as being in conformance
with such provisions of the state Building and Health Codes and local
Housing Codes as may apply, and by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
to ensure conformance with the Zoning Regulations, and must be in
compliance with all other codes or state and local laws applicable to
the new construction and/or improvements;
(2) That the assessment deferral agreement shall continue only for as
long as the use of the property remains the use authorized by §
197-39 and set forth in the agreement and shall provide that the
property owner or lessee, as the case may be, shall annually certify
to the Tax Assessor on a specified date that the property is used for
the authorized use set forth in the assessment deferral agreement;
(3) That the assessment deferral agreement shall automatically
terminate without notice if there is any delinquency in the payment
of property taxes or other obligations on the subject property owed
to the Town of Brookfield or the Water Pollution Control Authority,
such as water and sewer fees and assessments, as of one month
following the due date for the payment;
(4) That the assessment deferral agreement shall automatically
terminate without notice upon the date of the sale or transfer of
the improvements unless the new owner or lessee, as the case may
be, of such property shall enter into a new contract with the Town
incorporating all the terms of the agreement with the former owner
or lessee, as herein provided; and
(5) The subject construction and/or work on the improvements must
commence within 12 months from the date of the assessment
deferral agreement, and the final certificate of occupancy must be
issued within 24 months from the date of the agreement, except
where these time frames are expressly modified by the terms of the
agreement. The failure to adhere to any of the required time frames
in this subsection shall result in the automatic termination, without
notice, of the agreement.
§ 197-44. Additional provisions and requirements.
A. The Tax Assessor, after consulting with the Building Official, shall have
the sole responsibility of determining the cost and value of the
construction or improvements that are subject to a deferral of
assessment increases pursuant to this article.
§ 197-43 BROOKFIELD CODE § 197-44
179:262
B. A copy of any assessment deferral agreement entered into pursuant to
the provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor, who
shall adjust his/her records accordingly.
C. The Tax Assessor shall forward a copy of a certification that the
construction or improvements have been completed in accordance with
the assessment deferral agreement to the First Selectman. In the event
that the Tax Assessor denies such certification, the Tax Assessor shall
send a copy of the denial, including the reasons for denial, to the
First Selectman, who shall then inform the Board of Selectmen that the
certification was denied and that the tax deferral will not commence.
Upon such denial of certification by the Tax Assessor or upon a
termination of the agreement, the Tax Assessor shall readjust his/her tax
records in accordance with the provisions of this article.
D. Any agreement entered into under the provisions of this article shall be
recorded on the land records of the Town.
E. The Board of Selectmen may establish written procedures and technical
specifications for the administration of this article.
F. Properties upon which construction or improvements commenced prior
to the adoption of this article, but which have not yet received a final
certificate of occupancy, may be eligible for the benefits set forth in
this article, provided that they meet the requirements of, and apply in
accordance with, the provisions of this article.
§ 197-45. Eligible personal property.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-65h, the Board of
Selectmen may approve an agreement to defer the increase in assessment
of certain personal property to be located, or that is proposed to be located,
in a “manufacturing facility” as defined in General Statutes Section
12-81(72), subject to the requirements of Section 12-65h. The
determination and approval of any such agreement shall be based upon the
general guidelines, standards and requirements set forth in this Business
Incentive Tax article that could properly be applied to a review of, and the
terms of, an assessment deferral agreement for eligible personal property.
§ 197-44 SCENIC ROADS § 197-45
179:263

ARTICLE IX
Excess Tax Payments
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-6-2012]
§ 197-46. Retention of excess payments authorized; amount limited.
Pursuant to Section 12-129 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended from time to time, the Tax Collector is authorized to retain on
account excess payments of taxes less than $5.
§ 197-47. Requests for refund.
The Tax Collector shall refund any excess payment upon written request if
such request is made within one year from the date the tax was originally
due.
§ 197-46 SCENIC ROADS § 197-47
179:265
Chapter 201
TREES
§ 201-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Brookfield Tree
Ordinance."
§ 201-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health,
safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the Town.
§ 201-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms or phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have
their given meanings:
IMMEDIATE PUBLIC HAZARD — A public nuisance, the maintenance of
which is of so serious a nature as to constitute an immediate hazard to the
health of persons other than the persons maintaining such nuisance or filth.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, including a public utility company,
partnership and association.
PUBLIC AREA — Includes all public highways, parks and other lands owned
by or leased to or under the control of the Town.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any tree or shrub or part thereof growing upon
private or Town property which is interfering with the use of any Town
property, infected with infectious plant disease, or endangering the life,
health or safety of persons or property.
TREES AND SHRUBS — Include all woody vegetation presently or hereafter
planted in any public or private premises.
§ 201-4. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 7-148(b),
7-148(c)(6)(A)(v), 7-148(c)(7)(B), 7-148(c)(7)(E), 7-148(c)(7)(H)(x), and
7-148(c)(7)(H)(xi) and 19a-206.
§ 201-5. Tree Warden and Tree Committee.
A. Tree Warden.
(1) The Tree Warden shall be appointed in accordance with § C6-1A
of the Town Charter and shall have all the powers, duties and
authorities ascribed to him/her as set out in the Connecticut Public
Shade Tree Statute, particularly Connecticut General Statutes
Sections 23-58, 23-59, 23-60 and 23-65, as the same may be
amended, and in this chapter.
§ 197-47 BROOKFIELD CODE § 201-5
201:266
(2) The Tree Warden shall have full power and authority over all trees
and shrubs located within public areas and, to the extent provided
herein, on private property.
B. Tree Committee.
(1) The Town Director of Public Works, Tree Warden and Deputy Tree
Wardens shall function as the Tree Committee.
(2) The duty of the Tree Committee is to ensure that the intent and
provisions of this chapter are carried out to the fullest extent
possible. The Committee may give notice and consultation on:
(a) The amendment of this chapter; and
(b) Establishment of educational and informational programs such
as Arbor Day, Earth Day, or any other events that promote the
protection of trees within the community
§ 201-6. Permits.
No person other than the Tree Warden may perform any of the following
acts without first obtaining from the Warden a permit for which no fee shall
be charged, and nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any
person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits as are
required by law:
A. Plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground or
otherwise disturb any tree on any public area.
B. Place on any public area, either above or below ground level, a container
for trees or shrubs.
C. Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any tree or shrub located on any
public area.
D. Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other man-made object to
any tree or shrub located on any public area.
E. Cause damage to the root zone of any tree or shrub located on any public
area by digging a tunnel or trench, moving or storage of construction
vehicles, materials, or equipment, or changing of the grade within the
drip line.
§ 201-7. Abatement of nuisance.
A. Any tree or shrub or part thereof growing upon private or public
property, (1) which is interfering with the use of any public area, (2)
which is infected with an infectious plant disease, (3) or which
endangers the life, health or safety of persons or property outside of the
host private property is declared a public nuisance.
B. The Tree Warden, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to enter
onto private property (prior notice required) whereon there is located a
tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
C. If the Tree Warden shall determine with reasonable certainty, upon
inspection or examination, any nuisance tree or shrub as herein defined
exists in or upon any public area in the Town, he/she shall immediately
cause it to be treated, trimmed, removed or otherwise abated in such a
manner as to destroy or prevent the spread of the nuisance. The manner
in which the nuisance shall be abated shall be determined by the Tree
Warden.
§ 201-5 TREES § 201-7
201:267
D. If the Tree Warden shall determine with reasonable certainty upon
inspection or examination that any nuisance shrub or tree as herein
defined exists in or upon any private premises, he/she, in writing, shall
notify the owner or tenant having charge of such premises. Unless
the condition constitutes an immediate public hazard, the responsible
person shall, within 30 days after issuance of such notice, cause the
treatment, trimming or removal and destruction of such nuisance tree
or shrub as directed by written notice. No damage shall be awarded
the owner for the destruction of the trees or shrubs destroyed pursuant
to this chapter. In case the owner or tenant having charge of such
premises shall refuse or neglect to comply with the terms of the written
notice within 30 days after receiving it, the Tree Warden shall cause
the removal, treatment or trimming of such nuisance tree or shrub. The
expense thereof shall be charged to the owner of such premises on which
such tree or shrub is located and, with respect to the cost for removing,
treatment or trimming, that portion interfering with the public area or
public way shall become a lien on the property upon recordation of
notice thereof on the Town land records.
E. The Tree Warden is empowered to determine what constitutes an
immediate public hazard.
F. The Tree Warden is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of
an immediate public hazard by seeking from any court of competent
jurisdiction an order directing such immediate abatement. If a court
of competent jurisdiction so orders the immediate abatement, the Tree
Warden shall carry out the order.
§ 201-8. Appeals.
Any person or entity aggrieved by any order issued by the Tree Warden may
appeal, in writing, to the Board of Selectman, within 10 days of receipt of
written notice from the Tree Warden of said order. The Board of Selectman
shall hear said appeal within 30 days of receipt of said written notice of
appeal and shall render a decision on the appeal within 30 days following
the date of the hearing. The Board of Selectman may sustain the appeal, in
whole or in part, may dismiss the appeal and may take such further action
concerning said appeal as the Board of Selectmen deems appropriate. The
decision of the Board of Selectman shall be final and no further appeal shall
be permitted.
§ 201-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the
Town Tree Warden or his/her agents while engaged in the execution or
enforcement of this chapter.
B. Violation of any provisions of this chapter shall result in a fine and
penalty of $100 in addition to any cost of curing or abating said violation.
If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 207
§ 201-7 BROOKFIELD CODE § 201-9
201:268
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 131.
Parking — See Ch. 168.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 210.
§ 207-1. Speed limits established.
There is hereby established a maximum speed limit of 35 miles per hour on
all town roads in the Town of Brookfield, except as otherwise posted.
Chapter 210
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches — See Ch. 89.
Parking — See Ch. 168.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
§ 210-1. Restrictions on operation.
No person shall operate or permit and suffer to be operated a snowmobile,
motorcycle, motorbike, go-cart or all-terrain vehicles as hereinafter defined
in this chapter within the Town of Brookfield under any of the following
circumstances:
A. On private property of another without the express prior written consent
of the owner and the occupant of said property. Such consent may be
revoked at any time by the grantor thereof. Where such express prior
written consent has been obtained, the operator or person at the site
responsible for such operation shall keep said consent on his person and
available for immediate display at all times during the period of such
operation. Excepted from the operation of this subsection are any private
clubs or other organizations that permit the operation of recreational
motor vehicles on their property in connection with the principal use of
said property by the members of any such club or organization.
B. On any public grounds or property, including Town-owned land, which
shall include but not be limited to parks, ball fields, recreation areas,
open space or conservation lands, Town-owned easements and sidewalks
or area dedicated to or commonly used for pedestrian traffic, Town
storage facilities, garage areas and Board of Education lands, unless
specifically designated, set aside and reserved therefor by resolution of
a Town Meeting.
§ 201-9 TREES § 210-1
201:269
C. In such manner as to create loud or unnecessary noise so as to
unreasonably disturb or interfere with persons in the peaceful and quiet
enjoyment of their property.
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the safety
or property of any person.
§ 210-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES — A self-propelled vehicle designed to travel over
unimproved terrain and which has been determined by the Commissioner
of Motor Vehicles of the State of Connecticut to be unsuitable for operation
on the public highways, which is not eligible for registration under Chapter
246 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
GO-CART — Any self-propelled vehicle having any number of wheels in
contact with the ground and a seat or platform on which the rider sits,
kneels or stands in the operation thereof.
MOTORCYCLE or MOTORBIKE — A motor vehicle having not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground and a saddle or seat on which the
rider sits or a platform on which he stands, and with or without a side car,
and shall include bicycles having a motor attached.
SNOWMOBILES — Any self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow
or ice, except vehicles propelled by sail.
§ 210-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person under the age of 16 years who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed to be a juvenile offender. Any person of
the age of 16 years or over who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 215
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 182. Sewers — See Ch. 184.
§ 210-1 BROOKFIELD CODE § 210-3
201:270
ARTICLE I
Water System
[Adopted 8-13-201080]
§ 215-1. Authority.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Brookfield is hereby empowered
to administer the planning, construction and financing of water systems
and mains within the Town and, subject to the provisions of this article,
the Board may take all necessary or desirable actions in connection with
such extensions of water mains, including the levying and collection of
assessments pursuant to § 7-137c of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
Revision of 1958, as amended from time to time (the General Statutes).
§ 215-2. Reimbursement required.
A. Each owner of property shall, pursuant to the provisions of this article,
and in accordance with said C.G.S. § 7-137c, reimburse the Town for
the proportionate share of the total costs to the Town of the extension
of any water main which abuts such property. The amount of such
reimbursement shall be computed in such manner as to leave the Town
ultimately free of any of the cost of the extension of the water main
and expenses incidental thereto, except that where any portion of such
water service is to be used for a municipal purpose of the Town, the
Town shall contribute a fair proportion of the expense representing
such proportionate municipal share. Such expenses shall include, but
are not limited to, any costs of materials, installation, pumping stations,
service connections, curb, sidewalk and highway repairs, installation
of gate valves and shutoffs, right-of-way acquisition, interest and costs
of borrowing, whether temporary or permanent, administrative costs
for billing and accounting, all engineering and legal fees pertaining to
the extension and any other costs associated with the extension. The
costs of an extension of a water main shall also include the cost of
improvements, upgrades, replacements or repairs made by the Town in
order to preserve or enhance the water system, including but not limited
to pump station upgrades, water treatment upgrades and storage tanks.
B. In the case of land containing no improvements which is zoned for other
than commercial or industrial purposes or classified, pursuant to the
provisions of the General Statutes as farmland, forest land or open space
land on the last completed Grant List of the Town, which exceeds the
size of the smallest lot permitted in the lowest density residential zone
allowed under the zoning regulations of the Town by more than 100%,
the assessment of such excess land shall be deferred until such time as
such excess land shall be built upon or a building permit issued therefor
or until approval of a subdivision plan of such excess property, whichever
event occurs first, at which time the assessment shall be made. The
Board of Selectmen shall cause a caveat to be placed on the Brookfield
land records in each instance where an assessment is deferred.
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Water System, adopted 1-8-2007.
§ 215-1 TREES § 215-3
201:271
§ 215-3. Assessments.
A. The benefit assessment of each owner of property abutting the water
main shall be assessed by the Board of Selectmen or such authority as it
may designate.
B. Subject to reasonable allowance by the Board of Selectmen for
particular situations, the benefit assessment for each property in a water
main extension project shall be based upon the following factors:
(1) Area: For purposes of this article, the area shall equal the area
of land contained within the property lines of a lot. For common
interest communities, the area of each property shall equal the
total area of land of the common interest community divided by the
number of units.
(2) Frontage: For purposes of this article, any lot with a front lot line
on a street shall be deemed to have a minimum frontage of 50 feet
even if the actual frontage is less, and any interior lot benefited by an
extension shall be deemed to have frontage equal to the greater of
(a) the actual front lot line; (b) the distance between the side lot lines
measured in a straight line at right angles to the mean direction of
such side lot lines, which line or measurement shall touch but not be
in front of the building line; or (c) 50 feet even if the lot has no actual
frontage. The frontage of a corner lot which is at the intersection of
and abuts two or more streets, when the angle of the intersection is
not more than 135°, or where the intersection is rounded by a curve
having a radius of less than 100 feet, shall be the sum of the sides
(a side being a minimum of 50 feet for these calculations) divided
by the number of sides. Each unit in a common interest community
shall be deemed to have frontage equal to the frontage of the entire
lot, as described above, divided by the number of units or 25 feet,
whichever is greater.
(3) Number of building units: as to residential property, number of
dwelling units permitted under the current zoning classification of
the property or the existing number of units thereon, whichever
is greater. As to a common interest community or condominium,
the number of building units shall be equal to the number of units
created. As to property zoned commercial, industrial or for other
nonresidential zones, a unit shall constitute, for assessment
purposes, an area of 5,000 square feet even if the actual property
is less than 5,000 square feet. Any such property containing more
than 5,000 square feet which does not constitute a full unit shall
be assessed based on the percentage the excess bears to a full unit
of 5,000 square feet. If a property is partially in a residential zone
and partially in a commercial, industrial or other zone, the number
of units for each portion shall be determined in accordance with
the zoning classification applicable to that portion and then added
together to yield a total number of units for the property.
(4) The Grand List: Grand List valuation of the property, including both
land and buildings. Each of the above factors shall be given a weight
of 25%. The weighted factors shall be used to apportion the expense
of the extension among the properties to be assessed. The
§ 215-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 215-3
201:272
assessment of an individual parcel thus shall equal the product of the
total cost of the extension (as described in § 215-2 above) multiplied
by 0.25 of the sum of the following quotients:
(a) The area of the parcel divided by the area of all of the parcels to
be assessed;
(b) The frontage of the parcel divided by the total frontage of all of
the parcels to be assessed;
(c) The number of building units assigned to the parcel divided by
the total of all building units to be assessed; plus
(d) The Grand List valuation of the parcel divided by the total Grant
List valuation of all of the parcels to be assessed.
C. For purposes of measurements, the Town Assessor's maps shall be
deemed accurate unless otherwise shown by a Class A-2 survey certified
by a registered land surveyor.
D. If a property abuts more than one municipal water main, it will be
assessed as if it abutted only one water main. The street address listed in
the Assessor's Grand List shall determine which water main assessment
will apply.
E. If, given unusual conditions specific to a particular property, the formula
above, in the sole discretion of the Board of Selectmen, fails to
adequately encompass the full costs to the Town or is otherwise
inequitable, the Board of Selectmen shall determine the assessment
in an equitable manner. By way of examples: to the extent that soil
or groundwater pollution adds to the expense of the extension, those
additional expenses may be assessed against the properties that are the
source of the pollution; or if a property abutting a water main is already
served by a public water system owned and operated by the public water
utility assigned to that exclusive service area, then the assessment may
be deferred until the property connects to the Town's water main.
F. If assessments, individually and collectively, in the sole discretion of
the Board of Selectmen fail to adequately reimburse the full costs to
the Town or are inequitable, they may be adjusted by the Board of
Selectmen. [Added 6-3-2013]
§ 215-4. Hearings.
In the case of any assessment to be levied pursuant to this article, pursuant
to § 7-141 of the General Statutes, notice of the time and place for a hearing
upon such assessment shall be published at least 10 days before the date
thereof in a newspaper having circulation in the Town, and a copy of such
notice signed by the Town Clerk shall be mailed to the record owner of any
property to be affected thereby.
§ 215-5. Notice of assessment of benefits.
When the Board of Selectmen has determined the amount of the assessment
to be levied, it shall file a copy thereof in the office of the Brookfield Town
Clerk. Not later than five days after such filing, it shall cause a copy of such
assessment to be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in
§ 215-3 TREES § 215-5
201:273
the Town, and it shall mail a copy of such assessment to the record owner
of any property affected thereby.
§ 215-6. Appeals.
The owner of any property so assessed may appeal to the Superior Court
from the valuation of such owner's assessment in accordance with and
subject to the limitations of § 7-137c of the General Statutes.
§ 215-7. Payment of assessments.
A. Assessments shall be due and payable to the Brookfield Tax Collector 30
days after billing of the assessment to the property owner. Delinquent
assessments shall bear interest at the rate and manner provided for by
statute for delinquent property taxes.
B. The Board of Selectmen may allow assessments to be paid in
installments over a period not exceeding 20 years or such lesser time
as the Board determines. The Board of Selectmen shall fix the rate of
interest to be paid on the outstanding balance of the installments.
C. Any assessment or installment payment which is not paid when due
shall bear interest at the maximum statutory rate permitted by law
for delinquent property taxes. Such assessment, together with interest
thereon, shall constitute a lien against such property and the Tax
Collector shall cause a certificate of lien for each such assessment to be
lodged with the Town Clerk as provided in § 7-137d of the Connecticut
General Statutes. A lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided by
law for foreclosure of tax liens.
§ 215-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 215-7
201:274
Chapter 216
WATERWAYS
§ 216-1. Restrictions on use of vessels with marine sanitation
devices.
No person shall launch (nor knowingly permit the launching), moor, dock or
operate, upon the waters of Lake Candlewood within the limits of the Town
of Brookfield, any vessel equipped with a marine sanitation device (MSD),
unless:
A. Such MSD is designed and operated to prevent the overboard discharge
of sewage, treated or untreated, or of any waste derived from sewage; or
B. Its MSD not meeting the requirements of Subsection A shall, prior to
launching, have been securely sealed and made visibly inoperative so as
to prevent its use.
§ 216-2. Vessels subject to inspection for compliance.
All vessels located upon the waters of Lake Candlewood within the limits
of the Town of Brookfield shall be subject to inspection by any duly elected
or appointed Town or state law enforcement officer for the purpose of
determining whether such vessels are in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 216-3. Dumping materials in water prohibited.
No person shall deposit, dump, throw, abandon, discard, discharge, place or
cause to be deposited, dumped, thrown, abandoned, discarded, discharged
or placed upon or in the waters of Lake Candlewood, or any of its
tributaries, or upon the frozen surface thereof, within the Town of
Brookfield, whether from a vessel or otherwise, any litter, including sewage,
garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, debris, abandoned properties, waste
material, human excrements or any nauseous or offensive matter.
§ 216-4. Penalty for violation of provisions on marine sanitation
devices.
Any person who violates any provision of § 216-1 of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of $25 for each offense.
§ 216-5. Penalty for violation of dumping provisions.
Any person who violates any provision of § 216-3 of this chapter shall
be fined $10 for the first such offense and not more than $100 for each
subsequent offense.
§ 215-7 TREES § 216-5
201:275
Chapter 220
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
Chapter 221
WETLANDS PENALTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 220.
§ 221-1. Title; statutory authority.
This chapter, which shall be known as the "Brookfield Inland Wetlands
Penalty Ordinance, is hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of Public
Act No. 96-210 of the State of Connecticut.
§ 221-2. Citation and fine for violation of inland wetlands
regulations.
A. The Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Brookfield is hereby
authorized to direct the Inland Wetlands Enforcement Officer of the
Town of Brookfield, or any duly authorized assistant Inland Wetlands
Enforcement Officer, to issue a citation to and recommend a fine, as
hereinafter set forth, upon any property owner of record as of the date of
issuance of said citation, or other person who is found to be in violation
of any of the following provisions of the Inland Wetlands Regulations of
the Town of Brookfield as set forth in Chapter 220 of the Code of the
Town of Brookfield, as amended.
B. The Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Brookfield shall have the
authority to uphold, suspend, or revise such citations, as well as review,
uphold, rescind, or amend recommended fines, conduct hearings related
to appeals, and impose other actions as appropriate.
§ 221-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Each violation of any of the provisions of the Brookfield Inland Wetlands
Regulations shall constitute a separate and distinct violation under this
chapter, for which a citation may be issued which shall cause written notice
of the violation, proposed fine, and right to appeal to be delivered to or
served upon the property owner and/or violator. In the case of a continuing
violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed to be a separate
and distinct violation.
B. The Inland Wetlands Enforcement Officer or any duly authorized assistant
Inland Wetlands Enforcement Officer may recommend fines as appropriate.
The determination of the amount of such fines shall be based on the
guideline included herein. The amount of such fines shall not exceed the
amounts indicated for each offense.
§ 216-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 221-3
201:276
Code
Section Violation Fine
§ 220-5C The conduct of activities delineated in
§ 220-5C without the required permit
pursuant to § 220-7
Up to $1,000
§ 220-5D Failure to inform the Agency or provide
necessary data as mandated by
§ 220-5D prior to the commencement of
any operation
Up to $1,000
§ 220-12K(4) Failure to control stormwater
discharges, prevent erosion and
sedimentation, or prevent pollution of
wetlands and watercourses
Maximum $1,000
§ 220-12K(8) Failure to conform to the terms,
conditions, limitations or modifications
set forth in any permit, including any
time period established therein
Up to $1,000
§ 220-13 Failure to post the required bond or to
obtain liability insurance as required by
the Agency
Up to $1,000
§ 221-4. Payment and appeal.
Fines imposed pursuant to this chapter must be paid within 30 days from
the date of the citation. Any person wishing to contest such citation may
make written request for a hearing before a hearing officer or Commission
pursuant to the provisions of § 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes
and § 220-22B of the Code of the Town of Brookfield.
Part III: Planning and Zoning Regulations
Chapter 234
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Chapter 242
ZONING
§ 221-3 TREES § 221-4
201:277

Zoning Regulations
Town of Brookfield, Connecticut
Adopted by the Brookfield Zoning Commission
Effective Date:
2019-April-19
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
1
Contents
Article 1 – Introduction ............................................................................................................... 12
1. 1 Authority ........................................................................................................................ 12
1. 2 Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 12
1. 3 Zoning Map ................................................................................................................... 13
A. Zoning Districts ................................................................................................................ 13
B. Boundary Interpretation ................................................................................................ 13
1. 4 Interpretation of Regulations...................................................................................... 13
A. General ........................................................................................................................... 13
B. Prohibited if Not Permitted............................................................................................ 13
C. Minimum Requirements ................................................................................................ 14
D. Strictest Standards Control ........................................................................................... 14
1. 5 Conformity .................................................................................................................... 14
A. Conformity Required ..................................................................................................... 14
B. Valid Permits ................................................................................................................... 15
1. 6 Nonconformities ........................................................................................................... 15
A. Non-Conforming Uses ................................................................................................... 15
B. Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures .................................................................. 16
C. Non-Conforming Lots .................................................................................................... 17
1. 7 Validity, Separability, and Effective Date ................................................................ 18
A. Provisions Severable ...................................................................................................... 18
B. Effective Date ................................................................................................................. 18
Article 2 - Definitions ................................................................................................................... 19
2.1 Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 19
A. General Terminology and Use of Words .................................................................... 19
B. Terms Not Defined ......................................................................................................... 19
C. Text to Control ............................................................................................................... 19
D. Acronyms ........................................................................................................................ 20
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses .................................................................................. 48
3.1 Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 48
3.2 Residential Districts (R) ................................................................................................. 48
3.3 Principal Uses and Structures ...................................................................................... 48
A. Permitted As of Right .................................................................................................... 48
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
2
B. Permitted by Zoning Permit ........................................................................................ 49
C. Permitted by Special Permit ....................................................................................... 49
D. Community/Institutional-Type Uses ............................................................................. 50
3.4 Accessory Uses and Structures ................................................................................... 50
A. General Limitations ....................................................................................................... 50
B. Permitted As of Right .................................................................................................... 51
C. Permitted by Zoning Permit.......................................................................................... 50
D. Permitted by Speical Permit ......................................................................................... 50
3.5 Area, Dimensional and Building Height Requirements ........................................... 53
3.6 Customary Uses ............................................................................................................ 53
3.7 Solar Panels ................................................................................................................... 53
3.8 Agricultural and Animal Related Uses in Residential Zones ................................... 54
A. Limited Farm Stand........................................................................................................ 54
B. Farm Stand ...................................................................................................................... 54
C. Farm Animals .................................................................................................................. 54
3.9 Swimming Pools ............................................................................................................ 56
3.10 Recreational Equipment Storage in Residential Zones........................................... 57
3.11 Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential Zones .................................................. 57
3.12 Customary Home Occupations ................................................................................. 58
3.13 Conservation Subdivisions .......................................................................................... 59
A. Purposes .......................................................................................................................... 59
B. Eligibility............................................................................................................................ 59
C. Permitted Uses ............................................................................................................... 59
D. Development Standards and Controls ...................................................................... 60
E. Conserved Land Areas .................................................................................................. 60
F. Application Procedure .................................................................................................. 62
3.14 Multifamily Dwellings ................................................................................................... 62
A. Intent ............................................................................................................................... 62
B. Purpose ............................................................................................................................ 62
C. Site Eligibility ................................................................................................................... 63
D. Applications ................................................................................................................... 63
E. Design and Technical Requirements........................................................................... 64
F. Density and Number of Units ........................................................................................ 65
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
3
G. Density Bonus for Affordable Units .............................................................................. 65
H. Development Standards and Controls ...................................................................... 66
I. Maintenance ................................................................................................................... 68
J. Inspections ....................................................................................................................... 68
3.15 Planned Age-Restricted Community – PARC .......................................................... 69
A. General ........................................................................................................................... 69
B. Intent and Purpose ........................................................................................................ 69
C. Establishment of Community Site ................................................................................ 70
D. Site Eligibility Criteria ...................................................................................................... 70
E. Application Procedures ................................................................................................ 70
F. Design and Technical Requirements ........................................................................... 71
G. Density and Number of Units ....................................................................................... 71
H. Development Standards and Controls ...................................................................... 71
I. Miscellaneous Provisions ................................................................................................. 72
J. Maintenance .................................................................................................................. 73
K. Elderly Occupancy ........................................................................................................ 73
3.16 Accessory Apartments ................................................................................................ 73
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 73
B. Intent ................................................................................................................................ 73
C. Occupancy ................................................................................................................... 73
D. Standards ........................................................................................................................ 73
E. Termination of Special Permit ....................................................................................... 75
3.17 Guest House ................................................................................................................. 75
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 75
B. Standards ........................................................................................................................ 75
3.18 Group Day Care Homes ............................................................................................. 75
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 75
B. Standards ........................................................................................................................ 75
3.19 Short-Term Rental ......................................................................................................... 76
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 76
B. Standards ........................................................................................................................ 76
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts ....................................................................... 77
4.1 Purposes ........................................................................................................................ 77
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
4
A. Regional Commercial (C-1) .......................................................................................... 77
B. Neighborhood Commercial (C-2) ................................................................................ 77
C. Commercial Gateway North (CG-N) .......................................................................... 77
D. Commercial Gateway South (CG-S) ........................................................................... 77
E. Marine Commercial (MC) .............................................................................................. 77
F. Industrial (I-1) .................................................................................................................... 77
G. Corporate Park (CP) ...................................................................................................... 77
H. Town Center District (TCD)............................................................................................. 77
4.2 Permitted Uses .............................................................................................................. 78
A. Permitted Uses Table ...................................................................................................... 78
B. Prohibited Uses ................................................................................................................ 81
4.3 Location, Dimensional and Site Requirements ........................................................ 82
A. Dimensional Requirements Table ................................................................................. 82
B. Site Requirements – Gateway Districts ......................................................................... 82
4.4 Commercial and Industrial Uses ................................................................................ 84
A. Adult-Oriented Businesses ............................................................................................. 84
B. Agriculture and Animal-Related Uses .......................................................................... 85
C. Alcohol Sales ................................................................................................................... 85
D. Contractor’s Yards ......................................................................................................... 86
E. Marinas, Docks, and Slips ............................................................................................... 86
F. Recreation ........................................................................................................................ 86
G. Restaurants ..................................................................................................................... 86
H. Solar Energy Generation................................................................................................ 86
I. Veterinary Offices, Animal Hospitals, and Kennels ...................................................... 87
J. Combination/Mix of Commercial and Industrial Uses ............................................... 87
K. Combination/Mix of Commercial and Residential Uses ........................................... 87
L. Medical Marijuana Dispensary ...................................................................................... 87
Article 5 – Special Districts ......................................................................................................... 89
5.1 Town Center District (TCD) .......................................................................................... 89
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................ 89
B. Plan of Conservation and Development .................................................................... 89
C. Common Service Areas ................................................................................................ 90
D. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................. 90
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
5
E. Land Use Standards ........................................................................................................ 91
F. Architectural Guidelines ................................................................................................. 91
G. Conflicts ........................................................................................................................... 91
H. Application and Permitting ........................................................................................... 91
I. Parking ............................................................................................................................... 92
J. Design Flexibility ............................................................................................................... 93
K. Sidewalks .......................................................................................................................... 94
L. Landscaping .................................................................................................................... 96
M. Street Lighting ................................................................................................................. 96
N. Public Utilities ................................................................................................................... 97
5.2 TCD Perimeter Overlay Zone ...................................................................................... 97
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................ 97
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................. 97
5.3 Residential – Rental Housing Opportunity/Workforce Zone (R-RHOW) ................ 97
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................ 97
B. Requirements ................................................................................................................... 97
C. Expiration ......................................................................................................................... 99
5.4 Brookfield Aquifer Protection District (APD) ........................................................... 100
A. Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 100
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................... 100
C. Compliance .................................................................................................................. 100
D. Permitted Uses ............................................................................................................... 100
E. Aquifer Protection Performance and Design Standards ......................................... 102
F. Permit Review ................................................................................................................ 106
G. Inspection ...................................................................................................................... 106
5.5 Floodplain Districts (FP) .............................................................................................. 106
A. General Provisions ........................................................................................................ 106
B. Floodplain District Boundaries ..................................................................................... 106
C. Floodway Permitted Uses ............................................................................................ 108
D. Floodplain Permitted Uses ........................................................................................... 108
E. Other Permitted Uses .................................................................................................... 108
F. Structures (temporary or permanent) ........................................................................ 109
G. Storage of material and equipment ......................................................................... 109
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
6
H. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction .................................................................... 110
I. Specific standards .......................................................................................................... 110
J. Equal Conveyance, Compensatory Storage, and Associated Prohibitions ........ 112
5.6 Watershed Protection District (WPD) ...................................................................... 113
A. Candlewood Lake Watershed District, (CLW) ......................................................... 113
Article 6 – General Standards ................................................................................................. 117
6.1 Parking, Loading, and Access ................................................................................. 117
A. Off-Street Parking and Loading .................................................................................. 117
Table 6.1. Parking Dimensions and Aisles ................................................................... 118
Table 6.2. Parking Space Requirements .................................................................... 124
Table 6.3. Parking Credit Schedule Chart.................................................................. 124
B. Outdoor Vehicle Storage ............................................................................................. 124
C. Access............................................................................................................................ 125
D. Traffic Impact Analysis ................................................................................................. 127
6.2 Signage ....................................................................................................................... 129
A. Purposes ......................................................................................................................... 129
B. Severability ..................................................................................................................... 129
C. Permits ............................................................................................................................ 129
D. Prohibited Signs ............................................................................................................. 130
E. General Provisions ......................................................................................................... 130
Table 6.4. Permitted Signs ............................................................................................ 124
6.3 Landscaping ............................................................................................................... 138
A. Purpose, Applicability, and Design Principles ........................................................... 138
B. General Landscaping Standards ............................................................................... 139
C. Landscape Buffers ....................................................................................................... 140
D. Landscaping for Parking and Loading Areas........................................................... 141
6. 4 Outdoor Lighting ........................................................................................................ 142
A. Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 143
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................... 143
C. Standards ...................................................................................................................... 143
6.5 Earthwork and Grading ............................................................................................ 145
A. Purpose and Intent ....................................................................................................... 145
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................... 146
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
7
C. Standards ...................................................................................................................... 146
6.6 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control ........................................................................... 147
A. Purposes ......................................................................................................................... 147
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................... 147
C. Standards and Implementation ................................................................................. 148
6.7 Performance Standards ............................................................................................ 149
A. Purposes ......................................................................................................................... 149
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................... 149
C. Measurement and Certification ................................................................................ 149
D. Standards ....................................................................................................................... 149
6. 8 Stormwater Management ........................................................................................ 150
A. Purposes ......................................................................................................................... 150
B. Applicability ................................................................................................................... 151
C. Stormwater Management Plan ................................................................................. 151
6.9 Outdoor Display, Dining, and Storage Areas ......................................................... 154
A. Outdoor Sales, Display, and Storage ......................................................................... 154
B. Outdoor Dining .............................................................................................................. 154
6.10 Fences and Walls ....................................................................................................... 155
A. Location and Design Standards ................................................................................. 155
6.11 Architectural Guidelines ........................................................................................... 156
A. Purpose and Intent ....................................................................................................... 156
B. Background ................................................................................................................... 156
C. Applicability and Procedure ...................................................................................... 156
D. I-1 and CP Design Standards ...................................................................................... 157
E. C-1 and C-2 Design Standards .................................................................................... 158
F. CG-N and CG-S Design Standards ............................................................................. 160
6.12 Neighborhood Anti-Blight ......................................................................................... 162
A. Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 162
B. Regulation ...................................................................................................................... 162
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions ........................................................................................ 164
7.1 Temporary Events ....................................................................................................... 164
7.2 Telecommunications Towers and Antennas .......................................................... 164
A. Intent and Purpose .................................................................................................... 164
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
8
B. Jurisdiction and Applicability ................................................................................... 165
C. General Standards .................................................................................................... 165
D. Applications ................................................................................................................ 168
E. New Antenna ............................................................................................................. 169
F. Termination or Nonuse Removal .............................................................................. 169
G. Bonding ....................................................................................................................... 170
7.3 Firing Ranges, Target Shooting, and the Discharge of Firearms for Recreational
Purposes ................................................................................................................................. 170
A. Prohibition ................................................................................................................... 170
B. Firearm Plan Requirement ........................................................................................ 170
7.4 Small Wind Turbines ................................................................................................... 173
A. Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 173
B. Permits Required ........................................................................................................ 173
C. Procedure for Review ................................................................................................ 173
D. Standards ..................................................................................................................... 174
7.5 Outdoor Wood-Burning Furnaces............................................................................ 177
Article 8 – Procedures .............................................................................................................. 178
8.1 Preliminary Concept Plan and Pre-Application Review ...................................... 178
A. Purpose and Applicability .......................................................................................... 178
B. Submission and Procedures ........................................................................................ 178
8.2 Zoning Permit .............................................................................................................. 180
A. Applicability ................................................................................................................. 180
B. Submission and Procedures ........................................................................................ 180
C. Notice Provisions .......................................................................................................... 180
D. Foundation Survey Required....................................................................................... 181
E. Zoning Permit Expiration ............................................................................................... 181
8.3 Certificate of Zoning Compliance .......................................................................... 182
A. Applicability ................................................................................................................. 182
B. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 182
C. Notice Provisions .......................................................................................................... 182
8.4 Site Plan Application ................................................................................................. 184
A. Applicability .................................................................................................................. 184
B. Submission ...................................................................................................................... 184
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
9
C. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 184
D. Approval Considerations ............................................................................................. 185
E. Commission Action ....................................................................................................... 185
F. Submission of an Approved Plan ................................................................................ 186
G. Modifications to an Approved Site Plan ................................................................... 186
8.5 Special Permit Application ....................................................................................... 187
A. Applicability .................................................................................................................. 187
B. Pre-Application.............................................................................................................. 187
C. Submission ..................................................................................................................... 187
D. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 187
E. Approval Criteria ........................................................................................................... 188
F. Decision Considerations ............................................................................................... 190
G. Commission Action ...................................................................................................... 191
H. Following Approval ....................................................................................................... 191
I. Amendments and Modifications to an Existing Special Permit ............................... 192
8.6 Zone Text Amendment or Zoning Map Amendment Application ..................... 193
A. Applicability .................................................................................................................. 193
B. Submission ...................................................................................................................... 193
C. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 194
D. Approval Considerations ............................................................................................. 194
E. Commission Action ....................................................................................................... 195
8.7 Variance Application ................................................................................................ 196
A. Purpose and Applicability ........................................................................................... 196
B. Submission ...................................................................................................................... 196
C. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 196
D. Decision Considerations .............................................................................................. 197
E. Board Action .................................................................................................................. 198
8.8 Certificate of Location Approval Application ....................................................... 199
A. Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 199
B. Submission ...................................................................................................................... 199
C. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 199
D. Approval Considerations ............................................................................................. 200
8.9 Floodplain District Development Permit Application ........................................... 201
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
10
A. Purpose and Applicability ........................................................................................... 201
B. Submission ...................................................................................................................... 201
C. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 201
D. Approval Considerations ............................................................................................. 201
E. Commission Action ....................................................................................................... 202
8.10 Brookfield Aquifer Protection District Review ......................................................... 203
A. Purpose and Applicability ........................................................................................... 203
B. Submission ...................................................................................................................... 203
C. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 204
D. Approval Considerations ............................................................................................. 204
8.11 Procedural Requirements for Applications ............................................................ 205
A. Application Submittal Requirements ......................................................................... 205
B. Receipt of Application ................................................................................................. 205
C. Incomplete Applications ............................................................................................. 205
D. Statutory Time Frames, Public Hearings and Decisions ........................................... 206
E. Notice Requirements .................................................................................................... 206
F. Consultation ................................................................................................................... 209
G. Professional Responsibility for Plans and Designs ..................................................... 210
8.12 Bonds ........................................................................................................................... 212
A. Bond Form ..................................................................................................................... 212
B. Bond Release ................................................................................................................. 212
C. Collection Costs ........................................................................................................... 213
8.13 Excavation Permit ...................................................................................................... 214
A. Applicability .................................................................................................................. 214
B. Submission ...................................................................................................................... 214
C. Procedures .................................................................................................................... 214
D. Approval Considerations ............................................................................................. 215
E. Commission Action ....................................................................................................... 215
Article 9 – Administration and Enforcement ......................................................................... 216
A. Enforcement .................................................................................................................. 216
B. Designation of Enforcement Agent(s) ....................................................................... 216
C. Enforcement Actions ................................................................................................... 216
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements .............................................................................. 220
2019-April-19
Table of Contents
11
1.1 Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 220
1.2 Preliminary Concept Plan and Pre-Application Review ...................................... 220
1.3 Zoning Permit .............................................................................................................. 220
1. 4 Certificate of Zoning Compliance .......................................................................... 222
1.5 Site Plan ....................................................................................................................... 223
1.6 Special Permit ............................................................................................................. 226
1.7 Text Amendment ....................................................................................................... 228
1.8 Zone Change ............................................................................................................. 228
1.9 Certificate of Location Approval Application ....................................................... 229
1.10 Floodplain District Development Permit ................................................................. 229
1.11 Excavation Permit ...................................................................................................... 231
Appendix 2 - TCD Design Guidelines ..................................................................................... 234
Appendix 3 - Fee Schedule ..................................................................................................... 235
Appendix 4 - Revisions ............................................................................................................. 236
2019-April-19
Article 1 - Introduction
12
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 1 – Introduction
1. 1 Authority
These Regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut
General Statutes (CGS), as amended (Section 8-1 et seq).
1. 2 Purpose
These Regulations are adopted for the purposes set forth in CGS 8-2, including:
A. To guide the future growth and development of the Town of Brookfield in
accordance with the adopted Plan of Conservation and Development
B. To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; lessen
congestion in the streets; prevent the overcrowding of land; avoid undue
concentration of population; provide adequate light and air; and facilitate the
adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and
other public improvements.
C. To divide the Town into districts with considerations as to the character of
each district and its suitability for particular uses so as to conserve the value of
property and buildings and promote the most appropriate use of land
throughout the Town
D. To protect historic features and existing and potential groundwater and
drinking water supplies of the Town
E. To assure that proper provision is made for sedimentation control and the
control of erosion caused by wind or water
F. To encourage the development of housing opportunities, including
opportunities for multiple dwelling units, consistent with soil types, terrain, and
infrastructure capacity
G. To promote housing choice and economic diversity in housing, including
housing for both low and moderate income households, and identified housing
needs
H. To encourage energy efficient patterns of development; the use of solar and
other renewable forms of energy; and energy conservation in such a way as to
preserve the integrity, stability, and value of land and buildings
2019-April-19
Article 1 - Introduction
13
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
1. 3 Zoning Map
A. Zoning Districts
1. To accomplish the purposes of these Regulations, the Town of Brookfield is
divided into different districts as enumerated within these Regulations.
2. The location and boundaries of zoning districts shall be as shown on the
official Zoning Map, as may be amended from time to time, which is on file in the
Office of the Town Clerk.
3. The official Zoning Map is hereby declared to be a part of these Zoning
Regulations.
4. Any facsimile of the official map is intended for the convenience of the public
only and shall not be considered to be the official Zoning Map of the Town.
B. Boundary Interpretation
If not clearly delineated on the official Zoning Map identified above, district boundaries
shall be construed in the following sequence:
1. Following the centerline of a street, railroad, right of way, or easement;
2. Following the property lines of record at the time of adoption of these
Regulations or relevant amendments hereto;
3. Where district boundaries are set back from street lines, they shall be
considered as running parallel thereto at distances shown or measured; or
4. Following the lines of a particular physical feature including brooks, streams, or
ridgelines
In case of any remaining uncertainty regarding zone boundaries on the Zoning Map,
the zone boundary shall be determined by the Zoning Commission (Commission).
1. 4 Interpretation of Regulations
A. General
1. Should any doubt exist as to the meaning of any provision of these
Regulations, the decision and interpretation of the Zoning Commission shall
prevail.
2. To assist in the uniform application of the regulations in future cases, a written
record of all interpretations rendered by the Commission, or decided by the
courts, shall be maintained by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
B. Prohibited if Not Permitted
1. Any principal use of land, buildings, or structures not expressly permitted by
these Regulations in a particular zoning district is prohibited in that district.
2. Any activity not expressly permitted in the Regulations is prohibited.
2019-April-19
Article 1 - Introduction
14
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. Accessory uses that are not specifically permitted by these Regulations but
which are customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted principal use
shall be permitted unless specifically identified as prohibited elsewhere in these
regulations, subject to any conditions as may be imposed by these Regulations.
4. In the event of uncertainty as to whether a use or activity is permitted, the
Commission shall be responsible for interpreting these Regulations.
C. Minimum Requirements
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare unless the context clearly indicates that such
provision is intended to be a maximum limitation.
D. Strictest Standards Control
1. In the event that there are found to be conflicting requirements within these
Regulations, the most restrictive provision shall be applied.
2. The provisions of these Regulations may be superseded by other local, state, or
federal laws or regulations.
3. These Regulations do not release a person from compliance with a more
restrictive law, ordinance, easement, covenant, rule, regulation, or permit.
1. 5 Conformity
A. Conformity Required
Except as may be otherwise provided in these Regulations (such as for a lawfully
existing nonconforming lot or similar circumstance):
1. No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied except in conformity
with these Regulations for the zone in which the land, building, or structure is
located.
2. No building or other structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved,
replaced, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered except in conformity
with these Regulations for the zone in which the building, structure, or land is
located.
3. No land shall be sold or divided in a manner that results in a dimensional
standard or any other standard that does not conform to the requirements of
these Regulations.
4. No lot shall be diminished in area except in conformity with the provisions of
these Regulations.
5. No yard, setback, or other minimum requirement shall be reduced except in
conformity with the provisions of these Regulations.
2019-April-19
Article 1 - Introduction
15
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6. No height, building coverage, or other maximum requirement shall be
increased except in conformity with the provisions of these Regulations.
7. No land shall be sold or divided in a manner that results in a use of all or a part
thereof ceasing to conform to these Regulations.
B. Valid Permits
Nothing in these Regulations shall require any change in the plans, construction, or
designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued in
accordance with regulations which were in effect on the date the permit was applied
for.
1. 6 Nonconformities
A. Non-Conforming Uses
1. Continuance
Any non-conforming use of buildings, structures or land may be continued.
2. Extension, Expansion or Relocation
No non-conforming use of buildings, structures or land shall hereinafter be
extended, expanded or relocated on the same lot.
3. Change of Non-Conforming Uses
No non-conforming use of buildings, structures or land shall hereinafter be
changed into a new or different non-conforming use, except the Commission, by
Special Permit in accordance with Section 8.5, may allow a change from one
non-conforming use to another non-conforming use where:
a. those parts of an existing building site are manifestly designed or
arranged for such new or different use.
b. such new use is not precisely the same as the old use, but the new use
is generally similar to the old use;
c. where the transfer or change does not involve replacing existing nonconforming
structures with new non-conforming structures in whole or in
part; and
d. where the new or different use does not constitute the extension or
expansion of an old use, or part thereof on the same lot.
4. Discontinuance
No non-conforming use of buildings, structures or land which shall have been
voluntarily discontinued with an intent not to reestablish such use or building or
structure shall be resumed or replaced by the same or any other non-conforming
use. Any building, structure or portion thereof containing a non-conforming use
2019-April-19
Article 1 - Introduction
16
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or other
casualty may be restored and continued as a non-conforming use to the same
extent as said use existing before such destruction, provided that such nonconforming
use shall not be extended, expanded, or transformed into a different
non-conforming use.
5. Use Permitted by Variance
A use of land or of a structure which is not a permitted use in the district in which
it is located but which is permitted by variance shall be deemed to be a
nonconforming use.
B. Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures
A non-conforming building or structure may not be expanded, extended, relocated or
altered if such expansion, extension, relocation or alteration would increase the degree
of any nonconformity. Specifically as listed below:
1. Expansion, Extension, Alteration, or Replacement
a. No non-conforming building or structure shall be relocated on the lot.
b. No portion of any non-conforming building coverage on a lot shall be
transferred from one location to another location on the lot.
c. No portion of any non-conforming building coverage that is
attributable to an open structure without a roof, such as a deck, roof
garden, balcony, open entry, handicapped ramp, swimming pool, tennis
court, paddle tennis court, etc., shall be roofed over, enclosed or
otherwise expanded, extended or altered in any vertical or horizontal
direction from a structure into a building.
d. Any non-conforming building or structure can be strengthened,
restored or replaced; however, no portion of an existing building or
structure that is nonconforming as to setback shall have the portion of the
building or structure within the setback roofed over, enclosed, extended,
expanded or altered in any vertical or horizontal direction.
e. A building or structure which is prohibited by these regulations but
which is permitted by variance shall be deemed to be a non-conforming
building or structure.
f. The replacement of entry steps or platforms projecting into the setbacks
or in excess of coverage and no larger in area than the existing entry
steps and/or platform are not considered an expansion, extension, or
alteration.
2. Restoration
2019-April-19
Article 1 - Introduction
17
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Any non-conforming building or structure or non-conforming portion of a building
or structure which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of
God, or by other casualty may be restored or reconstructed to the same nonconforming
building or structure as existed before such damage; provided that
a. such restoration or reconstruction shall be limited to the damaged
portion of the building or structure;
b. such restoration or reconstruction shall adhere to all procedures
necessary to obtain a proper Zoning Permit. The owner of such damaged
building or structure may replace and reorganize the same amount of
gross interior floor space in a manner to more nearly conform to these
regulations.
c. such restoration or reconstruction of any structure within the Special
Flood Hazard Area as defined herein shall comply with Section 5.5.
3. Unsafe Conditions
Nothing herein shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any existing non-conforming building, structure or any part
thereof which shall have become unsafe as determined by the Building
Inspector or Fire Marshal.
C. Non-Conforming Lots
1. New buildings or Structures
A new building, structure or use, or an addition to an existing structure on a nonconforming
lot shall comply with all applicable requirements of the zoning district
in which it is located.
2. Adjoining Lots
If two or more adjoining lots of record, one or more of which are undeveloped
and fail to meet the requirements of these regulations with regard to lot area
and/or lot shape, were in the same ownership on June 15, 1960 or subsequent
date, and if such lots taken together would form one or more lots, each more
nearly meeting the requirements of these regulations with regard to lot area and
lot shape, such lot or lots shall merge and shall no longer be considered legally
existing as separate lots and must be combined and used in compliance with
the present lot area and lot shape requirements irrespective of subsequent
changes in ownership.
2019-April-19
Article 1 - Introduction
18
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
1. 7 Validity, Separability, and Effective Date
A. Provisions Severable
If any provision of these Regulations is ruled by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the provision expressly stated in
the decision to be invalid, and all other provisions of these Regulations shall continue to
be valid and fully effective.
B. Effective Date
These Regulations and any amendment or change hereto shall be in full force and
effect from the date established by the Commission in accordance with the CGS.
The effective date of these Regulations is 2018-December-21.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
19
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 2 - Definitions
2.1 Introduction
For the purposes of these Regulations, the terms, phrases, and words used in these
Regulations shall be construed as defined in this section unless the Commission finds
that the term, phrase, or word is otherwise clearly qualified by its context.
A. General Terminology and Use of Words
When consistent with the context, the following rules apply:
1. The word “shall” is mandatory.
2. The word “may” is permissive.
3. Words used in the present tense include the future and vice versa.
4. Words in the singular include the plural and vice versa.
5. Words in the masculine include the feminine, neuter, and vice versa.
6. The words “parcel,” “property,” “lot,” “plot,” and “premises” have the
same meaning.
7. The words "occupied" or "used" include the words "designed, arranged, or
intended to be occupied or used."
8. The words "zone," "zoning district," and "district" have the same meaning.
9. The word "person" also includes a partnership, association, trust,
corporation, or other legal entity.
10. The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
11. The word "built" includes the words "erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged, and moved."
B. Terms Not Defined
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, words not defined in this
Article shall be interpreted by the Commission after consulting one or more of the
following:
1. The State Building Code, as amended
2. The CGS, as amended
3. A comprehensive general dictionary
C. Text to Control
In the case of any difference of meaning between the text of a Regulation and any
caption, illustration, or table, the text shall prevail.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
20
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
D. Acronyms
For the purposes of these Regulations, the following terms are abbreviated as follows:
? Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection - DEEP
? Connecticut Department of Public Health – DPH
? Connecticut Department of Transportation – DOT
? Connecticut General Statutes – CGS
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
21
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2.2 Defined Terms
ACTIVE RECREATIONAL AREA
An area containing appropriate structures and facilities for recreational
purposes.
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS
A business related to adult oriented entertainment, which includes, but is not
limited to, adult bookstores, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult cabaret,
novelty businesses or other personal service businesses.
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE
An Adult Amusement Machine includes any amusement machine that is
regularly used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by its
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or
anatomical areas of the human body for viewing by adults 18 years or older.
ADULT CABARET
An Adult Cabaret is a public or private establishment that is licensed to serve
food and/or alcoholic beverages and that features nude or partially nude
dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers where
the emphasis is on depicting sexual activities or anatomical areas of the human
body consisting of male and female genitalia or female breasts.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater is an enclosed building with a capacity of less
than 50 persons used regularly or routinely for presenting materials that have as a
dominant theme an emphasis on sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas of
the human body for observation by adults wherein minors are excluded by virtue
of age.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER
An Adult Motion Picture Theater is an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or
more persons used regularly or routinely for the presentation of motion pictures,
films, video cassettes, and similar visual media characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical
areas of the human body for observation by adults wherein minors are excluded
by virtue of age.
AGE RESTRICTED COMMUNITY
A residential community consisting of dwellings supporting features and
amenities for the exclusive use of senior citizens planned and designed to meet
the criteria set forth at §42 USC 3607 (b)(2) as amended.
ANTENNA
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
22
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
A device used to collect, transmit, and/or receive telecommunications or radio
signals. Examples include panels, microwave dishes, and single pole devices.
The use of these facilities is not considered a public utility.
APARTMENT
Any building or any integrated group of buildings under the same ownership
arranged, intended, or designed to be occupied by two or more families living
independently of each other.
AQUIFER
A geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel capable of yielding
usable amounts of water.
AQUIFER PROTECTION ZONE (BROOKFIELD)
Recharge areas of designated aquifers. The "aquifer protection zones" are
shown on an overlay to the official Zoning Map entitled Aquifer Protection
District, Town of Brookfield effective January 1, 2000.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent-orgreater
chance of flooding in any given year.
AVERAGE GROUND LEVEL
See Height
BASE FLOOD
The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
The elevation of the crest of the base flood (100-year flood). The height in
relation to mean sea level (NAVD of 1988) expected to be reached by the
waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplain of coastal and
riverine areas.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
23
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor subgrade below the average exterior
finished ground level when measured within ten feet of the front wall on all sides.
For floodplain management purposes, a “basement” is any area of the building
having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BEDROOM
An area within a residential building having the potential to be utilized as a
sleeping area on a consistent basis and which provides privacy to the occupant.
Entry is through a door from a common area, not through a room already
deemed a bedroom. It normally contains at least one egress window and a
closet. Dens, home offices, libraries, and the like are not considered bedrooms.
BOAT DOCK/MOORING, PRIVATE
A structure or anchored device used for the mooring of not more than two boats
or yachts of more than 12 feet in length registered only to the
landowner/resident of the property adjacent to such boat dock/mooring.
BREWERY
A manufacturing facility as defined in CGS § 30-16 (b) where beer can be
manufactured, stored, bottled, and sold at either wholesale or at retail prices in
sealed bottles or other sealed containers for consumption off premises or offered
for sale on the premises. Free samples or tastings may be offered, all in
accordance with state permitting requirements.
BREWPUB
A brewery or microbrewery with a restaurant and/or a tasting room; a facility as
defined in the CGS § 30-16(f) and (g) including brewery or microbrewery
operations as permitted in these Regulations where beer can be manufactured,
stored, bottled, and sold at wholesale or at retail prices in sealed bottles or other
sealed containers for consumption off premises or sold to be consumed on the
premises in a room that is ancillary to the production of beer, with or without the
sale of food, all in accordance with state permitting requirements.
BUFFER STRIP
A suitable open space, unoccupied except for plant materials, left in its natural
state (or) having additional landscaping provided at locations deemed
appropriate by the Commission in order to screen the project from adjacent
properties, such additional screen to produce within three years a visual barrier.
No roads or drives (except for street access across such “buffer strips”), parking
areas, buildings, structures, or facilities shall be constructed within such “buffer
strips.” For safety purposes, lighting devices and traffic signs immediately
adjacent to any parking or driveway area may be constructed within such
buffers at such locations and height deemed appropriate by the Commission.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
24
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
BUILDING
Any structure that has a roof and is supported by walls on all sides.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY
Any building that is subordinate to and whose use is customarily incidental and
accessory to the use of the principal building on the same lot including, but not
limited to, a shed, detached garage, or cabana or poolhouse. [amended eff. 2019-Apr-
19]
BUILDING AREA
This term is commonly known as “building footprint.” The term means the ground
area enclosed by the walls of a building, together with the area of all covered
porches and roofed sections and is expressed in “square feet.” It is chiefly used
in connection with the calculation of “building coverage” as defined elsewhere
herein. Calculations include the width of the exterior walls.
BUILDING COVERAGE
See Coverage
BUILDING HEIGHT
See Height
BUILDING LINE
A line parallel to a street at a distance equal to the required front yard or at a
greater distance when otherwise legally established by the municipality or by
private covenant. Within an interior lot, the building line may be any line
approximately parallel to any interior property line set at not less than the
prescribed side or rear yard setback distances for the applicable zoning district.
BUILDING MATERIALS
“Building Materials” shall mean lumber, bricks, concrete, cinder blocks, plumbing
materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles,
motors, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in
constructing any structure.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING
A building, the size or location of which is not permitted by any provision of these
Regulations for the district in which such building is located but which was legally
in existence at the effective date of these Regulations or the applicable
provision which resulted in the nonconformity, or was subject to variance
approval.
BUILDING SQUARE FOOTAGE
This term shall mean the cumulative total of all areas of a building, calculated in
square feet. It is differentiated from “building area” as defined elsewhere herein,
which pertains solely to “footprint.” It is measured from the exterior dimensions of
perimeter walls. It includes the area of each story, basement, and all covered
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
25
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
areas. It excludes porticos and colonnades; uncovered courtyards, decks, and
patios; and other facilities considered by the Commission not to be a useable
part of the building (e.g. mechanical rooms). This term is often used in the
calculation of required parking, the determination as to whether a Special Permit
is required, building size limitations, and similar “size” calculations.
COMMERCIAL
Sale or exchange of goods, commodities, and/or personal or professional
services.
COMMERCIAL USE
Activity involving the sale of goods, commodities and/or personal or professional
services carried out for profit.
COMMISSION
The Zoning Commission of the Town of Brookfield, Connecticut.
COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITY
A noncommercial establishment intended primarily for the benefit and service of
the community in which it is located. Such facilities may include, but are not
limited to, community centers, community health clinics, senior centers, WMCA
or YWCA facilities, and boys and girls clubs.
CONDOMINIUM
Any building or any integrated group of buildings in a common interest
community (as defined by CGS Chapter 828) arranged, intended, or designed
to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other and
so designed as to give the maximum amount of open land areas per family.
CONSERVED LAND AREA
A parcel of land designated for open space use or conservation by the
Commission. Uses shall be limited to those that will maintain or enhance the
open natural state of the land, including but not limited to agriculture, forestry,
wildlife or wetland area, greenbelts, parks, or similar areas.
CONTRACTOR’S YARD
A commercially or industrially zoned lot, with or without support structures and
buildings, limited to the storage and maintenance of equipment commonly used
in the construction industry, including but not necessarily limited to dump trucks,
bucket loaders, excavators, bulldozers, and the like. The lot may also store
construction materials acquired in anticipation of their use at remote locations.
COURTYARD
An open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building, which space
is bounded on three sides by the walls of the building.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
26
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
COVERAGE
Building Coverage – The total
area of a parcel covered by
buildings or roofed areas as
measured along the outside
wall at ground level.
Impervious Coverage – Total
area of a parcel covered by
impervious surface.
Impervious Surface – A hard,
man-made surface that
prevents the percolation of
stormwater into the soil including
building roofs, driveways,
parking lots, sidewalks and other
paved surfaces, swimming
pools, and other impenetrable
surfaces.
Pervious Surface - A surface
area that consists of porous or
noncompacted loose material
that allows water to pass
through and infiltrate the underlying soil. Examples are manufactured pervious
pavers and parking spaces, loose gravel, rocks, and sand. It can be a
monolithic slab of porous material if installed and maintained per manufacturer’s
specifications.
CUL-DE-SAC
A street open at only one end.
CUSTOMARY USES
Accessory uses and structures that are customarily and reasonably incidental to
a permitted principal use on the same premises (such as tool and storage sheds,
garages, a swing set, child play structure, doghouse, or birdbath on residential
lots).
CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION
A low-impact business or service use conducted entirely within a dwelling by the
permanent resident or owner of a residential site where the primary use of the
site is for residential dwelling purposes. Typical of the types of permissible uses
are offices of medical, engineering, musical, educational, and financial
professionals; home craftsmen; administrative, computer, or clerical offices; and
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
27
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
the like, as determined by the Commission. The conducting of a clinic, tearoom,
antique shop, or similar uses is not permitted under this section.
DAY CARE (as per CCGS §19a-77(b) and as may be amended)
Child Day Care – Provider of supplementary care to more than twelve related or
unrelated children outside their own home on a regular basis.
Family Day Care – Private family homes caring for not more than six children,
including the provider’s own children not in school full time, where the children
are cared for not less than three, nor more than twelve hours during a twentyfour
hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis.
Group Day Care – Provider of a program of supplementary care (A) to not less
than seven or more than twelve related or unrelated children on a regular basis,
or (B) that meets the definition of a family day care home except that it
operates in a facility other than a private home.
DENSITY
The total number of dwelling units permitted.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to the construction of buildings or other structures; placement of
building or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or
drilling operations or the storage of related equipment or materials; the storage,
deposition, or extractions of materials; and the installation, repair, or removal of
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities located within
the area of special flood hazard.
DISCHARGE
Any accidental or intentional disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, incineration, or placing of any material into or on any land or water.
DISTURBED AREA
An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed, leaving the land
subject to accelerated erosion.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL
An animal normally adapted to live and breed in a tame condition.
DRAINAGE STRUCTURE
Any structure (culvert, pipe, swale, etc.), including both naturally occurring and
man-made, that conducts drainage.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
28
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
DRIVE, LOCAL ACCESS
Any drive or roadway that services less than the proposed project as a whole or
the majority of residents.
DRIVE, MAIN ACCESS
Any drive or roadway that serves the proposed project as a whole or the majority
of residents.
DRIVE-THRU FACILITY
A drive-thru facility is, and is limited to, a use that is accessory to a principal
permitted or specially permitted use and such drive-thru facility allows a
restaurant or retail business to dispense food, beverages, products, goods, or
services from within a building to patrons or customers who remain in motor
vehicles.
DUPLEX
A residential building containing two dwelling units. See also Dwelling, Two-Family.
DWELLINGS
Dwelling, Attached
A dwelling unit separated from other dwelling units in the same building by a
continuous vertical party wall which extends from foundation to roof, without
openings except for utilities.
Dwelling, Detached
A dwelling unit surrounded on all sides by yards.
Dwelling, Multiple
A group of dwelling units on one lot containing separate dwelling units for
three or more families, having separate or joint entrances, services, or
facilities.
Dwelling, One-Family
A detached dwelling unit designed for or occupied solely as a dwelling for
one family.
Dwelling, Two-Family
A detached building designated or occupied solely as dwelling units for two
families living independently of each other.
Dwelling Unit
One or more rooms in a residential structure, which room or rooms is (are)
arranged, designed, used, or altered for use by one family, said room or
rooms containing kitchen or kitchen area and a bathroom with bathtub
and/or shower, a toilet and sink. The term shall not be deemed to include
units in a hotel, motel, or rooming house.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
29
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
ELDERLY
A status attained by a resident beyond the age of 55.
EROSION
The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or other
geological agents, including processes such as gravitational creep.
FALL ZONE
The potential fall area for a small wind energy system. It is measured by using 120
percent of the total height as the radius around the center point of the base of
the tower.
FAMILY
Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living
together as a single housekeeping unit provided that a nonprofit group of not
more than five persons keeping house together but not necessarily related by
blood or marriage may be considered a "family."
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA)
The federal agency that administers the national flood insurance program.
FENCE
A physical barrier to separate or enclose a specific portion or portions of a lot.
See Fence Height, under Height
FIREARM
See CGS and State Regulations
FIREARM ACTIVITIES
The discharge of firearms for any purpose other than hunting with a valid permit.
Firearm activities include, but are not limited to, the use of property for a firing
range or for target shooting purposes.
FIREWORKS
See CGS § 29-356. For the purposes of these Zoning Regulations, fireworks shall
specifically include both “sparklers” and “fountains” as both of these terms are
defined in CGS § 29-356.
FLICKER
See Small Wind Energy Systems
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
30
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
FLOODING-RELATED TERMS
Flood or Flooding
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (Floodway)
The official map on which FEMA has delineated the boundaries of the
floodway.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
The official map on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study
The official report from FEMA which contains examination, evaluation, and
the determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, the corresponding
water surface elevations.
Floodplain
The area adjacent to a river or stream that is flooded in the regulatory flood.
The "Floodplain" includes the floodway and is bounded by the limits of the
regulatory flood (100-year floodplain).
Floodproofing
A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustment to properties
and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of
flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and
contents of buildings in a flood hazard area.
Floodway
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
New Construction
Structures for which the "Start of Construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of the FIRM, June 15, 1979, and including any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
Regulatory Flood
A flood that is representative of large floods known to have occurred in the
area and which is reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to
occur on a particular stream. The "regulatory flood" for each stream and
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
31
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
river subject to the provisions of the Regulations in Section 5.5 of these
Regulations.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
The elevation to which uses regulated by these Regulations are required to
be elevated or floodproofed.
Water Surface Elevation
Height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or
other datum where specified), of water within the floodplain areas of
coastal or riverine areas.
FLOOR
The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top
of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame
construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for the
parking of vehicles.
GENERAL SOIL TYPE
The predominant soil type in a zoning district and its accompanying
characteristics.
GROUNDWATER
Water in the subsurface zone beneath the water table in which all pore spaces
are filled with water.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT (GVW)
GVW shall mean the total vehicle weight including vehicle, body, passengers,
cargo, accessories, etc.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Hazardous or contaminant material shall mean any substance or mixture of
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant actual or
potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health if such
substances or mixtures were discharged to land or water. Toxic or hazardous
materials include, without limitation, synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum
products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and
all substances defined as toxic or hazardous under CGS and CT DEEP, and also
includes such products and solvents and thinners in quantities greater than
normal household use.
HEALTH AND FITNESS CENTER
Indoor facilities for providing physical exercise, gymnastics, weight control and
diet programs, physical rehabilitation, individual sports training, and similar
activities but not including sports events reserved for indoor sports courts.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
32
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
HEIGHT
Average Ground Level
A reference plane established by the average of the ground level as
measured at the base of all of the exterior walls. Measurements shall be taken
at intervals of ten feet around the perimeter of the building or structure.
Building Height
In measuring the height of a building or other structure to determine
compliance with maximum height provisions, measurements shall be taken
from the lower of either the pre-existing average ground level or the finished
average ground level at the base of the building or structure to the:
? highest point of mansard, dome (curvilinear), shed, or flat roofs,
including any parapets; or,
? the mean level between the eaves and ridge of gable, hip, or Aframe
roofs; or,
? the mean level between the highest eave and the ridge of a saltbox,
or the highest pitch break for a gambrel roof.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
33
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Fence Height
The vertical distance measured from the side of the fence that is interior to
the property from the ground directly below the fence to the top of the
fence panel excluding support posts and ornamental features that do not
extend more than 8 inches above the fence panel. Where the grade below
the fence has been altered for the sole purpose of elevating the fence, the
measurement shall be taken from the original grade. Allowance may be
made for variations in height along the length of the fence due to uneven
terrain so long as the majority of the fence sections do not exceed the
maximum height requirement and the panel itself does not exceed eight
feet in height. In the case of a fence on or within three feet of a retaining
wall, fence height shall be measured including the height of the retaining
wall, unless the fence shall be deemed necessary for safety by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. If a fence is setback at least three feet from the face of
the retaining wall, the fence height shall be measured from the base of the
fence.
HISTORIC DISTRICT
A historic district established pursuant to CGS Chapter 97a.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
Any structure that is (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior (SI) as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined
by the SI as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the SI to qualify as a registered historic
district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs that have been approved by the SI; or (d)
individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified by either: (1) a state
program as determined by the SI or (2) directly by the SI in states without an
approved program.
HOTEL
See Lodging
HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY
See Lodging
HOUSEHOLD PET
An animal customarily housed within the confines of a dwelling.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE/ SURFACE
See Coverage
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
34
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
INDOOR SPORTS COURTS
Indoor facilities for the playing of such sporting activities and games as
basketball, volleyball, racquetball, handball, tennis, soccer, batting practice
games, swimming and other similar events requiring group participation. The
courts/pool shall be of such size and dimensions as specified by the rules
governing the playing of such sports.
INSTITUTIONAL USE
A public or quasi-public use or facility incorporated as a public benefit not-forprofit
corporation and which qualifies for exemption under the Internal Revenue
Code, typically including houses of worship, libraries, public or private schools, or
hospitals. The term shall exclude those institutions which are penal or
correctional institutions, domiciliary care facilities, community residences, or
institutions owned or operated by a government agency.
JUNKYARD
Any junkyard, motor vehicle junk business, and motor vehicle junkyard as defined
by CGS. The term shall also include any place of outside storage or deposit,
whether in connection with a business or not, for two or more motor vehicles
which are no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public
highways and shall also include any place of outside storage or deposit of used
parts of motor vehicles which on any lot have an aggregate bulk equal to one
automobile. In residential districts and recreational districts, however, the term
shall also include the outside storage of more than one unregistered motor
vehicle in any lot in such manner as to be visible from any street or any other lot.
"Junkyard" shall also mean any place in or on which discarded metal, glass,
plastic, paper, cordage, or other waste or secondhand material that has not
been a part or is not intended to be a part of any motor vehicle is stored or
deposited.
KENNEL
Any premises on which four or more dogs, four months old or older are kept.
LAND TREATMENT
Any groundwork, including filling, grading, and draining, necessary to comply
with Section 6.5 of these Regulations.
LANDSCAPING AND RELATED TERMS
Berm
A raised, sloped landscape device made of earthen material designed to
provide visual separation between areas and which may contain planted
materials and such natural landscape architectural features as boulders,
sculptures, timbers, or stone walls, and arranged to the satisfaction of the
Commission.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
35
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Evergreen Tree
A coniferous species of tree with an expected mature height greater than 20
feet.
Ground Cover
Plant materials generally not in excess of ten inches in height and used for
decorative purposes or for their soil stabilization characteristics. Such
materials include but are not necessarily limited to ivy, pachysandra, crown
vetch, ground pine, and similar materials.
Lawn
An area planted and maintained in perennial grass. The selection of soils,
sod, or grass seeds and maintenance practices shall result in lawn areas
typical of lawn areas in adjacent residential zones.
Shade Tree
A deciduous tree with an expected mature height of 35 feet or greater.
Shrub
A deciduous or coniferous species of plant with a mature height of at least six
feet.
Understory Tree
A deciduous tree with an expected mature height of 12 feet.
LIMITED ENTERTAINMENT AREA
See Restaurant-Related Terms
LIVESTOCK/POULTRY FARMING, COMMERCIAL
Horses, cows, ponies, sheep, or similar-type grazing animals and including
chickens, hens, turkeys, or similar-type poultry raised/kept for the purpose of
conducting a business, industry, trade, or similar type of farming venture.
LIVESTOCK/POULTRY, NONCOMMERCIAL
Horses, cows, ponies, sheep or similar-type grazing animals and including
chickens, hens, turkeys or similar-type poultry raised/kept for the purpose of a
hobby, diversion, distraction, or similar pursuit. This shall include the raising of
animals for competition or show, such as in fairs, 4-H programs, or similarly
sponsored matches.
LITTER
“Litter, junk, trash, rubbish, refuse, or debris of any kind” shall mean garbage,
scrap, and waste materials including metals, boxes, cartons, bottles, cans, rope,
rubber, rags, plastic, paper, glass, wood and wooden sticks or pallets or parts
therefrom (excluding those stored and used in connection with an industrial or
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
36
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
commercial operation on the site), yard trimmings, cut tree branches,
appliances, televisions or furniture not usable for the purpose for which they were
manufactured, or any other scrap or waste material of any kind, including parts
or components of any of the above.
LODGING
Hotel
A building providing lodging for persons with or without meals and intended
for the accommodation of transients and so designed that normal access
and egress are controlled from a central point.
Hotel, Extended Stay
A building designed as a hotel, generally intended to accommodate longer
lengths of stay, where all guest rooms are fully furnished and have a full
kitchen.
Motel
A building or group of buildings providing lodging for persons intended
primarily for the accommodation of transients, having a private outside
entrance for each room or suite of rooms and for each of which rooms or
suites of rooms automobile space is provided on the premises and which do
not have cooking facilities within lodging rooms.
Short-Term Rental
The temporary rental of a dwelling unit or part of a property for occupancy
by someone other than the unit’s owner or permanent resident for no more
than 14 consecutive days during any six-month period, with no property
being used for such temporary rental more than three times during any sixmonth
period.
LOT AND RELATED TERMS
Lot
A plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or
more permitted buildings, including such open spaces as are required by this
chapter. In the case of public, institutional, commercial, or industrial
buildings, a group of buildings under the same ownership may be
considered as occupying the same "lot;" a "lot" may or may not be the land
shown as a "lot" on a recorded deed or plat.
Lot Area
The area of land contained within the property lines of a lot.
Lot, Corner
A lot at the intersection of an abutting on two or more streets where the
angle of intersection is not more than 135 degrees or where the intersection
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
37
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
is rounded by a curve having a radius of less than 100 feet. A corner lot shall
be deemed to have two front yards and two side yards but no rear yard.
Lot Coverage
See Impervious Coverage in Coverage
Lot, Frontage
The distance measured along the street line(s) of a parcel of land.
Lot, Interior
A lot other than a “street side,” “through,” or “corner” lot, where the method
of access from a public street(s) is via a 50-foot-wide right-of-way which is
either an integral portion of the lot itself, or an unobstructed easement, or
private right-of-way. Setbacks from all lot lines shall be the distance
designated for “front yard,” “side yards” and “rear yards” for the applicable
zoning district provided.
Lot Line
The established division line between lots or between a lot and a street.
Lot Line, Front
The street lot line, the lot line located adjacent to the accessway providing
access to the lot, or the lot line most parallel to the street that provides
access to the lot.
Lot Line, Rear The lot line located most directly opposite and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side
A lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. In the case of corner lots
or through lots, all lines extending from streets shall be considered "side lot
lines."
Lot Line, Street
A lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way boundary.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
38
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Lot, Nonconforming
A lot, the size and location of which is not permitted by any provision of these
Regulations for the district in which such lot is located, but which was legally
in existence at the effective date of these Regulations, or subject to variance
approval.
Lot, Through
A lot other than a corner lot
which abuts two or more
streets which do not
intersect at the lot.
Lot Width
The distance in a straight line
between the side lot lines
measured at the front
setback.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An
unenclosed area, usable solely for parking of vehicles, is not considered a
building's lowest floor. Specifically prohibited are any enclosed areas that are
below base flood elevation.
MANUFACTURED HOMES
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including as a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before June 15, 1979, the effective date of the initial floodplain
management ordinance adopted by the community.
Manufactured Home
A residential structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"Manufactured Home" does not include a "Recreational Vehicle," but
recreational vehicles will be considered manufactured homes if they remain
on the site for 180 consecutive days or longer.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
39
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
MARINA
An area of a waterway, lake, or pond and associated shoreline used for the
commercial mooring of boats and yachts and/or support facilities thereof. A
“marina” shall not include private mooring facilities wherein the facilities are used
only for the mooring of a boat(s) registered to the resident of the property at which
the mooring is located.
MARKET VALUE
The value of a structure shall be determined by the appraised value of the
structure using the cost approach to value method, prior to the start of the initial
repair or improvement of the structure, or in the case of damage the value of
the structure prior to the damage occurring.
MEAN SEA LEVEL
For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the NAVD of 1988 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on the FIRM are referenced.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
A facility which is a place of business where marijuana, as defined by CGS, may
be dispensed or sold at retail to qualifying patients and primary caregivers and
for which the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection has issued a
dispensary facility permit to an applicant under CGS § 21a-408 et seq. and §
21a-408-1 to 21a-408-70, inclusive, of the Regulations of the Connecticut State
Agencies.
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER
Includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers
(wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for
anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any telemetry
devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow
characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or
to characterize the wind resource at a given location.
MICROBREWERY
A manufacturing facility as defined in CGS § 30-16 (b) where annually up to
15,000 barrels of beer can be manufactured, stored, bottled, and sold at either
wholesale or at retail prices in sealed bottles or other sealed containers for
consumption off premises or offered for sale on the premises. Free samples or
tastings may be offered, all in accordance with state permitting requirements.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT
A development containing one or more multifamily or single-family dwelling units
and one or more commercial, public, institutional, retail, office, or industrial uses.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
40
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
MOTEL
See Lodging
NATURAL RESOURCE REMOVAL
Activities that involve withdrawing materials from the natural environment. Such
materials may include, but are not limited to, trees, soil, sand, gravel, oil and
water.
NEIGHBORHOOD
A group of adjoining properties and/or buildings having similar predominant
characteristics and qualities.
NIGHTCLUB
A place of entertainment open at night, usually serving food and liquor, having a
floor show and providing music and space for dancing, including establishments
referred to as "Discotheques."
OPEN SPACE
A space, not occupied by a building or other structure, on the same lot as the
principal building.
PARKING-RELATED TERMS
Gross Parking Lot Area
The cumulative total square footage of all areas dedicated for vehicle
parking or loading, including all individual parking spaces, loading spaces,
end and intermediate islands, and building separation buffers adjacent to
parking spaces but excluding aisles, internal drives, and building separation
buffers not adjacent to parking spaces.
Parking Area
An open space used for parking motor vehicles exclusively and in which no
gasoline or motor vehicle accessories are sold and no other business is
conducted.
Parking Space
An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle. (See
Table 6.1 of these Regulations for required dimensions.)
PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS
A service business whose principal use is the provision of services of a personal or
domestic nature relating to the repair, adjustment, alteration, cleaning, or
servicing of items owned by or being provided to an individual customer,
including, but not limited to, barbershops, beauty salons, nail salons, day spas,
clothing rental, photographic studios, garment repair, shoe repair, and tailoring.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
41
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Personal service businesses are primarily engaged in the provision of services
rather than the sale of products.
PERVIOUS SURFACE
See Coverage
POWER GRID
The transmission system created to balance the supply and demand of
electricity for consumers.
PREMISES
A lot as defined in this section or that portion of a lot, structure, or building that is
actually in use for the specific purpose or use under consideration.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
A use or structure that facilitates the transportation of the general public, including
but not limited to bus depots, bus stops, train stations, railroad yards, railroad
crossings, and the like.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
Recreational vehicle (a.k.a. park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable
structures) means a vehicle which is:
(1) built on a single chassis,
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections,
(3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a truck,
(4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use; and
(5) maintained fully licensed and ready for highway use. If recreational
vehicle remains on the site for 180 consecutive days or longer, it shall be
considered a manufactured home.
RESTAURANT-RELATED TERMS
Limited Entertainment Area
Restaurant floor area devoted at any time to the combined uses of cocktail
lounge, bar, dance floor, stage, or standing room for the viewing of
entertainment, not to exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area (including
storage areas) of the restaurant.
Restaurant
A business establishment where prepared food is served and sold.
Restaurant, Fast Food
A restaurant characterized by high customer turnover; payment upon order
or receipt of food; sales of foods and nonalcoholic beverages for on- or off2019-
April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
42
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
premises consumption; and foods and beverages preprepared or available
after a short waiting period and primarily served in or on disposable
wrappers, containers, or plates.
Restaurant, Sit-Down
A restaurant characterized by low customer turnover, sales of hot meals and
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, generally with table
service, and may also include limited entertainment areas (see also Limited
Entertainment Area).
Restaurant, Limited Service
A restaurant characterized by low to moderate customer turnover; sales of
food and beverages that may include alcoholic beverages limited to beer
and/or wine only; and no limited entertainment areas. Limited-service
restaurants shall include but not be limited to cafeterias, caterers serving a la
carte meals, coffee shops, delicatessens, donut shops, ice-cream parlors,
snack bars, and other similar food service establishments.
SEASONAL BUSINESS
A business in operation at intervals and affected by or depending on a season.
SEDIMENT
Fragmental material transported by, suspended in, or deposited by water or air
or accumulated in beds by other natural agents.
SETBACK
The shortest distance between any part of the building or structure and the
nearest property line. Excepted from setback calculations are utility pads
(including equipment located thereon, e.g., HVAC, generators, gas tanks etc.)
enclosed in a space not more than five feet in height, not more than five feet
from the outside perimeter wall, and not more than six feet in length. The above
exclusions do not apply in the R-7 district.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL
See Lodging
SIGHT DISTANCE/SIGHT LINE
That distance at which a vehicle traveling in an opposing or perpendicular
direction first becomes visible.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
43
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
SIGN
A display device of any material concerned with the sale of goods or
performance of services or existence of facilities; any device for visual
communication used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the
attention of the public but not including any flag or insignia of any government
or governmental agency or of any fraternal, civic, charitable or religious
organization.
See also Window Sign
SITE PLAN
A scale drawing of the subject property which depicts those items which are
pertinent to zoning review and approval, including but not limited to those items
indicated in Section 8.4. Such drawing shall met the accuracy of a Class A-2
survey.
SITE PLAN, LANDSCAPED
A detailed landscaping plan showing all grading, drainage, fences, walls, shrub
and tree plantings, and other landscape features.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM RELATED TERMS
Flicker
The moving shadow created by the sun shining on the rotating blades of the
wind turbine.
Net Metering
The difference between the electricity supplied over the electric distribution
system and the electricity generated by the small wind energy system which
is fed back into the electric distribution system over a billing period.
Shadow
The outline created on the surrounding area by the sun shining on the small
wind energy system.
Small Wind Energy System
A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and
associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of
60 kilowatts or less and will be used primarily for on-site consumption.
Total Height
The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind turbine blade
when it is at its highest point.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
44
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Tower
The monopole or guyed monopole structure that supports a wind turbine.
Tower Height
The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind
turbine.
Wind Turbine
The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion
components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to convert
kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate
electricity.
SOLID WASTE
Unwanted or discarded materials, including solids and containerized liquid or
gaseous materials.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STORY
See the State Building Code
STORY, HALF
See the State Building Code
STRATIFIED DRIFT
Unconsolidated, sorted sediment composed of layers of sand, gravel, silt, or clay,
deposited by meltwaters from glaciers.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
45
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
STREET
Any road, highway, avenue, land, or right-of-way providing access to one or lots.
STREET LINE
The line dividing the street and the lot.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or which is
attached to something having location on the ground, including signs,
billboards, a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a
manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities
or infrastructures. Fences and walls equal to or less than eight feet in height shall
not be considered a structure under this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its predamaged condition would exceed 50 percent of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alterations, or improvements to a
structure taking place over a five-year period, in which the cumulative costs
equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure. The market
value of the structure should be:
(1) The appraised value of the structure using the cost approach to value,
prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or
(2) In case of damage the value of the structure prior to the damage
occurring.
(3) For the purposes of this definition, "Substantial Improvement" is considered
to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or the structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include
any improvement project required to comply with existing health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
living, working, and learning conditions.
TAVERN
An establishment where liquor is sold to be consumed on the premises, including
cocktail lounges but not including nightclubs and discotheques.
TOURIST CABIN
A furnished residential structure with or without kitchen facilities containing not
more than two bedrooms and primarily intended for the accommodation of
transients.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
46
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
TOWER or ANTENNA TOWER
A structure, whether freestanding or attached to a building or another structure,
that is used to support equipment used to collect, transmit, and/or receive
telecommunications or radio signals. The use of these facilities is not considered
a “utility.”
TRAILER COACH
Any vehicle or object on wheels and having no motive power of its own but
which is drawn by or used in connection with a motor vehicle and which is so
designed and constructed or added to by means of such accessories as to
permit use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, whether resting on
wheels, jacks, or other foundation, and shall include the type of vehicle known
as a "mobile home."
USE, ACCESSORY
A land use customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the principal use or
building and located on the same lot as such principal use or building.
USE, NONCONFORMING
Any use of land or building that is not permitted by these Regulations in the
district in which such use is located but which was legally in existence at the
effective date of this chapter or any pertinent amendment thereto.
VARIANCE
A grant in relief from the terms of the Zoning Regulations in accordance CGS §8-
6 and § 8-7.
VIOLATION
A failure of any use, structure or lot to be fully compliant with the community’s
zoning, building, health, fire protection, or similar municipal codes and
ordinances including floodplain management regulations. All projects initiated
without the required approvals and permits are deemed to be in violation until
such time as all required documentation is reviewed and all required approvals
obtained.
WALKWAY/SIDEWALK
An unobstructed paved walkway for pedestrians at the side of a street, or
adjacent to a building, or within a parking area, or between buildings, which is at
least four feet in width and otherwise compatible with Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) requirements.
2019-April-19
Article 2 - Definitions
47
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
WINDOW SIGN
A sign that is attached to the inside of a window or placed in a manner that the
primary view is through a window. Signs attached to the outside of a window are
considered wall signs.
YARD-RELATED TERMS
Yard, Depth or Width
The depth of front and rear yards and the width of side yards shall be
measured perpendicularly to the respective lot lines.
Yard, Front
An open space between the building and the front lot line, extending the full
width of the lot or, in the case of a corner lot, extending along all streets.
Yard, Rear
An open space between the
building and the rear lot line,
extending the full width of the lot.
Yard, Required Front, Side or Rear
So much of the front, side, or rear
yard as is required by the
applicable provisions of these
Regulations.
Yard, Side
An open space between the
building and a side lot line,
extending from the front yard to
the rear yard. Any yard not a rear
yard or a front yard shall be
deemed a "side.”
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
48
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
3.1 Purpose
The Residential Districts (R) are intended to provide suitable areas primarily for
residential uses and development appropriate to the environmental characteristics of
the land and character of the neighborhood. The primary difference between the
various Residential districts is to provide a variety in the size and density of residential
neighborhoods and a diversity of housing opportunities after consideration of soil types,
terrain, and infrastructure capacity.
Certain nonresidential uses may be allowed in Residential districts when it can be
demonstrated that such uses are compatible with nearby residential uses and preserve
neighborhood character and property values.
3.2 Residential Districts (R)
The following zoning districts constitute the (R) districts, intended primarily for singlefamily
residential development and accessory uses.
? R-7
? R-15
? R-40
? R-60
? R-80
? R-100
3.3 Principal Uses and Structures
A. Permitted As of Right
Additional
Requirements
(Section)
1. Conservation Uses - open space, natural areas, and preserved
lands including wildlife sanctuaries, flood protection facilities,
conservation areas, pedestrian or bicycle greenway trails, and other
lands in natural conditions
2. Agricultural uses 3.8
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
49
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
B. Permitted by Zoning Permit
Additional
Requirements
(Section)
1. One single-family dwelling per parcel
2. The letting of rooms or furnishing of board in a dwelling unit by the
resident of the premises to not more than two persons, except that
more than two persons may be permitted with the approval of the
Commission
3. Short-Term Rentals 3.19
C. Permitted by Special Permit
Additional
Requirements
(Section)
Residential Type Uses
1. Conservation Subdivisions 3.13
2. Multi Family Dwellings 3.14
3. Planned Age Restricted Community (PARC) 3.15
4. Group day care home licensed by the State of Connecticut 3.18
Community/ Institutional-Type Uses
1. Schools and colleges operated by a government unit or nonprofit
corporation 3.3D
2. Private schools for pupils below high school grade, whether operated for
profit or not 3.3D
3. Private nursery schools 3.3D
4. Child care centers licensed by the State of Connecticut 3.3D
5. Churches, parish houses, convents and similar religious buildings 3.3D
6. Clubs, lodges, and community houses, except those of which a chief
activity is a gainful service or activity carried on as a business 3.3D
7. Libraries, museums, and auditoriums operated by a governmental unit or
nonprofit corporation 3.3D
8. Hospitals, sanatoriums, and similar philanthropic institutions operated by a
governmental unit or nonprofit corporation 3.3D
9. Privately operated sanatoriums, convalescent homes, or homes for the
aged 3.3D
10. Fire or police stations and other municipal buildings, such as a post office 3.3D
11. Electric transformer station, water or sewer pumping stations 3.3D
12. Public parks, public playgrounds, or public recreational areas operated
by a governmental unit or nonprofit corporation 3.3D
13. A cemetery of a church corporation located in the Town of Brookfield 3.3D
14. Antenna(s) and antenna towers and associated facilities 3.3D
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
50
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
D. Community/Institutional-Type Uses
The community/institutional-type uses permitted in this section are subject to the
following property conditions:
? There shall be a minimum lot area of 120,000 square feet;
? a minimum lot width of 300 feet;
? two side yards of 75 feet each in width;
? a rear yard of 50 feet in depth;
? a front yard setback of at least 75 feet from the front lot line;
? not more than ten percent of the area of the lot shall be covered by buildings;
and,
? No parking or recreation equipment shall be located in any required front or
side yard.
In permitting these Community/Institutional-Type Uses, the Commission shall find that:
? The proposed use will have no detrimental effect on the property value of
present and future dwellings in the vicinity;
? the proposed site planning and landscaping are in harmony with the character
of the neighborhood;
? no conditions will be created which adversely affect traffic safety or the normal
movement of traffic;
? adequate provisions will be made for off-street parking; and
? provisions for water supply and sanitary sewage disposal will be adequate.
3.4 Accessory Uses and Structures
A. General Limitations
1. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall be located on the same lot as
the principal building, structure, or use to which they are accessory.
2. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall not be located on a lot without
the establishment of a permitted principal use, nor shall any new lot be
created that has an accessory building, structure, or use without a principal
use.
3. Accessory uses are permitted as provided in this section provided that:
a. Accessory buildings shall be included in the maximum building coverage
specified in Section 3.5.
b. Accessory structures shall comply with the minimum rear and side yard
setbacks specified in Section 3.5 and shall not be located in the required
front yard.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
51
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
4. Proposals for accessory structures and buildings requiring a permit under this
section shall obtain prior approval of the proposed location from the Town
Sanitarian.
B. Permitted As of Right
Additional
Requirements
(Section)
1. Customary uses - accessory uses and structures less than eight feet
in height and not more than 75 square feet in area 3.6
2. Parking of up to six automobiles is permitted outside in the
residential driveway, but not otherwise within the front yard or on the
town right-of-way or any easement giving access to the property. All
such vehicles shall be owned or operated by a permanent resident
or owner of the property on which parked. Parked vehicles shall be
registered, except up to one unregistered vehicle may be allowed.
3. Limited farm stands 3.8
4. The keeping of farm animals for personal use and enjoyment 3.8
5. Domestic animals kept as pets by residents for their personal
enjoyment, excluding hoofed animals or poultry
6. Recreational equipment storage 3.1
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
52
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
C. Permitted by Zoning Permit
Additional
Requirements
(Section)
1. Customary uses: [amended eff. 2019-Apr-19]
a. Accessory uses and structures.
b. Buildings with an area not more than:
1: 300 square feet for an Accessory building (such as a shed),
2: 900 square feet for a Detached Garage or Pool House,
3: 1,200 square feet for a Barn,
except that buildings with areas greater than the above may be permitted
with the approval of the Commission with submission of a Site Plan.
3.6
2. Commercial Vehicle Parking - Only one commercial vehicle not
exceeding 13,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) may be parked or
garaged on a residential lot
3.11
3. Farm stands 3.8
4. The keeping of poultry on lots of less than one acre 3.8
5. Customary home occupation 3.12
6. Family Day Care licensed by the State of Connecticut
7. Solar panels 3.7
8. Swimming pools 3.9
9. Guest house 3.17
D. Permitted by Special Permit
Additional
Requirements
(Section)
1. (deleted) [amended eff. 2019-Apr-19] --
2. Commercial Vehicle Parking - Only one commercial vehicle not
exceeding 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) may be parked or
garaged on a residential lot
3.11
3. Commercial livestock or poultry operation 3.8
4. Accessory apartments 3.16
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
53
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3.5 Area, Dimensional and Building Height Requirements
R-100 R-80 R-60 R-40 R-15 R-7
Minimum Lot Area* (square feet) 100,00 80,000 60,000 40,000 15,000 7,000
Minimum Lot Width (square feet) 200 150 100 50
Minimum Side Yard (feet) 50 30 15 10
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 50 30 15 10
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 50 40 30 20
Minimum Building Separation (1-2 floors) 20
Minimum Building Separation (> 2 floors) 50
Maximum Building Coverage (%) 10 20 25
Maximum Impervious Coverage (%) 30 40 50 65
*Minimum Lot Area excludes wetlands, watercourses, slopes in excess of 25° (46.6%,
2.15:1 slope), portions of the lot less than 50 feet wide, or the private right-of-way
leading to interior lots. The area is to be calculated using the existing, prior-todevelopment
conditions.
No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in building height. Excluded from the
building height calculations is any space resulting from design seeking to achieve the
goals and objectives of Section 6.11 (Architectural Guidelines) of these regulations.
3.6 Customary Uses
A. Accessory customary uses and structures shall comply with the side yard
setbacks of the Residential District and shall not be located in the front yard.
B. Customary uses shall be set back from the rear yard line at least 50 percent of
the required rear yard for the Residential District.
C. The maximum height of customary use structures shall be:
? 30 feet in R-100 and R-80 zones;
? 25 feet in R-60 and R-40 zones; and,
? 20 feet in R-15 and R-7 zones.
D. The Zoning Enforcement Officer in consultation with the Commission shall
determine which uses shall be permitted as customary uses.
E. Accessory buildings or structures that require a permit from the Town Building
Official shall be included in calculating impervious coverage.
3.7 Solar Panels
Solar panels whose primary purpose is to provide energy for the home on the lot are
permitted by Zoning Permit provided that:
A. Roof-mounted solar panels shall not be included in the maximum building height
regulations.
B. Solar panels are to be considered as a structure when located at ground level
and are allowed provided that:
1. Supporting documentation proves that no suitable location is available on
the building due to exposed surfaces not facing the appropriate direction.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
54
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2. No glare will be created.
3. The optimum location of the panels is at ground level.
4. The Commission may at its discretion establish a 10-foot or greater setback
requirement.
C. In no case are solar panels permitted whose primary purpose is to supply power
for commercial purposes.
3.8 Agricultural and Animal Related Uses in Residential Zones
The purpose of this Regulation is to promote Brookfield’s agricultural heritage and
protect existing neighborhoods.
A. Limited Farm Stand
Limited farm stands are permitted as of right in Residential Districts provided:
1. The farm stand structure occupies no more than 40 square feet in area for the
sale of agricultural products.
2. The farm stand structure is located at least 20 feet from the street line to
provide off-street parking.
3. All agricultural products offered for sale must be grown on the premises.
B. Farm Stand
Farm stands are permitted by Zoning Permit provided:
1. The farm stand structure occupies between 40 square feet and 200 square
feet in area for the sale of agricultural products.
2. The property shall contain not less than three acres of land devoted to
growing edible crops and agricultural produce that is available for sale at the
farm stand.
3. Seventy percent of gross sales shall be from agricultural goods produced on
the premises.
4. Such farm stand may be located in the front yard and shall be a minimum of
25 feet from any adjacent parcels.
5. The extent and type of any products to be sold, any activities to be
conducted, and any classes to be offered on the lot shall be clearly stated in
the application or shall be considered to be prohibited.
6. To ensure public safety, such farm stands are required to provide parking with
adequate ingress and egress not in a public right-of-way (permeable parking
surface is preferred).
C. Farm Animals
Hoofed animals, poultry, and livestock are permitted as follows:
1. Hoofed Animals - The keeping of hoofed animals by the residents of the
residential lot for their personal use and enjoyment provided that:
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
55
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. For horses, ponies, mules, donkeys, and cattle, the property lot shall
contain two acres of land for the first such animal and an additional one
acre of land for each additional animal.
b. For llamas, alpacas, sheep, goats, swine or similar animals, the lot shall
contain two acres of land for the first such animal and an additional 20,000
square feet of land for each additional animal.
2. Poultry – The keeping of poultry by the residents of the residential lot for their
personal use and enjoyment provided that:
a. The lot shall contain at least one acre for the first 12 fowl, and there shall
be no more than six fowl per every additional 20,000 square feet.
b. The keeping of one or more roosters requires a minimum of three acres.
c. The keeping of poultry on lots of less than one acre may be permitted by
Zoning Permit.
3. Commercial Livestock/Poultry Farming – The keeping of hoofed animals and/
or poultry for commercial purposes requires a minimum of five acres.
4. For all farm animals, suitable areas of at least 20,000 square feet will be
established exclusively for housing, feeding, and buffer area. Approximately
one-half of this area will be actively used while the other half is left fallow to
rejuvenate and reseed. This area must be maintained so as to prevent soil
erosion or the contamination of adjoining properties, watercourses, or water
supplies.
5. Adequate fencing shall be installed and maintained to contain farm animals.
6. A 50-foot buffer, either in its natural state or landscaped as required elsewhere
herein, shall be maintained between the property line and all fencing, corrals,
feeding areas, etc. Animals shall not be left unattended within the buffer, and
any droppings shall be promptly removed from the buffer strip.
7. An appropriate building shall be provided for the keeping of farm animals. This
building shall be well maintained, periodically cleaned, and shall not be
unsightly or degrading to the neighborhood. The building shall be centrally
located in the rear yard of the premises, and rear and side lot line setback shall
be maximized. In no event shall the building be closer than 75 feet from any
adjacent property line. Temporary animal shelters shall be permitted only for a
maximum period of 30 days. All food, supplies, and tools shall be stored within
the animal building.
8. All fencing, corrals, feeding areas, etc. and buildings used for farm animal
shelters will have reasonable foliage screening, natural or planted, so as to
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
56
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
minimize the visual impact of the farm animals’ habitat from neighboring
dwellings.
9. All properties, building, and manure-droppings storage areas used for animals
shall be maintained in a clean and healthy manner and shall conform to Public
Health codes, State of Connecticut, and any additional Town health
requirements as determined from time to time.
10. No condition shall be created that will adversely affect the performance of
sewage disposal systems located on the property or adjacent properties.
11. No noticeable offensive odor shall be detected off the premises. Manure
and other waste material must be removed from the housing, grazing, and
feeding areas on a regular basis.
12. No external floodlighting will be allowed that transmits beyond the owner's
property.
13. All farm animal properties shall be subject to inspection by this Commission or
the Zoning Enforcement Office or representatives selected by the Commission for
the purpose of determining compliance with reasonable sanitation/health
practices, as well as with this regulation.
3.9 Swimming Pools
A. Residential swimming pools, including in-ground, aboveground, and semi-inground
pools, shall be permitted in any zoning district provided that all of the
applicable regulations of the State of Connecticut Building Code and any
amendment thereto are complied with.
B. Swimming pools shall not be located in the Front Yard.
C. Minimum setbacks for swimming pools and their related decking/apron area
shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
R-100 R-80 R-60 R-40 R-15 R-7 MC
Minimum Side Yards (feet) 30 30 20 20 15 10 10
Minimum Rear Yard (feet) 30 30 20 20 15 10 10
Minimum Front Yard (feet) 50 50 40 40 30 20 20
D. For the purposes of calculating building coverage and impervious coverage,
swimming pools and related impervious decks or aprons increase impervious
coverage only.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
57
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3.10 Recreational Equipment Storage in Residential Zones
Storage of camping or recreational equipment such as a recreational boat, travel
trailer, a tent trailer, campers, pick-up camper, or a recreational vehicle shall be
permitted as of right in any residential district provided that:
1. At no time shall such equipment be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes.
2. There shall be no connections to any utility service, including electrical, heat,
water, and sewage disposal service.
3. If such equipment is parked or stored outside of a garage, it shall only be parked
or stored in a neat and orderly manner in a designated drive and shall only be
parked in a location that conforms to the minimum yard setbacks for the
Residential District.
4. Parking or storage of any such equipment on any lot shall be limited to one such
piece of equipment, except that one additional utility trailer may be parked or
stored per additional acre of lot area above the minimum required by the
Residential District. Said trailers shall be registered in the name of and be the
legal property of an occupant of the principal dwelling.
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of these Regulations, any such trailers may be
parked anywhere on the lot for servicing, cleaning, loading, or unloading
purposes for a period not to exceed three days.
3.11 Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential Zones
A. Regardless of GVW, all commercial vehicles parked in residential zones shall
meet the following standards:
1. No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct the view of traffic from adjacent
driveways or streets.
2. No vehicle containing hazardous materials or waste may be parked on a
residential lot.
3. No tanker trucks or similar type vehicles used for hauling liquids including, but
not limited to, oil trucks, septic cleanout trucks, etc. shall be allowed.
4. There shall be no loading or unloading of commercial vehicles between the
hours of 9 p.m. and 7 a.m.
5. No trucks that haul cargo that emits objectionable odors shall be permitted.
6. All vehicles allowed under this Regulation are also subject to the Town's Noise
Ordinance.
7. All commercial vehicles under operation may not exceed 55 dB between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. to 7:30 p.m. for a duration of more than five minutes and
not to exceed 45 dB for a duration of three minutes between 7:30 p.m. and
7:30 a.m. Monday - Saturday and Sunday and holidays between 10 a.m. to
7:30 p.m.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
58
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit a home occupation that is not
otherwise permitted under the Regulations.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prohibit commercial vehicles parked
temporarily while engaged in providing products or services to the owner of the
property.
D. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit commercial vehicles that are used
as part of (1) a use of facility operated by the Town of Brookfield, a fire
department, State of Connecticut, or federal government; or (2) a maintenance
facility in support of a multiple dwelling project on the lot, or in support of a
Special Permit use if authorized under such Special Permit.
E. Commercial vehicles - Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, overnight
(8:00 p.m. through 6 a.m.) parking of commercial-type vehicles is prohibited in all
residential districts.
3.12 Customary Home Occupations
A. Zoning permit applications for Customary Home Occupations shall give due
consideration to:
? The nature and magnitude of the business operation,
? The intensity and hours of operations,
? Neighborhood traffic considerations,
? Adequacy of off-street parking and screening thereof,
? Frequency of deliveries or site visitations by clients or outside
employees,
? Required infrastructure, and
? The number of personnel involved.
B. The overriding consideration in issuing a Zoning Permit is the Zoning Enforcement
Officer’s perception of the use as not affecting the residential appearance,
character, and nature of the site and adjacent neighborhood.
C. Customary Home Occupations shall:
1. Not employ more than two individuals within the dwelling in addition to the
resident
2. Occupy a floor area not in excess of 25 percent of the total floor area of the
dwelling
3. Conduct all operations within the dwelling
4. Provide that all business-related parking is “off-street” and within designated
driveways/turnarounds
5. Create no objectionable noise, odor, vibrations; unsightly site conditions;
electromagnetic interference in the immediate vicinity; and hazards to
neighborhood health, safety, and general welfare
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
59
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6. Result in visitations to the site of not more than three vehicle trips per hour,
day care centers excluded
7. Change the residential character or nature of the dwelling, site, or adjacent
properties
8. Not permit exterior storage of contractor’s materials or exterior parking of
contractor’s equipment of any kind
3.13 Conservation Subdivisions
A. Purposes
1. It is the objective of this section to encourage the conservation of existing
undeveloped land in the Town within the current zoning density framework
through the utilization of more flexible standards and requirements that
permit a more creative, attractive, and efficient use of land in such a way as
to achieve the following purposes:
a. The maximum preservation of natural open space within new residential
developments so as to establish a more desirable living environment and
help to assure the maintenance and/or enhancement of the
appearance, character, and natural beauty of an area
b. The protection of the local ecology and the underground water table, the
minimization of flood hazards in downstream areas, and the prevention of
soil erosion, by preserving water bodies, wetlands, watercourses, a major
stands of trees, steep slopes, ridge lines, significant geological features,
and other areas of environmental value
2. And one or more of the following additional purposes:
a. To preserve the character and property values of existing residential
development
b. To preserve land for scenic, park, recreational, and educational purposes
c. To encourage the development of community water supply systems
within new residential developments so as to promote greater safety and
efficiency
B. Eligibility
The provisions of this subsection are applicable only to properties located within the
Residence R-40, R-60, R-80, and R-100 Districts and only if a subdivision plan for such a
development is approved by the Planning Commission upon a determination that the
purposes as set forth in Subsection A will be achieved.
C. Permitted Uses
The permitted uses within a conservation subdivision shall be the same as those
otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which it is located and shall be subject to
the same procedures and restrictions as would otherwise be applicable thereto.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
60
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
D. Development Standards and Controls
Except as specified in this section, all development standards and controls applicable
to other residential subdivisions shall be applicable to conservation subdivisions. The
following standards are to be considered minimums that may be increased in specific
instances where determined necessary or appropriate by the Planning Commission:
1. Density: The maximum permitted number of one-family building lots within a
conservation subdivision shall be determined by dividing the land area of the
subject property by the normal minimum required lot area for one-family
dwellings for the district or districts in which the property is located, except that
the Planning Commission may reduce the permitted number of lots so
calculated if, in the Commission's opinion, such reduction is warranted based
upon the presence of substantial areas of poor soils and/or other severe
topographic limitations of the subject property that would tend to inhibit
development at such a density.
2. Minimum required lot area: The minimum required lot area for one-family
dwellings in a conservation subdivision shall be 20,000 square feet, except that
larger minimums may be required in specific instances where determined
necessary or appropriate by the Planning Commission or by the Health Director
of the Town of Brookfield.
3. Minimum required lot width: The minimum required lot width for a one-family
building lot in a conservation subdivision shall be 100 feet.
4. Minimum required yards: The minimum required yards for a one-family building
lot in a conservation subdivision shall be as follows, except that where such
building lots adjoin private property not included within the conservation
subdivision the minimum yard requirements normally applicable to buildings
within the zoning district in which the property is located shall apply to setbacks
from such adjoining property lines:
a. Front yard: 30 feet from the front lot line.
b. Side yards: 15 feet minimum; the aggregate of both side yards shall not be
less than 45 feet.
c. Rear yard: 25 feet.
E. Conserved Land Areas
1. All land within a conservation subdivision which is not included with a onefamily
building lot or designated to serve as roads or for other public purposes
shall be designated "conserved land area(s)" on the final subdivision plan. The
conserved land areas shall be in such location and/or such size and shape and
shall have such access as may be approved by the Planning Commission as
being appropriate to satisfy the purposes set forth in this section.
2. Ownership of conserved land areas:
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
61
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. The ownership of conserved land areas shall be divided equally among
all owners of one-family building lots within the conservation subdivision,
except where all or an appropriate portion of the conserved land areas
are:
i. Deeded to a recognized conservation organization dedicated to the
preservation of open space, and such dedication is acceptable to the
conservation organization and to the Town Planning Commission; or
ii. Offered for dedication to the Town of Brookfield, and the Town
Meeting has voted to accept such offer.
b. Except in those cases where the ownership of the conserved land areas
is to be vested in the Town of Brookfield or an approved conservation
organization, the subdividers shall execute and file with the Planning
Commission documents that are sufficient to create a property owner’s
association responsible for the continued ownership, use, and
maintenance of all conserved land areas in accordance with the
following requirements:
i. Membership in the association shall be mandatory for each property
owner within the subdivision and for any successive lot owners.
ii. The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes,
and the maintenance of the conserved land areas, including any
active recreation areas and related facilities.
iii. Each lot owner within the subdivision shall be made responsible for
paying his proportionate share of the association costs, and the
assessment levied by the association shall become a lien on the
property if not paid.
iv. The association shall have the power to adjust assessments to meet
changing needs.
v. In the event that the maintenance, preservation, and/or use of the
conserved land area(s) ceases to be in compliance with any of the
above requirements or any other requirements specified by the
Planning Commission when approving the subdivision plan, the Town
shall be granted the right to take all necessary action to assure such
compliance and to assess against the association and/or each
individual property owner within the subdivision all costs incurred by
the Town for such purposes.
vi. The establishment of such an association shall be required prior to
the sale of any lots within the subdivision.
3. Permitted uses in conserved land areas:
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
62
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Except where otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, conserved land
areas shall be preserved in their natural state, and the use of such areas shall be
limited to appropriate conservation, open space, and recreation purposes as
determined by the Planning Commission. Suitable legal agreements, including
conservation easements, in form and content approved by the Town Attorney
may be required by the Planning Commission to assure such continued
preservation and use of conserved land areas. A portion of the conserved land
area(s) may be designated "active recreation area" on the subdivision plan, in a
location approved by the Planning Commission, provided that such designated
area remains in the ownership of a homeowner’s association. Within such area,
structures and facilities for active recreational purposes, including playground
equipment, swimming pools, tennis courts, and so forth, may be constructed and
operated for the use of the property owners in the conservation subdivision and
their guests. Such active recreation area shall not exceed ten percent of the
total area of the proposed subdivision.
F. Application Procedure
Subject to compliance with any special standards, requirements, and procedures as set
forth in this section, the Planning Commission may approve conservation subdivisions in
accordance with the approved procedures applicable to a conventional subdivision
containing three or more lots.
3.14 Multifamily Dwellings
A. Intent
It is the intent of this section to:
? Enable the establishment of multifamily dwellings, including apartments, garden
apartments, townhouses, row houses, condominiums, and cooperative
apartment buildings, in appropriate locations of the Town so as to respond
effectively to diverse housing needs.
? Provide guidelines, standards, and controls for the development of multiple
family dwelling projects that are compatible with the intent of this regulation;
? Provide for affordable housing; and
? Meet the planning goals and objectives of the Town of Brookfield.
B. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to guide in achieving the stated intents while providing for:
? The protection of the environmental character of the area and the particular
suitability for the specific use;
? The protection against congestion in the streets;
? Protection against undue concentration of population and overcrowding of
land;
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
63
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
? Preservation of buildings and property values;
? Adequate access of light and air;
? Adequate vehicular access and off-street parking;
? Adequate disposition of buildings upon the land;
? Freedom for site layout and building design that will enable to achieve, to the
extent practicable, construction efficiency and economic building forms while
assisting in establishing a compatible and attractive living environment; and
? The pursuance of economic development while meeting the housing needs of
diverse households.
C. Site Eligibility
1. The minimum total contiguous land area required for a multifamily dwellings
project site is as follows:
a. In Residential (R) Zones: ten acres
b. In the TCD Perimeter Overlay: one acre
c. In other permitted zones: five acres
2. The site shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a collector, principal, or
minor arterial street as defined by the Connecticut Department of
Transportation (CT DOT) in its Functional Road Classification, as may be
amended, unless located in the TCD Perimeter Overlay Zone, where the
minimum frontage is 100 feet on any street, or unless the site has frontage on
a state highway, in which case the site shall have a minimum lot width of 200
feet.
3. The site topography shall be able to accommodate the buildings, roads,
development features, and amenities as well as other requirements of this
Section;
4. The site shall be served by public sewer systems capable of handling the
effluent that may be generated by the development;
5. The site shall be served with adequate water to meet the development’s
potable and firefighting water demands;
6. The site shall be so situated, consist of topography, and is furnished with
natural features that can accommodate the development; and
7. The development shall not exert a detrimental impact on nearby properties
or values thereof.
D. Applications
Concurrently with the submission of an application and all required data to the Zoning
Commission, the applicant shall submit one duplicate application form and data
package to the Brookfield Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
64
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
formally receive a copy of the application and data package at its first scheduled
meeting following receipt of such data in the office of the Planning Commission and
determine its findings on the proposal per CGS § 8-3a.
E. Design and Technical Requirements
In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 8.5, the proposed project shall
conform to the following:
1. The site planning, landscaping, and architectural theme shall be in harmony
with the character of the neighborhood. Existing features of the site which
add value to the development or to the Town as a whole, such as trees,
watercourses, topographical contour, inland wetlands, and historical and
similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved through harmonious design
and placement of buildings, driveways, walks, and parking facilities.
2. The proposed finished contour map to Class A-2 survey standards shall show
all contour lines at two-foot intervals in areas other than those designated as
“conserved land areas.”
3. Two independent means of access shall be provided for the site. At least one
such means of access shall be provided within a frontage containing a
minimum of 200 feet on any street, except in the TCD Perimeter Overlay.
4. The proposed project shall conform to the regulations of the Inland Wetlands
Commission of the Town of Brookfield with regard to any wetlands contained
within the proposed project. Each application shall be accompanied by
evidence that an application has been submitted to the Inland Wetlands
Commission.
5. Drives that serve the proposed project shall be constructed in accordance
with the driveway specifications of the Town of Brookfield and those sections
pertaining to driveways, roads, and street improvements found in
Architectural Graphic Standards of the latest edition published by the
American Institute of Architects.
6. Main access drives shall have the traveled portion thereof not less than 26
feet in width. Local access drives shall have the traveled portion thereof not
less than 22 feet in width. Walkways shall be provided to assure safe
pedestrian travel between buildings and community facilities.
7. In addition to such requirements as may be set forth in the State Building
Code and State Fire Safety Code, as determined by the Building Official,
Town of Brookfield, the proposed project shall conform to the following:
a. Each multifamily dwelling structure shall be separated a minimum of 20
feet from another building or structure. Multifamily dwelling structures of
more than two stories shall be separated by 50 feet.
b. Sewage treatment facilities shall be in accordance with the
requirements set forth by the Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA),
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
65
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Town of Brookfield. Community water systems shall be in accordance
with the requirements of the Connecticut Department of Public Utility
Control and such other regulations and requirements of other agencies as
may be required by law. The Commission shall be provided with copies of
any approvals granted by the WPCA, State Health Department, and/or
State DEEP for sewage systems and public water supply approvals from
the Connecticut Department of Public Utility Control, Connecticut
Department of Health, and Connecticut DEEP, as may be required,
before submission and consideration of the Design Review application.
c. All utilities shall be located underground.
d. Typical floor plans and elevations depicting the configuration of the
dwelling spaces shall be submitted with the application.
e. If the entire project is not to be constructed within an 18-month period,
the application shall contain a detailed construction schedule indicating
the start and completion dates for each planned phase. The first
construction phase, unless otherwise permitted by the Commission, shall
contain all the necessary facilities for the overall project, such as
community water system, sewerage facilities, recreational facilities, main
access drives, etc. Subsequent phases shall contain only additional
dwelling units, connecting utility lines, local access drives, and associated
parking.
F. Density and Number of Units
1. No multifamily dwelling project shall contain more than 150 dwelling units.
2. Multifamily dwelling developments shall have no more than 8 dwelling units
per gross acre of developable land, unless the development qualifies for a
density bonus per subsection G below. For the purposes of this Section,
developable land is the total land area minus 50 percent of the area of inland
wetlands, utility easements employing aboveground buildings or towers, and
natural slopes steeper than one to one (1:1).
3. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in any one multifamily
dwelling structure is as follows, unless the development qualifies for a density
bonus per subsection G below:
a. Residential (R) zones: four units; provided, however, that if any angular
configuration is utilized and a corner unit is feasible, the Commission, in its
discretion, may allow a fifth corner unit within the structure.
b. Other permitted zones: six units for a one- or two-story structure, or nine
units for a three-story structure
G. Density Bonus for Affordable Units
1. Additional units per gross acre and additional units per structure shall be
permitted, provided that 20% of the total dwelling units on the site are subject to
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
66
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
binding recorded deeds containing covenants or restrictions which require that
such dwelling units be sold or rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the
units as housing for which persons and families pay 30% or less of income, where
such income is less than or equal to 80% of the area median income, as defined
by CGS Section 8-30g.
2. The number of additional units per gross acre that shall be permitted shall not
exceed 10 units per gross acre (for a total of 18), or in the TCD-Overlay zone, 4
units per gross acre (for a total of 12), as defined in subsection F above.
3. The number of additional dwelling units per structure that shall be permitted
shall not exceed six units in Residential (R) zones; and 10 units for one- or two-story
structures, or 12 units for a three-story structure in all other permitted zones.
4. A development that uses an affordable housing density bonus shall submit an
affordability plan that complies with CGS Section 8-30g and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
H. Development Standards and Controls
1. Permissible Accessory Uses and Buildings – The following uses may be
permitted by the Commission after the Commission shall have found that they
are an integral part of the overall development to serve primarily the residents
thereof:
? Game courts or fields
? Golf courses
? Swimming pools and cabanas
? Meeting halls
? Recreational facilities buildings
? Maintenance, storage, and utility buildings
? Residents’ parking garages
2. Minimum Setbacks
a. (In Residential (R) zones, no principal building, accessory building, or
parking area shall be located closer than 100 feet from any side or rear
property line.
b. In the TCD Perimeter Overlay zone, no principal building, accessory
building, or parking area shall be located closer than 20 feet from any
front, side, or rear property line.
c. In other permitted zones, no principal building, accessory building, or
parking area shall be located closer than 50 feet from any front, side, or
rear property line.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
67
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
d. Such setback yards may be required to be provided with screening as
determined by the Commission.
3. Maximum Building Height
No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in building height. Excluded from
the building height calculations is any space resulting from design seeking to
achieve the goals and objectives of Section 6.11 of these regulations.
4. Parking
Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, a minimum of one and one-half
(1.5) off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit containing one bedroom,
and a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) off-street parking spaces for each
dwelling unit containing two or more bedrooms shall be available in a wellplanned
landscaped configuration except when dwelling units are dedicated to
housing for the elderly, when the minimum shall be one (1.0) space per dwelling
unit. Parking areas shall be a minimum of ten feet from any unit within the
project. They shall be screened from adjacent residential areas and public
thoroughfares by dense evergreen plantings, grassed embankments, or similar
screening, approved by the Commission. No parking shall be permitted within
100 feet set back from the lot line through which main access to the project is
provided.
5. Conserved Land Area
All land that is not dedicated to dwelling units, maintenance, storage and utility
buildings, garages, roadway and parking areas, sewer systems, or active
recreational areas shall be designated “conserved land areas” in perpetuity.
The conserved land area(s) shall be preserved in their natural state or improved
at the discretion of the Commission and limited to appropriate passive
recreation.
On an individual, case-by-case basis, the Commission may request an easement
on certain portions of the conserved land area for public water supply including
access thereto. In such instances, a dedicated parking area may be permitted
in the conserved land area.
6. Active Recreational Areas
In addition to those areas designated “conserved land area(s),” area(s) shall be
designated “active recreational area(s) on the site plan in a location(s)
approved by the Commission. Within such area(s), appropriate structures and
facilities for recreational purposes, as approved by the Commission, shall be
constructed and operated for the use of the residents and their guests. These
facilities may be used for accessory uses. Such areas must remain in the
ownership of a tenants’/owners’ association.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
68
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
I. Maintenance
1. Maintenance:
? All common project facilities or systems shall be maintained by the
applicant, owner, or residents' association in perpetuity. Such systems and
facilities shall include, to the extent such items are included in the original
approval, the following:
o Project utilities, including fuel, lighting, electricity, telephone, and
cable television distribution systems and controls
o Roadways, drives, parking areas, and sidewalks including curbing and
paving
o Drainage systems, including erosion and sedimentation protection,
piping, drains, catch basins, manholes, cleanouts and riprap ditching
o Recreational facilities
o Landscaping, including maintenance of buffer areas and conserved
land areas
o Other similar common project systems and facilities
J. Inspections
1. In accordance with CGS § 8-12, the Town of Brookfield, acting through its
duly appointed officials, may enter onto the premises for the purpose of
verifying compliance with state, local, and municipal standards and
regulations, including any approvals previously issued and relating to the
development. As a condition for granting approval, each applicant, owner,
or residents' association shall provide legal documents which shall hold
harmless and indemnify the Town of Brookfield and its duly appointed officials
from any claims or liability arising from the corrections of violations cited. The
form of such documents shall be acceptable to the Commission. The
provisions of this subsection shall survive the issuance of any Certificate of
Occupancy or Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
2. Should such verification inspections discern that corrective action is
necessary to bring the development into conformance with statutes, laws
and regulations, the cognizant Town official performing the inspections shall,
in writing, cite the violations noted and require corrective action within a
reasonable period of time. Failure to perform the required corrective action
shall be considered a violation of the Zoning Regulations, Town of Brookfield,
and be subject to such fines or penalties as prescribed by statute, ordinance,
or regulation.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
69
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3.15 Planned Age-Restricted Community – PARC
A. General
The Commission may, pursuant to an application hereunder, establish PARCs on sites
and within areas deemed suitable for such purposes and provided that the sites comply
in general with the eligibility criteria, standards, and other requirements of this section.
Following the designation of an eligible site, a special permit application for
development meeting the requirements of this Section shall be submitted within six
months thereafter.
B. Intent and Purpose
1. It is the intent of this Section:
a. To enable the establishment of age-restricted communities addressing the
needs and interests of the elderly in appropriate locations of Town so as to
respond effectively to the housing needs of an increasing elderly population;
b. To provide guidelines, standards and controls for the development of
PARCs, which are compatible with the intents of this regulation; and
c. To meet the planning goals and objectives of the Brookfield development
plans.
2. The purpose of this Section is to guide in achieving the stated intents while
providing for:
a. Housing opportunities that are designed to meet the special needs of
elderly citizens;
b. The protection of the environmental character of the area and the
particular suitability for the specific use;
c. The protection against congestion in the streets;
d. Protection against undue concentration of population and overcrowding
of land;
e. Preservation of buildings and property values;
f. Adequate access of light and air;
g. Adequate vehicular access and off-street parking;
h. Adequate disposition of buildings upon the land;
i. Freedom for site layout and building design that will enable, to the extent
practicable, achievement of construction efficiency and economic building
forms while assisting in establishing a compatible and attractive living
environment; and
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
70
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
j. The pursuance of economic development while meeting the housing
needs of elderly residents.
C. Establishment of Community Site
The owner of record of a parcel of land or a contract purchaser may petition for the
establishment of a PARC only if the parcel meets the site eligibility criteria of subsection
D below.
D. Site Eligibility Criteria
The Commission may at its discretion establish PARC sites providing that the site(s) meets
the following criteria:
1. The site consists of no less than five acres and is located within the TCDPerimeter
Overlay, Gateway North, Gateway South, or Industrial zones;
2. The site can be provided with or the site is within close proximity of shopping
facilities and services;
3. The site has the required frontage on a state highway and/or a Town road or
street which street, road, or highway is improved or will be improved to the
extent necessary to adequately accommodate the development traffic;
4. The site topography can accommodate the buildings, roads, development
features, and amenities as well as other requirements of this Section;
5. The site has or will be provided with plantings, vegetative cover, or features
that will adequately buffer site development from adjacent properties;
6. The site is served by public sewer systems capable of handling the effluent that
may be generated by the development;
7. The site can be served with adequate water to meet the development's
potable and firefighting water demands;
8. The site is so situated, consists of topography, and is furnished with natural
features that can accommodate the development; and
9. The development will not exert a detrimental impact on nearby properties or
values thereof.
10. If located in an Industrial Zone, the site must abut a Residential Zone.
E. Application Procedures
1. Following the designation of the property as suitable for a PARC pursuant to
the eligibility criteria described under subsection D above, the applicant may
submit an application for special permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 8.5
of these Regulations.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
71
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2. Concurrently, with the submission of an application and all required data to
the Zoning Commission, the applicant shall submit one duplicate application
form and data package to the Brookfield Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall formally receive a copy of the application and data package
at its first scheduled meeting following receipt of such data in the office of the
Planning Commission and determine its findings on the proposal per CGS § 8-3a.
F. Design and Technical Requirements
As established for Multifamily Dwellings in 3.14E.
G. Density and Number of Units
1. No PARC project shall contain more than 150 dwelling units.
2. Not more than 8 units per developable acre of land. For the purposes of this
Section, developable land is the total land area minus 50 percent of the area of
inland wetlands, utility easements employing aboveground buildings or towers,
and natural slopes steeper than one to one (1:1).
H. Development Standards and Controls
1. Permissible Uses:
a. Planned age-restricted structures consisting of dwellings not to exceed
three bedrooms each designed for use as elderly housing exclusively.
b. Accessory uses, buildings, and structures including parking areas and
garages; maintenance buildings; and recreational uses, buildings, and
facilities when said uses are built and maintained for the exclusive use of
residents within the project and their guests. At the Commission's discretion,
accessory uses may include a retail/service store not to exceed 4,000 square
feet in total floor area designed to service the immediate needs of
community residents.
c. All structures and uses under this section shall meet the definition of
"Housing for Older Persons" set forth at §42 USC 3607 (b)[2] as amended.
3. Minimum Lot Area and Frontage:
a. The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
b. The lot shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public highway
having a right-of-way no less than 50 feet.
4. Minimum Setbacks:
a. No principal building, accessory building, or parking area shall be located
closer than 50 feet from any front, side, or rear property line.
b. No building in a townhome-style PARC shall be located closer than 25 feet
from the edge of pavement of any road, internal drive, or cul-de-sac.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
72
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
c. If abutting a residential district, no building, structure, or parking area
pursuant to this Section shall be closer than the minimum side or rear building
setback required in the residential district which it abuts. Such setback yards
may be required to be provided with screening as determined by the
Commission.
5. Maximum Building Height:
No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in building height. Excluded from
the building height calculations is any space resulting from design seeking to
achieve the goals and objectives of Section 6.11 of these Regulations.
6. Building Separation:
For the purpose of emergency vehicular access, buildings or structures shall be
separated as may be prescribed by prevailing local fire or building codes and
regulations but in no event shall they be closer than 20 feet from another
building or structure. Exempted from this requirement are buildings not designed
for human occupancy.
7. Off-Street Parking:
A minimum of one and one-half (1.5) spaces per dwelling unit is required. The
Commission may require additional off-street parking spaces for visitors and
guests.
8. Landscaping:
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the intent and spirit
described under Section 6.3 of these Regulations.
I. Miscellaneous Provisions
1. Conserved Land Area:
a. All land that is not dedicated to dwelling units, maintenance, storage and
utility buildings, garages, roadway and parking areas, sewer systems, or
active recreational areas shall be designated "conserved land areas" in
perpetuity. The conserved land area(s) shall be preserved in their natural
state or improved at the discretion of the Commission and limited to
appropriate passive recreation.
b. On an individual case-by-case basis, the Commission may request an
easement on certain portions of the conserved land area for public water
supply including access thereto. In such instances, a dedicated parking area
may be permitted in the conserved land area.
2. Active Recreational Areas:
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
73
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
In addition to those areas designated "conserved land area(s)," area(s) shall be
designated "active recreational area(s) on the site plan in a location(s)
approved by the Commission. Within such area(s), appropriate structures and
facilities for recreational purposes as approved by the Commission shall be
constructed and operated for the use of the residents and their guests. These
facilities may be used for accessory uses. Such areas must remain in the
ownership of a tenants'/owners' association.
J. Maintenance
As established for Multifamily Dwellings in 3.14I.
K. Elderly Occupancy
The applicant shall submit for final approval of the Commission documentation that
dedicates and restricts the units to elderly persons in perpetuity. Such documentation
shall be in the form of a deed restriction or such other form as may be acceptable to
Commission Counsel.
3.16 Accessory Apartments
A. Purpose
The Commission may allow the development of one accessory apartment in a singlefamily
dwelling or on a single-family property by Special Permit in order to provide for
affordable housing options within Brookfield.
B. Intent
The intent of this section is to:
? Enable property owners desiring to meet the housing and social needs of
Brookfield;
? Provide an alternate housing arrangement that can adequately and
comfortably house residents requiring lower cost housing;
? Reduce the necessity for public agencies to provide housing and support
services; and
? Establish a procedure to minimize potential impacts from accessory apartments
on abutting single-family uses.
C. Occupancy
The owner of the property shall occupy either the single-family dwelling unit or the
apartment unit.
D. Standards
1. No single-family dwelling unit shall qualify under these regulations unless such
unit shall have been on the Assessor's list on October 1, 1975, or a dwelling
constructed after October 1, 1975, for which a building permit for a single-family
dwelling was issued.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
74
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2. The lot shall be a minimum of 40,000 square feet, and shall otherwise conform
to the minimum yard, area and bulk requirements of the underlying zone.
3. Conversion of an existing outbuilding into an accessory apartment, where in
the opinion of the Commission it is not feasible to connect the outbuilding to the
main house, will be allowed subject to the provisions of this section. Whether the
“apartment unit” is within an existing dwelling, or a proposed newly constructed
dwelling, or within an existing outbuilding, there shall be only one “apartment
unit” allowed per lot.
4. An apartment unit shall not be occupied by more than two unrelated persons
and no more than four persons in total.
5. An apartment unit shall contain not less than 480 square feet nor more than
800 square feet of the building footprint.
6. All parking shall be on the premises.
7. Where located within or attached to a single-family dwelling, the accessory
apartment shall have:
a. one means of egress separate from that of the main dwelling, and
b. at least one operable door on a common wall connecting the main
dwelling to the apartment.
8. The applicant shall provide a site plan and layout for exterior and interior
modifications showing all proposed changes of sufficient detail for the
Commission to evaluate compliance of the proposal with the Regulations.
9. The owner must reside in either the main part of the house or in the
apartment. The other occupant must be a direct family member, elderly or
disabled person or a caregiver for an elderly or disabled person who lives on the
premises.
In lieu of the above requirement, the owner of the property instead shall file an
affordable housing deed restriction which requires that such accessory
apartment be rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the unit as housing
for which persons and families pay 30% or less of income, where such income is
less than or equal to 80% of the area or state median income, whichever is less,
as defined by CGS Section 8-30g-8(a). The deed restriction shall be in effect for a
period of not less than ten years from the date of recording these Deed
Restriction and continuing until expiration upon the filing of a Notice of Expiration
upon the Land Records with a copy to the Town of Brookfield-Land Use Office,
by the property owner. The deed restriction shall also provide that the
municipality may recover its reasonable fees and expenses in enforcing the
terms of any deed restriction.
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
75
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
E. Termination of Special Permit
Upon written notice of termination of the Special Permit by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer due to failure to comply with these Regulations, the accessory apartment shall
be removed within 120 days. The removal of all kitchen appliances and fixtures and the
safe cutting and/or capping of the utility lines and pipes servicing them to the
satisfaction of the Building Official shall constitute removal of the accessory apartment.
The Building Official may allow the removal of the pre-existing kitchen instead of the
kitchen in the accessory apartment.
3.17 Guest House
A. Purpose
A guest house intended solely for the accommodation of guests of the family
occupying the principal dwelling and for which no rental or other charge is made or
received, either directly or indirectly, in cash, kind, or services, may be permitted.
B. Standards
1. One guest house apartment may be constructed on the same lot provided all
setback, yard, coverage, and height requirements for the specific zoning district
are adhered to.
2. The guest house shall not exceed 15 percent of the floor area of the principal
dwelling.
3. The guest house structure shall not provide kitchen facilities.
3.18 Group Day Care Homes
A. Purpose
To allow state licensed group day care homes in residential districts by Special Permit.
B. Standards
1. All state licensure requirements are met; including those pertaining to building,
fire safety and health codes;
2. All minimum lot, yard and coverage requirements for the residential zoning
district are met;
3. Signage, if any, conforms to the zoning district regulations;
4. There shall be safe and adequate provision for boarding and off-boarding
children from vehicles without hazards to pedestrians; off-street parking and
loading must comply with Section 6.2
5. A safe on-site vehicle turnaround, or separate entrance and exit points must
be provided;
2019-April-19
Article 3 – Residential Districts and Uses
76
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6. No area for active play or play structures may be located in a front yard or
within 10 feet of a property line. A sight-obscuring and childproof wall or
fence of at least five feet shall be installed along the entire perimeter of all
play areas. In addition to such walls or fences, an exterior buffer of at least five
feet in height shall be planted and maintained along the entire perimeter of
any play areas;
7. The site must be landscaped in a manner compatible with adjacent
residences;
8. No structural or decorative alteration that will alter the residential character of
an existing residential structure used for a group day care home is permitted.
Any new or remodeled structure must be designed to be compatible with the
residential character if the surrounding neighborhood;
9. If the proposed group day care home is within 2,500 feet of
another currently operating group day care home, the Commission may
approve the application only if the application shows that the cumulative
effects will not have an adverse effect on the neighborhood due to traffic, noise
and other safety factors;
10. No group day care home shall be located on a shared or common driveway
used by two or more residences including the residence of the applicant;
11. The applicant must show that there will be no traffic congestion resulting
from the operation of the group day care home.
3.19 Short-Term Rental
A. Purpose
To allow short-term rental of dwelling units as an accessory use in residential districts by
Zoning Permit.
B. Standards
1. No more than 2 adult guests per bedroom, and any associated children, are
permitted for the duration of the short-term rental.
2. Accessory buildings and structures may be used for short-term rental, provided
the owner or permanent resident of the principal dwelling unit remains on the
premises for the duration of the short-term rental.
3. The short-term rental shall not materially disrupt the residential character of the
neighborhood.
4. No signs are permitted in association with the short-term rental.
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
77
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
4.1 Purposes
A. Regional Commercial (C-1)
The purpose of the Regional Commercial (C-1) District is to allow for commercial and
professional activities that have regional draw, especially the retail sale of goods and
services.
B. Neighborhood Commercial (C-2)
The purpose of the Neighborhood Commercial District is to allow smaller-scale
commercial and professional activities primarily serving local residents.
C. Commercial Gateway North (CG-N)
The purpose of the Commercial Gateway North District (CG-N) is to provide an
attractive entrance into Brookfield and a transition to the Town Center District along
Federal Road that allows for a variety of commercial and higher-density residential uses
that have high-quality site and building design with interconnected vehicular and
pedestrian systems.
D. Commercial Gateway South (CG-S)
The purpose of the Commercial Gateway South District (CG-S) is to provide an
attractive transition to the Town Center District along Federal Road that allows for a
variety of commercial and higher-density residential uses that have high-quality site and
building design with interconnected vehicular and pedestrian systems.
E. Marine Commercial (MC)
The purpose of the Marine Commercial District (MC) is to allow for certain residential,
institutional, recreational and marine commercial uses in select, concentrated locations
that are primarily residential.
F. Industrial (I-1)
The purpose of the Industrial District (I) is to allow and protect industrial development
opportunities that are adequately supported by the land and contribute to the Town’s
economic base.
G. Corporate Park (CP)
The purpose of the Corporate Park District (CP) is to allow industrial development
opportunities in a park-type environment.
H. Town Center District (TCD)
See Section 5.1 of these Regulations for details on the Town Center District.
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
78
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
4.2 Permitted Uses
A. Permitted Uses Table
ZP = Zoning Permit Site = Site Plan SP = Special Permit, public hearing required
Table of Permitted Commercial and Industrial Uses
1. Community Services CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Community service facility Site Site Site Site SP SP SP SP
2. Institutional Uses CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Cemetery SP SP SP SP
b. Daycare (child and adult) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
c. Places of worship/parish houses and centers,
provided a minimum lot area of 120,000 square feet
SP SP SP SP SP
d. Public buildings (state or federal) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
e. Schools – public, private, preschools, training
schools
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
f. Town of Brookfield buildings Site Site Site Site Site Site SP SP
3. Dwellings and Residential Care CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. One-family dwellings ZP ZP Site ZP Site*
b. Multi-family dwellings (see Section 3.14) SP SP SP SP SP*
c. Planned Age Restricted Community (PARC) (see
Section 3.15)
SP SP SP SP SP† SP*
d. Assisted living facility, congregate housing,
continuing life care community, or nursing facility
SP SP SP SP SP† SP SP
e. Residential dwelling units on floors other than the
first floor in mixed-used buildings.
Site Site SP SP SP Site
* See Section 5.1 for limitations on one-family homes, PARCs, and Multi-Family Dwellings in the TCD Overlay Zone.
† Must abut a Residential district.
4. Agriculture and Animals CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Kennels (see 4.4I) SP SP SP SP SP
b. Argiculture/farm stand (see 4.4B) ZP ZP ZP ZP ZP Site
c. Commercial livestock or poultry (4.4B) ZP ZP ZP ZP ZP
d. Greenhouses Site Site Site Site Site Site
e. Veterinary offices and animal hosptials (see 4.4I) Site Site SP Site SP Site SP
f. Riding stables, Boarding, & Livery Site Site SP Site SP Site SP
5. Lodging CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Hotels/motelsinns, provided a minimum lot area of
80,000 square feet plus 2,000 square feet for each
room
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
b. Bed and Breakfast SP SP SP SP SP
c. Conference centers as accessory uses to
hotels/motels/inns
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
79
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
ZP = Zoning Permit Site = Site Plan SP = Special Permit, public hearing required
6. Retail Sales and Service CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. General retail (building footprint < 7,500 sq ft) Site Site Site Site Site SP*
b. General retail (building footprint = 7,500 sq ft) SP SP Site SP SP SP*
c. Drive-thru facilities SP SP SP SP SP SP*
d. Outside storage or display of merchandise SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
e. Retail sale limited to commodities that are
manufactured, processed, fabricated, or
warehoused on the premises provided that the total
floor area devoted to retail sales does not exceed
50% of gross floor area of all building on the
premises.
SP
SP
SP
SP
Site
SP
f. Sale at wholesale of an commodity except live
animals and commerical explosives.
SP SP Site Site Site Site
g. Adult-oriented business (see 4.4A) SP
h. Alchohol (see 4.4C) Site Site Site Site Site
i. Medical Marijuana Dispensary (see 4.4xx) SP
j. Artisan/Craftsman studio/shop SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
k. Automobile/boat/motorcycle/equipment sales
and rental
SP SP Site SP SP
l. Automobile and boat service (limited or general
motor vehicle repair license) (see 4.4D)
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
m Car wash, provided that all building and
equipment is set back a minimum of 100 feet from
the front lot line
SP SP SP SP SP SP
n. Dry cleaner/laundry SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
o. Flower, nursery, garden centers SP SP SP SP SP
p. Gasoline sales/filling station SP SP SP SP
q. Parking garage (freestanding whether or not
connected to another building)
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
r. Parking garage (under building) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
s. Personal service business Site Site Site Site SP Site
t. Rental, equipment and supplies Site Site Site Site SP SP Site SP
u. Undertaking and funeral homes SP SP SP SP SP SP
* See Section 5.1 for special provisions regarding building footprints and Drive-Thrus in the TCD
7. Offices CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Banks and financial institutions (bldg footprint < 5,000 sq ft) Site Site Site Site Site Site Site
a. Banks and financial institutions (bldg footprint = 5,000 sq ft) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
b. Medical and dental offices and laboratories
(bldg footprint < 5,000 sq ft)
Site Site Site Site Site Site Site
b. Medical and dental offices and laboratories
(bldg footprint = 5,000 sq ft)
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
c. Professional and business offices (bldg footprint < 5,000 sq ft) Site Site Site Site Site Site Site
c. Professional and business offices (bldg footprint = 5,000 sq ft) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
8. Food and Beverage Establishments CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC* I-1 CP TCD
a. Fast-food restaurant SP SP Site Site SP SP
b. Sit-down restaurant Site Site Site Site Site Site Site
c. Limited-service restaurant Site Site Site Site SP SP Site Site
d. Outdoor dining accessory to a sit-down restaurant
(see Section 6.10)
Site Site Site Site SP SP SP
e. Tavern with a permit Site Site Site Site SP SP SP
f. Bar/café with a permit SP SP Site Site SP SP SP
g. Brewpub with brewery SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
h. Brewpub with microbrewery, microdistillery SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
i. Catering establishment where food is prepared for
delivery and consumption off the premises
Site Site Site Site SP SP SP SP
* See Section 5.1 for special provisions regarding building footprints in the TCD
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
80
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
ZP = Zoning Permit Site = Site Plan SP = Special Permit, public hearing required
9. Industrial CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Assembling, manufacturing, and processing of
products, supplies, and/or equipment
SP SP SP SP Site Site
b. Publishing and printing SP SP SP SP Site Site
c. Research laboratories (excluding medical
laboratories)
SP SP SP SP Site Site
d. Truck and bus terminals SP
e. Warehousing and distribution SP SP SP SP Site Site
f. Wholesale SP SP SP SP Site Site
10. Recreation CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Assembly halls and theaters SP SP SP SP Site SP SP
b. Gymnasiums Site Site Site Site Site SP
c. Health and fitness centers Site Site Site Site Site SP Site
d. Indoor courts, pools, sporting areas (see 4.4F) Site Site Site Site Site SP SP
e. Marinas, docks and slips (see 4.4E) SP
f. Outdoor courts, pools, play areas (see 4.4F) SP SP SP SP SP Site SP
11. Storage CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Bulk storage of materials SP SP SP SP SP SP
b. Motor vehicles, indoor SP SP SP SP Site SP
c. Motor vehicles, outdoor SP SP
d. Boats, indoor SP SP SP Site SP
e. Boats, outdoor SP SP SP
f. Contractor’s equipment, indoor SP SP SP Site SP
g. Contractor’s yard and outdoor equipment
storage (see 4.4E)
SP Site SP
h. Self-storage facilities SP Site SP
12. Energy and Utilities CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. Utilities (electric, water, natural gas, public, sewer) SP SP SP SP Site SP SP
b. Solar energy as an accessory to a principal use
(see 4.4I)
ZP ZP ZP ZP ZP ZP ZP ZP
c. Telecommunications towers and antennae (see
7.2)
SP SP SP SP SP SP
d. TV and data facilities SP SP Site Site Site SP
13. Mix or Combination of Uses CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. The combination or mixture of Commercial and
Industrial uses that are permitted within the District
on the same parcel (see 4.4K)
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
b. The combination or mixture of Commercial and
Residential uses that are permitted within the District
on the same parcel (see 4.4L)
SP
SP
SP
SP
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
81
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
ZP = Zoning Permit Site = Site Plan SP = Special Permit, public hearing required
A. Occupancy of Existing Space CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
a. *MINOR Modifications to a valid approved use
where:
? The existing number of trees or shrubs is NOT
reduced;
? Erosion and sedimentation controls are NOT
required;
? NO conditions will occur which affect traffic
safety;
? Existing outdoor lighting fixtures are NOT
modified;
? The number of parking spacers are NOT
reduced NOR increased by more than 10% of
existing; AND
? Building or structures as initially constructed are
NOT enlarged by more than 2,500 square feet
or 25%, whichever is less (such enlargements
are limited to a one-time expansion)
ZP
Site
ZP
Site
b. *MAJOR Modifications to a valid approved use
where:
? The existing number of trees or shrubs IS
reduced;
? Erosion and sedimentation controls ARE
required;
? Conditions will occur which WILL affect traffic
safety;
? Existing outdoor lighting fixtures ARE modified;
? The number of parking spacers ARE reduced OR
increased by more than 10% of existing; OR
? Building or structures as initially constructed ARE
enlarged by more than 2,500 square feet or
25%, whichever is less.
Site
SP
Site
SP
c. Subsections a. & b. above shall not apply to the
following uses: kennels; hotels, motels, or inns; bed
and breakfasts; drive-thru facilities; adult-oriented
business; automobile/boat/motorcycle/equipment
sales, rental or repair; car wash; dry cleaner; flower,
nursery, garden center; gasolines sales/filling station;
undertaking/funeral homes; bar/café; brewpubs
with brewery or microbrewery
SP
*Any modifications permitted under subsections a. & b. above shall be modifiations or amendments to the originally
approved site plan or special permit.
B. Prohibited Uses
The following uses shall be prohibited in the Industrial & Commercial Districts:
(a) Any business which includes an adult amusement machine.
(b) Any business which could be characterized as an adult cabaret.
(c) Any business containing or consisting of an adult motion picture theatre or
adult mini-motion picture theatre.
(d) Any business which could be characterized as an adult personal service
establishment.
(e) Any use prohibited by 5.4 D(2) of the Aquifer Protection Regulation.
(f) Medical Marijuana Production Facilities.
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
82
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
4.3 Location, Dimensional and Site Requirements
A. Dimensional Requirements Table
CG-N CG-S C-1 C-2 MC I-1 CP TCD
Min Lot Area (sq ft) 40,000 20,000 80,000 40,000 10,000 40,000 40,000 10,000
Min Lot Width (ft) 150 75 200 150 50 150 150 50A
Min Front Yard Setback (ft) 25 50 20 50G 50 6B
Min Rear Yard Setback (ft) 30 20 50 30 10 30G 30 10C
Min Side Yard Setback (ft) 30 20 50 30 10 30G 30 0
Max Impervious Coverage (%) 75 80
Max Building Height (ft) 30F,G 45 42
Setback from Residential
District LineD
100 100E 100 0 100 0
A: Plus 26 ft wide side yard if rear parking is provided.
B: Minimum from sidewalk or property line, whichever is closer; and a maximum of 25 feet from
property line.
C: Plus the width of a rear yard drive.
D: Except when the boundary is contiguous with a railroad right-of-way, the setback may be reduced
to 25 feet.
E: Except for multifamily dwellings, which shall comply with the minimum setbacks set forth in Section
3.14(G)(2).
F. Except when in the I-1 Height Overlay Zone where 45’ max building heights are allowed.
G. Except in the CG-N district where 45’ max building height is allowed on parcels = 25 acres with
required setback of 150’ from property lines on all sides.
B. Site Requirements – Gateway Districts
1. Buildings
In addition to the area, yard, and height requirements found in 4.3A, the
following site development standards shall apply to all uses in the Gateway
Districts (CG-N and CG-S).
a. Buildings along a public street shall be oriented to the street. Buildings
along an interior access drive shall be oriented toward the access drive.
b. For sites where multiple buildings are proposed, the minimum distance
between buildings shall be equal to the height of the tallest adjacent
building. In instances where the building has a sprinkler system, the
buildings shall have a minimum separation distance of 25 feet.
2. Access and Parking
In addition to the access and parking standards set forth in Section 6.1, the
following standards shall apply to all uses in the Gateway Districts (CG-N and
CG-S):
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
83
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. Where parking may be visible from a street or internal access drive, the
parking lot shall be buffered by existing or proposed topography, the
preservation of existing mature vegetation, low walls, or evergreen plant
material.
b. Access from Federal Road shall be limited to one driveway per parcel,
or site in the case of a unified site development of multiple parcels, in
order to reduce the potential of traffic congestion unless the Commission
finds that overall traffic circulation and safety will be improved by having
more than one point of access.
c. Where practical, the Commission may recommend that internal access
drives be connected to adjacent properties in order to facilitate a
comprehensive circulation system and avoid congestion along Federal
Road to promote shared parking.
d. Loading areas shall not be visible from Federal Road and shall be
suitably screened from other streets and internal access drives.
3. Landscaping of Parking and Loading Areas
In addition to the landscaping requirements set forth in Section 6.3, the following
landscaping standards shall apply to parking and loading areas in the CG-N
District.
a. At least ten percent of a parking and loading area containing more
than ten spaces shall be landscaped using landscaped planting islands
and planting strips.
b. At least one shade tree shall be provided within the parking lot for
every ten spaces.
c. Parking lots shall have landscaped islands at the end of row of parking.
The islands shall have a minimum width of ten feet.
4. Where the soils are suitable, planting islands and planting strips may be
depressed when designed to serve as rain gardens or to promote
infiltration of surface runoff from the parking lot. Depressed areas shall be
suitably protected with guardrails or curb stops.
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
84
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
4.4 Commercial and Industrial Uses
A. Adult-Oriented Businesses
An adult-oriented business may only be located in the specific Zoning Districts found in
Section 4.2 as revised. In addition to the general requirements of these Zoning
Regulations, site plan approval, parking and other requirements, and notwithstanding
any regulation to the contrary, such uses are subject to the following requirements:
1. No such adult-oriented business may be located within 500 feet of any
residential structure, public or private school or other educational facility serving
individuals under 18 years of age, daycare centers, senior centers, churches,
medical marijuana dispensaries, or other adult-oriented business establishments,
nor an establishment which sells alcoholic beverages pursuant to a valid State
Liquor License. For purposes of compliance with these distance requirements,
distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening
structures or objects from the principal interest of the building containing the
proposed use to the nearest boundary of the uses identified herein.
2. No such business shall remain open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. and shall not be open on Sundays.
3. All such business interiors shall be fully lighted and well-lit during operating
hours.
4. No such business shall have any enclosed screens or booths or cubicles.
5. No such business may have for rental or usage adult amusement machines for
the viewing of materials depicting sexual activities or male or female nudity.
6. No such business shall include the featuring of live entertainment involving the
touching or displaying of nude male or female entertainers, the actual or
simulation of sexual activities, or the exposure of human genitalia or female
breasts.
7. No such business shall be conducted in a manner that permits the observation
of any materials or novelties intended for adult viewing from any public way.
Accordingly, displays, windows, doorways, and signs shall not be arranged so as
to display the adult-oriented business to the exterior of the premises. No such
business shall allow partially nude live performances as defined in Town of
Brookfield “Adult Oriented Business Establishments Ordinance.”
8. All such businesses must post or maintain a sign 24 inches by six inches on the
exterior of the building adjacent to its main entranceway indicating “ADULTS
ONLY” in capital letters with letters five inches in height.
9. No such adult business shall be allowed if it has not first complied with and
obtained any licensing requirements of the Town of Brookfield Ordinance
Regarding Adult-Oriented Businesses.
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
85
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
10. All such establishments must be in compliance with any applicable
ordinance of the Town of Brookfield.
B. Agriculture and Animal-Related Uses
1. The purpose of this Regulation is to promote Brookfield’s agricultural heritage
and protect its economic development interest.
2. Growing edible crops and agricultural produce for wholesale or retail is
generally permitted by zoning permit in the CG-N, CG-S, C-1, C-2, and I-1 zones,
provided the following:
? The parcel and any structures meet the minimum dimensional
requirements of the District.
? Seventy percent of gross sales shall be from agricultural goods produced
on the premises.
? The extent and type of any products to be sold, any activities to be
conducted, and any classes to be offered on the lot shall be clearly
stated in the application or shall be considered to be prohibited.
? Adequate parking is provided to accommodate farm equipment and
customer vehicles.
3. Commercial livestock or poultry farming requires a minimum of five acres. In
addition, a 100-foot buffer shall be maintained, in its natural state or landscaped
as required to provide visual screening, between the property line and any
fence, corral, feeding area, or structure used to house or feed animals.
C. Alcohol Sales
No building or premises shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor under a package
store permit issued by the State of Connecticut if the principal public entrance to such
premises is situated less than 2,000 feet from the principal public entrance of any other
premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor under a package store permit issued by
the State of Connecticut. Said 2,000-foot distance requirement shall be measured as
follows: beginning at the midpoint of the principal public entrance door of the portion
of the structure in which the sale of alcohol is proposed, thence to the center of the
closest public street by the shortest distance without intersecting a structure, thence
along the centerline of said public street or streets to a point in a public street
perpendicular to the nearest portion of any other structure in which alcoholic liquor is
sold under a package store permit, thence by the shortest distance without intersecting
a structure to the midpoint of the principal public entrance door of the portion of the
structure in which alcoholic liquor is sold under a package store permit. In no case shall
the portion of any two structures in which alcoholic liquor is sold or proposed to be sold
under a package store permit be located within a radius of 1,000 feet as measured
from the midpoints of the principal public entrance doors of said portions of said
structures. For the purposes of this section, the terms “alcoholic liquor” and “package
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
86
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
store permit” shall have the same meaning as those terms defined in Chapter 545 of the
CGS, as may be amended or re-codified from time to time.
D. Contractor’s Yards
Any fuel storage facilities shall be built above ground and provided with a containment
berm. The mixing of materials is permitted provided that effective dust control methods
are used and that the operations conform to the noise regulations of Section 6.8.
Contractor’s yards are NOT permitted in any Aquifer Protection District.
E. Marinas, Docks, and Slips
The quantity, construction, lighting, and physical location of docks and mooring spaces
and parking spaces pertaining thereto, from the aspect of public safety, shall be
subject to approval of the Commission. The sale of fuel and lubricant for marine use is
considered an accessory use hereto.
F. Recreation
Mechanical amusement park devices are specifically prohibited. Within the MC
District, outdoor recreational uses shall not be operated later than 10:00 p.m.
G. Restaurants
Within the MC District only, food sold for consumption at home is considered an
accessory use. Specifically prohibited in this District are ice cream, soda, hot dog, or
hamburger stands or outlets or similarly related establishments, except those which may
be reasonably considered by the Commission to be an accessory use to a club, beach,
or recreational sports area. The Commission may grant a special permit for such
accessory use.
H. Solar Energy Generation
Solar panels accessory to a principal use and whose primary purpose is to provide
energy for the principal structure are permitted by Zoning Permit provided that:
1. Roof-mounted solar panels shall not be included in the maximum building height
regulations.
2. Solar panels are to be considered as a structure when located at ground level
and are allowed provided that:
a. Supporting documentation proves that no suitable location is available on
the building due to exposed surfaces not facing the appropriate direction.
b. No glare will be created.
c. The optimum location of the panels is at ground level.
d. The Commission may at its discretion establish a 10-foot or greater setback
requirement.
3. In no case are solar panels permitted whose primary purpose is to supply power
for commercial purposes.
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
87
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
I. Veterinary Offices, Animal Hospitals, and Kennels
Such uses require a minimum lot area of five acres, and no animal may be kept in an
enclosure or structure which is located within 150 feet from any property line.
J. Combination/Mix of Commercial and Industrial Uses
Within districts that permit both commercial and industrial uses, the combination or
mixture of such types of uses on the same lot shall not generally be permitted. The
Commission, in its sole determination, may permit the combination or mixture of such
uses only when they are supportive of or accessory to one another, e.g.,
warehouse/office, manufacture/sales, etc. When incompatible uses are proposed to
be combined or mixed or where the risk to pedestrians and property would be
increased, the combination or mixture shall not be permitted, e.g., truck terminal/retail
shop, motel/contractor’s yard, etc.
K. Combination/Mix of Commercial and Residential Uses
Within the CG-N and CG-S Districts, more than one of the permitted uses may be
permitted on the same parcel in separate buildings or mixed-use buildings provided
that the uses and buildings are planned as a single development.
For sites where multiple buildings are proposed, the minimum distance between
buildings shall be equal to the height of the tallest adjacent building. In instances
where the building has a sprinkler system, the buildings shall have a minimum separation
distance of 25 feet.
L. Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Medical Marijuana Dispensaries are permitted, subject to Special Permit Approval, and
the following requirements:
a. Shall be licensed by the State of Connecticut and must maintain all necessary
approvals and permits from the State at all times;
b. The Gross Leasable Space shall not exceed 4,000 square feet;
c. The main pedestrian entrance to the proposed dispensary shall be located at
least 1,000 linear feet from all public and private schools, nursery schools, daycare
facilities, parks and playgrounds, and places of worship. The distance shall be
measured by drawing a straight line between: 1) the nearest main pedestrian
entrance of any existing facility listed herein, or 2) in the case of a park or
playground, from the nearest boundary of the park or playground, and the
nearest pedestrian entrance of the proposed dispensary;
d. Shall be located in the Industrial District (I-1);
e. Shall not adversely affect health, safety, convenience and welfare of the
surrounding neighborhood;
f. Shall not engage in the sale of recreational marijuana, regardless of Connecticut
Laws, without additional approval from the Town of Brookfield;
2019-April-19
Article 4 – Commercial and Industrial Districts
88
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
g. Shall not operate within 7,000 linear feet of any other Medical Marijuana
Dispensary, measured as set forth in item c above;
h. Shall not be located in the same building or any portion thereof that is used for
residential purposes.
Notwithstanding any other zoning regulation to the contrary, there shall be no outdoor
display of marijuana products, packaging, paraphernalia, display boards or pricing
information.
Medical Marijuana Production Facilities are specifically prohibited in any district/zone.
2018-December-21
Article 5 – Special Districts
89
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 5 – Special Districts
5.1 Town Center District (TCD)
A. Purpose
This district encompasses the historical business center of the town. Many business
establishments within the district have been in operation prior to the enactment of the
Regulations, and physical conditions exist which limit their compliance with regulatory
requirements and/or good planning principles. It is considered in the best economic interest
of the Town to foster business development of both new and existing establishments in a
planned, integrated, and orderly manner and in such a way as to complement the historic
character and traditions of the district.
In the future, the Four Corners will become a center of activity in Brookfield and a
destination. It will be a “downtown” for Brookfield that is well defined visually and
aesthetically, providing a positive experience for residents and visitors, with a distinctive
identity that is well known throughout Brookfield and the region. Development will have
complementary scale, character, and density that will contribute to a sense of both history
and vitality. It will offer places to live, work, shop, eat, and find entertainment and cultural
enrichment. The area will provide a diversity of services that enhance the quality of life for
residents and invite travelers to stop. This will be complemented by access to the Still River as
a scenic resource in the Four Corners. It will have complementary civic spaces in the form of
outdoor parks and plazas and public community facilities. Most new development will result
from infill and from reuse or redevelopment of existing sites. No new strip or large-scale
single-use developments will be built.
The area will be easy to access and navigate by car, bicycle, transit, and on foot. There will
be a variety of opportunities to travel by all these means along all roads within the Four
Corners area including walking, biking, rail, and bus along with key connections among
those means. Streets in the Four Corners will offer a balance among motor vehicle and
pedestrian and bicycle traffic, with an enhanced streetscape that is pedestrian friendly and
complementary to the character of the area. This will be accomplished through
improvements such as landscaped sidewalks, aesthetic lighting, and areas to pause and
relax such as plazas with benches near public art and other public spaces. Traffic on Route 7
will flow at reasonable speeds through the area as a result of measures designed to
encourage drivers to slow down, improve safety, and minimize any degradation of the
character of this special place.
B. Plan of Conservation and Development
The Commission shall use the Plan of Conservation and Development as amended to include
the Four Corners Revitalization Plan, approved by the Planning Commission, Town of
Brookfield, as a guide in reviewing all applications for design review approval within the
district. In particular, the Commission shall consider and be guided by the various aspects of
2018-December-21
Article 5 – Special Districts
90
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
the Plan, which may identify historic sites, irreplaceable site features, wetlands, utility
concepts, bridges and walkways, service areas, common areas and open space, potential
housing sites, access drives, vehicle and pedestrian circulation patterns, and common
parking areas in addition to other elements.
C. Common Service Areas
In order to provide for services to the district as a whole, certain areas within the district may
be acquired by various business entities and held in common under a condominium
association or similar entity. Such service areas may consist of access drives, parking areas,
area lighting, utility facilities, walkways, seating, landscaped areas, etc.
D. Permitted Uses
1. Table of Permitted Uses
The permitted uses established for the TCD are as indicated in Table I, “Table of
Permitted Uses” appearing in Section 4.2.
2. Residential Apartment or Condominium Dwelling Units
Residential apartment or condominium dwelling units may be permitted on floors
other than the first floor of a mixed-use structure. Each such dwelling unit shall not
contain more than two bedrooms.
3. One-Family Dwellings/PARCs/Multi-Family Dwellings
One-family dwellings, PARCs, and Multi-Family Dwellings (notwithstanding point 2
above) are permitted only in the TCD Perimeter Overlay Zone (see Section 5.2 of these
Regulations).
4. Square Footage Restriction
Each new structure permitted within the district shall not exceed a footprint of 12,000
square feet, except when the new structure is a supermarket/grocery store or
municipal building, when the footprint shall not exceed 20,000 square feet.
5. Drive-Thru Facility
a) The lot shall be a minimum of 40,000 square feet;
b) The lot must have frontage on a state highway, thus making it subject to
state Drive-Thru regulations.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
91
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
E. Land Use Standards
F. Architectural Guidelines
Additional design standards for compliance for site design are set forth in the TCD Design
Guidelines in Appendix 2 of these Regulations.
G. Conflicts
Where compliance with the TCD Design Guidelines is required pursuant to this Regulation, to
the extent that there is any conflict between a specific provision of this section and the TCD
Design Guidelines set forth in Appendix 2, the requirements of the TCD Design Guidelines shall
prevail and apply.
H. Application and Permitting
1. In addition to meeting all requirements of Section 8.5, “Special Permit Application,”
all projects shall demonstrate:
Lot Area, Min.
As determined by parking space and building footprint
requirements for a particular use or group of uses but not less than
10,000 square feet
Impervious Coverage,
Max. 80%
Loading/Refuse area, Min. 250 square feet
Lot width, Min. 50 feet, plus 26-foot-wide side yard driveway if rear parking is
required
Side Yard None
OR, if a Side Yard
Driveway is provided, the
setback from the inner
edge of the drive
None
Rear Yard 10 feet, plus the width of a rear yard driveway
Front Yard Setback, Min. 6 feet from sidewalk or property line, whichever is closer
Front Yard Setback,
Max. 25 feet from property line
Height, Max. Three stories and 42 feet
Sidewalk width, Min. 6 feet wide or as per Town Center District Sidewalk and Access
Management Plan
Common or Public Areas Refuse containers, seating areas, and other pedestrian amenities
shall be provided at locations approved by the Commission.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
92
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. Preservation of historical sites and irreplaceable site features
b. Preservation of the architectural design of the original building during renovation
or expansion of existing buildings
c. Continuity of the architectural theme with adjacent structures
d. Harmony of building material texture and color with other district structures
2. All projects must undergo a preapplication review with the TCD Design Review
Team, which shall be chosen by the Commission. The advisory team may be
comprised of the following technical specialists: an architect and a landscape
architect, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Town Historian, Fire Chief or his
designee, Fire Marshal, Sanitarian, Building Inspector, WPCA Chief of Maintenance,
and Inland/Wetlands, when applicable. A complete site plan must be submitted prior
to the preapplication meeting. The team and its members will function in an advisory
capacity for the Commission and will provide a report for each project proposed in
the TCD.
I. Parking
1. Off-Site Parking - Notwithstanding 6.1, if a business has insufficient parking to meet
the regulatory requirements on the site where the business is established, the business
may satisfy the requirement by acquiring (lease or purchase) the additional required
parking spaces on an off-site location approved by the Commission. In such
instances, the distance from the closest perimeter wall of the business establishment to
the perimeter of a defined off-site parking location shall not exceed 900 feet, except
that parking spaces dedicated for employee use may be at a greater distance.
2. Aesthetic and Pedestrian Considerations - If a business determines that site
aesthetics and pedestrian accessibility can be improved by the addition of malls,
walkways, landscaping, or similar site elements, or if adequate additional off-street
parking is provided, it may apply to the Commission for a special permit that would
allow for reduced on-site parking in favor of these design enhancements and the
substitution of additional parking spaces within a defined off-site parking location
approved by the Commission. In such instances, the distance from the closest
perimeter wall of the business establishment to the perimeter of the defined off-site
parking shall not exceed 900 feet, except that parking spaces dedicated for
employee use may be at a greater distance.
3. Location
a. With the approval of state and municipal authorities, street-side parking within
the right-of-way is permitted.
b. No street-side berms are required.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
93
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
c. Off-street parking shall be located in the side or rear yards of street-front
development.
4. Minimum Spaces – Parking shall be provided as required by Section 6.1 of these
Regulations.
J. Design Flexibility
1. Assemblages – In order to allow for more practical and conforming development,
the assemblage of smaller, contiguous parcels into a legal, consolidated conforming
parcel is to be encouraged.
2. Side Yards – Pursuant to Section 5.1E above, the Commission has provided for the
“clustering” of buildings, on separate sites, planned in such a manner as to foster
pedestrian accessibility and continuity, integrity of architectural design, and the
orientation of buildings to the street. In such instances, the adjoining buildings may be
connected by covered pedestrian walkways or courtyards. The Commission,
however, must give specific consideration to the need to provide emergency
passage of vehicles through these yards and fire protection methods.
3. Setbacks from Access Drives – Setbacks from common area access drives shall not
be less than ten feet. No parking space may be located closer than ten feet from a
building.
4. Parking Areas – Buffers, setbacks, and other distance requirements pertinent to
parking areas may be reduced when the Commission finds that such reduction will
foster pedestrian accessibility, pedestrian and vehicular safety, and utilization of good
design and engineering principles. Pedestrian walkways are permitted within any
buffers in setback areas between roads, drives, accessways, and parking area
pavement.
5. Signage – Signs within the district shall conform to the requirements of Section 6.2,
except as follows:
a. There shall be a common design concept, approved by the Commission, for
signs for individual businesses located within a building or grouping of buildings.
b. “Building signs” of the prescribed size shall be allowed on both the front and
rear of a building.
c. “Freestanding signs” directing vehicles to the access points or assigned parking
area of individual businesses may be erected on the approach to access drives or
roadways provided that:
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
94
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
i. The location of the signs is consistent with the Plan of Development,
ii. The sign(s) do not inhibit lines of sight.
iii. The overall sign shall have lettering and directional arrows that contrast from
the background and shall not exceed a size of 20 square feet.
iv. Individual sign panels, placed on the above sign and indicating the
individual business name, shall not exceed six inches x 36 inches.
v. Signs shall be no more than 10.5 feet in height.
vi. Sign location shall not interfere with the use of any sidewalks.
d. Signs which identify the district may be erected at the borders of the district with
the prior written permission of the landowners of record. These signs shall be
uniform in appearance and shall not exceed 20 square feet.
K. Sidewalks
1. Installation
For any new, modified, assembled, or subdivided properties within the District,
sidewalks shall be installed as follows:
a. Along all street frontages, between the road right-of-way and building
frontages;
b. Along all sides of a developed site which abut a public highway;
c. Adjacent to entrances to buildings at locations deemed appropriate by the
Commission;
d. So as to connect sidewalks on a user's property with parking areas on the same
or adjacent properties;
e. So as to connect any sidewalk on a user's property to adjacent parks, plazas, or
other open space and/or recreational areas; and
f. In the event an adjacent sidewalk is planned but not built, the sidewalk shall be
built so as to connect to the proposed sidewalk.
2. Sidewalk Location
a. Sidewalks shall not be permitted within any area dedicated by either the DOT or
the Brookfield Director of Public Works (DPW) for guardrails, fencing, drainage
devices, plowed snow storage, and the like.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
95
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
b. Sidewalks shall be located parallel to the street at a height six inches above the
edge of pavement unless otherwise determined by the Commission so as to adjust
to variable site conditions.
c. When located immediately adjacent to street-side parking spaces, they may be
located immediately adjacent to the street curb.
d. When not located adjacent to street-side parking spaces, they shall be located
no closer than four feet from the curb or edge of pavement. This four-foot area
shall be planted with sod or ground cover plant material.
e. With the specific approval of the cognizant state and municipal agencies,
sidewalks may be located within the roadway right-of-way.
3. Construction
a. Sidewalks shall be extended to the perpendicular curb at intersections and shall
be continuous across driveways.
b. Sidewalks shall meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
c. Sidewalks shall be sloped to prevent the accumulation of water on the surface.
d. Steps shall not be permitted on sidewalks.
e. Minimum Width:
i. When immediately to adjacent diagonal, on-street parking:
A minimum of five feet in width to provide for unencumbered pedestrian
passage. An additional paved area of not less than eight feet in width from the
sidewalk to the front of a building shall be provided. This area shall include
containerized landscaping, tree wells, and street furniture.
ii. When on-street parking is not provided:
A minimum of five feet in width located from either the front lot line or edge of
pavement and may be located within any required street-side buffer area.
4. Construction Standards
All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with DOT and Brookfield Department
of Public Works standards and specifications.
5. Owner Responsibility
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
96
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
The owner of the private property directly abutting a sidewalk shall be responsible for
and have the duty, burden, and expense of the maintenance, repair, snow/ice
removal, cleaning, repair, and renewal of such walks.
L. Landscaping
1. Landscape Plan
The landscaping plan shall be developed with the goal of creating a pedestrian
friendly environment.
2. Planter Boxes
Street-side areas shall use planter boxes containing deciduous, evergreen, and other
similar plants. They shall be located every 20 feet along the front perimeter of the site.
The planter boxes shall be not less than three feet in diameter or three feet square and
adequate to support the continued and healthy plant life contained therein.
3. Buffer Areas
The Commission may require landscaped buffer areas to shield or enhance the view
of the site and the use from adjacent uses, land, or buildings.
M. Street Lighting
Property owners shall provide street lighting from dawn to dusk each day along all sidewalks
as follows:
1. Maximum separation distance between poles shall be 50 feet.
2. Maximum pole and fixture height shall be 14 feet.
3. Lighting fixtures and poles shall be uniform in design throughout the district and shall
comply with the requirements of Section 6.4.
4. The connection from power source to lighting poles shall be underground.
5. There shall be one in-line cartridge-type fuse per each pole accessible through a
covered hand hole.
6. The average level of illumination shall be 12 LUX.
7. Property owners shall be responsible for maintenance and repair including bulb
changing.
8. Installation plans shall be specifically approved by the Commission and DPW.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
97
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
N. Public Utilities
All utilities shall be placed underground unless otherwise authorized by the Commission upon
review of plan and finding that unique geographical or complex technical circumstances
exist.
5.2 TCD Perimeter Overlay Zone
A. Purpose
The purpose of this overlay zone is to:
1. Encourage housing in the TCD of sufficient density to support small-scale
commercial and transit uses.
2. Enable properties on the perimeter of the underlying TCD to have the flexibility to
develop residential uses not otherwise permitted in the TCD zone.
B. Permitted Uses
In addition to all permitted uses allowed in the underlying TCD Zone, multifamily dwellings
and PARC developments are permitted by special permit in the TCD Overlay zone in
accordance with the requirements of Section 3.14 and Section 3.15, respectively.
5.3 Residential – Rental Housing Opportunity/Workforce Zone (R-RHOW)
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Residential – Rental Housing Opportunity/Workforce Zone (R-RHOW) is to:
1. Increase the availability of affordable and attainable rental workforce dwellings in
the Town of Brookfield where existing and adequate public facilities and services are
present.
2. Rehabilitate sites that have become either functionally obsolete or have suffered
from significant deterioration or have become derelict.
3. Efficiently utilize existing infrastructure and promote neighborhood planning where
such infrastructure is available to create a diversity of housing and mixed commercial
uses.
B. Requirements
A mixed commercial/workforce housing use may be permitted within the R-RHOW Zone
subject to special permit by Section 8.5, the R-RHOW Zone Regulations, and the following
additional requirements:
1. The development shall contain a mix of residential and commercial uses which may
include retail, restaurant, and professional and medical offices with associated
amenities.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
98
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2. The development shall be located on Federal Road and within 1,600 feet of the
intersection of Federal Road and Station Road.
3. The development shall be located on a parcel of land or combined parcels of land
having a minimum of three acres and a maximum of five acres which are served by
public sewer and water.
4. The parcel shall have a minimum width of 500 feet.
5. Impervious coverage shall not exceed 60 percent.
6. Setbacks for buildings shall be as follows:
a. Street or front yard minimum of five feet
b. Side yard minimum of five feet
c. Rear yard minimum of 100 feet
7. Minimum number of parking spaces shall be one and one-half (1.5) per dwelling
unit. Spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet. Reasonable
accommodations shall be made for commercial uses as shall be determined by the
Commission.
8. Maximum building height shall be three stories.
9. Maximum density for residential uses shall not exceed 27 dwelling units per acre.
10. A minimum workforce housing component of 10 percent of the total number of
dwelling units shall be provided, which shall be set aside for occupants earning not
more than 80 percent of the area median income. An incentive housing plan and
deed and/or lease restrictions comparable to those required by C.G.S. §8-30g (as it
may be amended) and/or Section 5.1 of the Brookfield Zoning Regulations shall be
submitted for approval by the Commission to ensure compliance with this requirement
as a condition of any approval.
11. All applications shall meet the requirements of Section 5.1H of the Brookfield Zoning
Regulations.
12. A minimum of 3,000 square feet on the first floor of the buildings located on the site
shall be for a commercial use. Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary, the
Commission may require that additional commercial space on the first floor of any
buildings on the site be reserved as a “flex space” and prioritize it for additional
commercial use in such buildings prior to allowing the use of such flex space for
residential use. The total of such flex space shall not exceed 50 percent of the first
floor of the buildings located on the site.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
99
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
C. Expiration
For any R-RHOW in existence as of the adoption date of these Regulations, the Commission
shall no longer accept applications for a mixed commercial/workforce housing use, in
accordance with these Regulations, after July 1, 2021. In addition, no new R-RHOW zones
shall be created after the adoption date of these Regulations.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
100
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
5.4 Brookfield Aquifer Protection District (APD)
A. Purpose
It is the purpose of the Brookfield APD to protect public health by preventing
contamination of the ground and surface water resources providing water supply or
potential water supply to the Town of Brookfield. These Regulations intend to provide
protections across a larger area of existing or potential water supply sources than the
Town of Brookfield’s Aquifer Protection Area Regulations, adopted under CGS 22a-354a
to 22a-345bb, and administered by the Brookfield Zoning Commission.
B. Applicability
These regulations apply to all land within the boundaries of the APDs delineated on a
map on file in the offices of the Commission that shows both primary and secondary
recharge areas of the designated aquifer and is entitled "Aquifer Protection District,
Town of Brookfield effective January 1, 2000" and that are not serviced by a public
water company (e.g. Aquarion, etc.).
C. Compliance
Within Town boundaries, the APDs shall be superimposed on existing zoning districts. The
provisions of these regulations shall be in addition to all other requirements of
applicable statutes, codes, regulations, or ordinances. In the event of conflict between
the provisions of this Regulation and any other Town regulation, the more restrictive
requirement shall control.
D. Permitted Uses
1. Permitted uses are all uses permitted within the underlying district except as
cited in Subsection D(2) below.
2. The following uses or activities are specifically prohibited:
a. Road salt storage and loading facilities
b. Manufacture, storage, warehousing, or transportation of toxic,
hazardous, or contaminant materials as a primary activity
c. On-site disposal of toxic, hazardous, contaminant, or industrial waste
into the soil or groundwater regime
d. Truck terminals, depots, yards, and servicing facilities of a transportation
line or company as a primary activity but excluding warehousing and
distribution services
e. Sanitary landfills, junkyards, salvage yards, and other solid waste
disposal
f. Contractor’s yards
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
101
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
g. Motor vehicle service or washing stations of a commercial nature
h. Automotive and boat sales, repair or storage. Boat storage may be
permitted provided the following precautions are designed, constructed
and followed:
i. All boat storage shall be within a weather tight building.
ii. No repair work on any boat shall be permitted.
iii. Internal fire protection walls shall be provided and no area
protected by such walls shall exceed 10,000 square feet.
iv. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained. It shall be
connected to a twenty-four (24) hour answering service. Fuel fume
detectors shall also be installed on the ground level and shall be
connected to the alarm monitoring system.
v. The floors shall be Portland cement concrete and depressed a
minimum of ten (10) inches with Portland cement concrete “curbs
(minimum ten (10) inches high). All concrete shall be sealed
against water, oils and fuel. All construction joints shall be sealed.
vi. A 20,000 gallon storage tank shall be provided and have a high
overflow connected to a catch basin if possible. All floor areas
shall drain to this tank.
vii. All drain plugs shall be left in any boats on the ground level.
viii. All batteries shall be removed from the boats prior to the boat
being placed within the building.
ix. All personal items containing any flammable materials shall be
removed from the boats prior to the boat being placed within the
building.
i. Disposal of snow from Disposal of snow from outside of the district
j. Uses or processes whereby other than standard domestic wastes
generated on the site are discharged into the groundwaters of the Town
of Brookfield
k. Underground storage of fuel and other flammable or hazardous
material except that pre-existing underground storage may be continued
as a pre-existing, nonconforming use provided that there is evidence that
no leakage has occurred.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
102
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
l. Etching, plating, coating, finishing, degreasing, chemical cleaning, and
the like
m. Unless specifically regulated by the DEEP or prohibited by the state or
Brookfield Health Department, the storing of hazardous substances for
purposes of retail consumer sale or individual private use is excepted from
this prohibition.
E. Aquifer Protection Performance and Design Standards
1. General
All permitted uses shall conform to the standards indicated below. The purpose
of these standards is to prevent or minimize potential groundwater pollution from
improper waste disposal, releases of hazardous materials, and other sources. An
alternative standard or protection method may be approved if it is clearly
demonstrated to provide equivalent protection of these standards.
2. Exception
Storage or use of hazardous materials in quantities normally associated with
customary residential or office use as determined by the Commission is exempt
from these standards.
3. Stormwater Management
a. No wastewater discharges shall be connected to the stormwater
system.
b. Stormwater from developed site areas shall be directed to an
aboveground outlet point (swales, basins, surface waters). Discharges to
drywells or other subsurface leaching structures may be allowed for the
recharge of clean stormwater only, such as clean roof drainage.
c. Stormwater contact with sources of pollution shall be prevented by use
of roofs, covers, berms, and directing runoff away from such sources.
d. Parking, storage, loading, and other areas where releases can occur
shall be an impervious surface.
e. All sites and parking areas shall require the property owner or site
operator to prepare, implement and maintain a Stormwater Management
Plan as described by DEEP in its “General Permit for the Discharge of
Stormwater Associated with Commercial Activity” document of May 15,
2017, as revised. Furthermore, runoff from parking areas shall be collected
and contaminants shall be separated therefrom by use of engineered
contaminant collection devices, e.g., Vortechs or similar systems. The
contaminant materials shall be disposed of in accordance with DEEP
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
103
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
regulations. Maintenance on the collector system shall be performed at
least annually, and collection of contaminant materials shall be performed
at least semiannually. A report prepared by a professional engineer shall
be submitted to the Commission annually and shall describe the results of
the stormwater management system inspection and any required
corrective action. A permanent maintenance bond in an amount
designated by the Commission shall also be required.
f. The use of sodium chloride as a deicing agent is prohibited.
4. Wastewater Discharges
No wastewater shall discharge to the ground other than approved domestic
sewage systems or other certain discharges approved by state wastewater
discharge regulations, such as contaminant separator systems.
5. Floor Drains
No floor drains shall discharge into the ground. Floor drain discharges may be
connected to public sanitary sewers in accordance with DEEP or WPCA
approval. Bathroom and kitchen drains connected to a Health Department
approved septic system are excepted from this standard.
6. Storage, Generation, Use, and Handling of Hazardous Materials
All areas and operations where hazardous materials are stored, generated, used,
or handled shall be designed and constructed to prevent groundwater
contamination including provisions for the control of inadvertent or accidental
spills, leaks, or other discharges. The following standards shall apply:
a. Manufacturing, processing, or other activities using hazardous materials
shall be conducted only in a building or structure where the flooring is
impervious to the material being used. Suitable containment provisions
shall also be constructed for areas in which such activities are conducted.
If floor drains are present, they shall be made inoperable prior to
conducting such activities.
b. Generation of toxic or hazardous materials in excess of 100 kilograms per
month shall require a permit issued by the DEEP. Disposal of any material
so generated shall be in accordance with DEEP regulations.
c. Pre-existing underground storage tanks may be replaced subject to the
following:
i. Tanks shall be double-walled fiberglass-reinforced plastic or a
double-walled steel cathodically protected.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
104
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
ii. Piping and distribution lines shall be protected against corrosion
and constructed of double wall pipe or within a secondary
containment pipe or conduit.
iii. A monitoring or failure detection system shall be employed.
iv. An overfill prevention or contaminant area shall be employed.
d. Aboveground storage tanks, containers, or drums shall be within a
building or structure meeting the following requirements:
i. Have an impervious floor and containment area or dike of
adequate size to contain the total volume stored
ii. The area shall be protected by a roof and adequate sides to
prevent exposure to precipitation.
iii. Tank overfill protection devices shall be designed to prevent
release of overfill outside of the storage area.
iv. Storage areas shall be located outside of floodprone areas or be
floodproofed.
v. Have no floor drains
e. Venting systems for evaporation or distillation of hazardous materials
shall be designed with a control or recovery system to prevent the
discharge of contaminated condensate or drippage.
f. Loading or transferring activities shall be conducted on impervious
surfaces, roofed and diked to capture and control any spills or leaks.
7. Bulk Material and Solid Waste Storage
a. Bulk storage facilities of nonhazardous materials which may leach into
the ground such as deicing salt, sludge, manure, or silage shall have an
impervious floor and roof and be raised or designed to prevent surface
water runoff from entering.
b. Solid waste dumpsters shall be on a concrete pad, covered and
plugged so as to be watertight.
8. Hazardous and Contaminant Materials Control Plan
A control plan and applicable procedures shall be submitted for approval that
contains the following elements:
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
105
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. An inventory of all hazardous or contaminant materials which are or
will be generated, stored, or used at the facility and a description of the
methods and procedures utilized for the receipt, handling, storage,
utilization, treatment, and disposal of such materials. The inventory shall
also state the quantities involved and shall be accompanied by the
applicable Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS).
b. Security and inspection measures to control vandalism or accident
c. The locations and types of storage containers used to store hazardous
and contaminant materials and a description of leak detection and
prevention methods and equipment
d. Procedures for the periodic inspection and maintenance of handling
equipment and storage containers
e. A description of the operations at the site, including service, cleaning,
or manufacturing processes which might result in contamination of
surface or groundwater
f. Procedures to contain and clean up spills or leaks of hazardous
materials
g. Procedures for the collection after use and off-site disposal of
hazardous and contaminant materials
h. Procedures for an emergency response to natural or man-made
accidents or disasters including notification of local and state officials
i. Name, address, and phone number of the persons responsible for
implementing the above plans and procedures
9. Pesticide and Fertilizer Use
Any use which includes more than five acres of land for crop, lawn, garden, or
landscaping requiring regular application of pesticides or fertilizer shall be
accompanied by a management plan indicating the types of materials,
application schedule, and conformance with DEEP-approved best
management practices.
10. Monitoring
If the Commission determines that additional safety measures and monitoring
are needed because of hydrological conditions, existing contamination, or a
high potential for contamination, then it mayl require the installation of
monitoring wells, periodic sampling, and reporting of analysis of the samples.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
106
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
F. Permit Review
To ensure compliance with these Regulations, review and determination must be made
by the Commission in accordance with Section 8.10 in order to grant a special permit in
a Brookfield APD.
G. Inspection
On a periodic basis or for good and sufficient reason at other times, the Commission
shall cause inspections and/or tests to be conducted to verify compliance with
applicable federal, state, and municipal standards/requirements for drinking water. In
the event that such tests indicate noncompliance, the Commission shall require the
owner/occupant to immediately cease operations causing such noncompliance and
to take timely corrective action at his expense.
5.5 Floodplain Districts (FP)
A. General Provisions
1. Applicability
In accordance with the official Floodplain Map identified hereinafter, this district
is superimposed over any other zoning district. It is subject to all regulations
applicable to the underlying district and those additional regulations contained
in this section.
2. Administration
All projects to be contained wholly or in part in the Floodplain District shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Inland Wetlands Commission, if required by
law. The application to the Zoning Commission, pursuant to Section 8.9 of these
Regulations, shall not be accepted unless the applicant has submitted an
application to the Inland Wetlands Commission previous to or no later than the
application submitted to the Zoning Commission, if required by law. If an
application was required by law to be submitted to the Inland Wetlands
Commission, the Zoning Commission shall not render a decision on such
application and site plan until a report has been submitted by the Inland
Wetlands Commission with its final decision. This information along with a copy of
the Inland Wetlands permit and all other data as prescribed by Section 8.4 or
Section 8.5 shall become a criterion to be considered in the approval/ denial of
the application and shall be made part of the applicant’s design review file.
3. Use Variances
In accordance with the authority granted by CGS § 8-6, no use variances shall be
permitted in the Floodplain District.
B. Floodplain District Boundaries
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for
Fairfield County, Connecticut, dated June 18, 2010, accompanying Flood Insurance
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
107
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Rate Map (FIRM) dated June 18, 2010, other supporting data applicable to the Town of
Brookfield, and any subsequent revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this section. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference
into this section, it must take precedence when more restrictive, until such time as a
map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The areas of special flood
hazard include any area on the FIRM designated as Zones A and AE, including areas
designated as floodway on a FIRM. Areas of special flood hazard are determined
utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the FIS for a
community. The BFEs provided on a FIRM are only approximate (rounded up or down)
and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. The FIS is
on file at the office of the Town Clerk, Town Hall, Brookfield, Connecticut. The
regulatory flood protection elevation for any point in question shall be the governing
factor in locating the zoning district boundary of the land.
1. Establishment of Development Permit
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard as prescribed in Section 8.9 of
these Regulations.
2. Designation of the Brookfield Zoning Commission
The Brookfield Zoning Commission is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this section by granting or denying development permit applications
in accordance with its provisions.
3. Information to be Obtained and Maintained
a. Obtain and record the actual as-built elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures.
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
i. Verify and record the actual as-built elevation (in relation to
mean sea level).
ii. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section 8.9
and Appendix 1.
iii. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this section.
4. Alteration of Watercourses
Notify adjacent communities and the DEEP prior to any alteration or relocation of
a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. Require that
maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
108
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
C. Floodway Permitted Uses
Subject to the provisions of and in conformance with Section 8.4 or Section 8.5, the
following open space uses may be permitted within the floodway provided that such
uses do not require fill, structures, or storage of materials or equipment and are not
prohibited by any other regulations:
1. Low-value agricultural uses, including pasture, grazing, wild-crop harvesting,
and nonfertilized crops
2. Private and public recreation, such as golf courses; tennis courts,; driving
ranges; archery ranges; picnic grounds; swimming areas; outdoor ice-skating
rinks; parks; wildlife and nature preserves; target ranges; trap and skeet ranges;
fishing areas; and bicycle, hiking, and horseback riding trails
D. Floodplain Permitted Uses
Subject to the provisions of and in conformance with Sections 8.4 or 8.5 of these
Regulations, the following uses may be permitted within the floodplain to the extent
that they are permitted in the underlying district:
1. All uses permitted in the floodway, as described in Subsection C
2. All agricultural uses, including general farming, nurseries, truck farming, and
forestry, provided that all structures are located outside the floodway
3. Seasonal commercial uses, including open-air markets and drive-in theaters,
provided that all structures are located outside the floodway
4. Parking areas and loading areas, provided that all structures are located
outside the floodway
5. Nonstructural residential uses, including lawns, garden, parking area, and play
areas, provided that all structures are located outside the floodway
6. Storage of low-cost, nonhazardous materials, provided that all structures are
located outside the floodway
7. Nonresidential buildings whose lowest floor is elevated one foot above the
100-year flood or is floodproofed to an elevation one foot above the 100-year
flood, provided that all structures are located outside the floodway
8. Residential buildings whose lowest floor, including basement, is elevated one
foot above the 100-year flood, provided that all structures are located outside
the floodway
E. Other Permitted Uses
The following uses may be permitted in floodplain areas with or without floodways
having established BFEs but prohibited in the floodway, provided that no structure
(temporary or permanent), fill deposits (including fill for roads, parking, and levees),
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
109
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
excavations, obstructions, storage of materials or equipment, or other use may be
allowed which, acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses, increases
flood elevations by one foot or more beyond the BFEs as depicted on the Town’s FIS
dated June 18, 2010, and in the accompanying FIRM.
1. Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises
2. Natural resources removal in accordance with Section 6.7
3. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines
4. Support for structures, excluding fill, where the floor level of the structure is
above the regulatory flood protection elevation but the supports are within the
floodplain area
5. Structures constructed on fill, or first floor if there is no basement, provided that
the basement floor is above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The fill
shall be at a point no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood-protection
elevation for the particular area and shall extend at such elevation at least 15
feet beyond the limits of any structure or building erected thereon.
6. Uses or structures accessory to a permitted use
F. Structures (temporary or permanent)
1. Structures shall not be designed for human habitation except as provided in
Subsection D(8).
2. Structures shall have a low flood-damage potential.
3. The structures or structure, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis
parallel to the direction of flood flow, and so far as practicable, structures shall
be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.
4. Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, which may result in
damage to other structures or restriction of bridge openings and other narrow
sections of the stream or river.
5. Service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, shall be constructed
at or above the regulatory flood-protection elevation for the particular area.
G. Storage of material and equipment
1. The storage or processing of materials that are buoyant, flammable, or
explosive in time of flooding is prohibited.
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
110
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed, if not subject to
major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily
removable from the area within the limited time available after flood warning.
H. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
1. Anchoring: All new construction, including manufactured and mobile homes,
and substantial improvements thereto shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
pressure. Anchoring may include over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
2. Construction materials and methods:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
3. Utilities:
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
d. Electrical heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning systems
shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
e. Aboveground storage tanks that are located outside or inside of the
structure must be elevated above the BFE on a concrete pad or be
securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral
movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and
have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of floodwater.
I. Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where BFE data has been provided as set forth in
Subsection B, Floodplain District Boundaries, and Subsection B(4), Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following provisions are required. If any structure or portion thereof lies
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
111
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
partially or wholly within one or more flood zones, the entire structure must comply with
the most stringent requirements of the zones involved.
1. Residential construction:
New construction and substantial improvements thereto shall be placed on a
permanent foundation and shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the BFE. This includes manufactured homes located
outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing park in which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the areas of special flood hazard
shall either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use, or meet the elevation requirements listed
above and anchoring requirement of Section H (1). A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect utilities and security devices, and has no permanent
attached additions.
2. Nonresidential construction
New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to a level one foot above the BFE or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
a. Be floodproofed from an elevation one foot above the BFE and below
so that the structure is watertight with walls and floors substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects on buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certificates shall be
provided to the official set forth in Subsection B(5)(b).
3. Floodways
a. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection
B are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris and
potential projectiles and erosion, the following provisions apply:
i. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, are prohibited unless
certification, with supporting technical data, by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
112
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
practice that encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet)
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
When utilizing data other than that provided by FEMA, the
Commission shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on
the principle that that area chosen for the regulatory floodway shall
be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing
the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any
one point.
ii. If Subsection I(3)(a)[i] is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of Subsection H, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
iii. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, (temporary or
permanent) are prohibited within all special flood hazard areas.
b. These requirements are in addition to those requirements of Site Plan or
Special Permit Application established in Section 8 of these Regulations.
4. 100-Year Flood Districts
Where BFEs have been determined but before a floodway is designated, no new
construction, substantial improvement, or other improvement, including fill, shall
be permitted which could increase BFE more than one foot at any point along
the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively
with the proposed development.
J. Equal Conveyance, Compensatory Storage, and Associated Prohibitions
1. Equal Conveyance
Within the floodplain, except those areas that are tidally influenced, as
designated on the FIRM for the community, encroachment resulting from filling,
new construction, or substantial improvements involving an increased footprint of
the structure are specifically prohibited unless the applicant provided
certification from a registered engineer demonstrating, with supporting
hydrological and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet)
increase in flood levels (BFE). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to
the floodplain including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be
constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood
velocity.
2. Compensatory Storage
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
113
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
The water-holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are
tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new
construction, or substantial improvements involving an increased footprint to the
structure shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the
floodplain. Storage shall be provided on site unless easements have been
gained from adjacent property owners. It shall be provided within the same
hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage. It shall be
hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of
floodwater at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation,
which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory
volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway
or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off site if approved by
the Town of Brookfield.
5.6 Watershed Protection District (WPD)
A. Candlewood Lake Watershed District, (CLW)
1. Background
Candlewood Lake, the state’s largest lake and one of its most important inland
water resources, has experienced a gradual deterioration of water quality since
about 1950. Studies of the lake shoreline development area have recommended
planning to avoid the need to install a public sewer system.
Brookfield is one of five Connecticut towns that border the lake shore. The lake’s
watershed area is 26,461 acres, and Brookfield’s portion is 1,177 acres or 4 percent
of the total. However, the watershed in Brookfield, especially the lake shore area,
is generally intensively developed and a primary source of stormwater runoff that
can carry nutrients and pollutants that contribute to the eutrophication of the lake
and deterioration of lake and groundwater quality.
These regulations are designed to minimize, and where possible reduce, the
negative impact of stormwater runoff affecting Candlewood Lake and the
watershed area, thereby reducing the rate of lake eutrophication and avoiding
the need for a public sewer system.
2. Purpose
The purpose of the Candlewood Lake Watershed District is to prevent nutrient
enrichment or contamination of Candlewood Lake and its watershed and to
avoid the need for sewers in this densely developed area of Brookfield.
Specifically, the purposes are:
a. To minimize the impervious surfaces and maximize infiltration of
stormwater runoff
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
114
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
b. To reduce peak stormwater flow and minimize the likelihood of soil
erosion, stream channel instability, flooding, and habitat destruction
c. To preserve and/or create vegetative buffers of native plantings to
control and filter stormwater runoff
d. To minimize disturbance of natural grades and vegetation and utilize
existing topography for natural drainage systems
e. To contain stormwater runoff on the site wherever possible to reduce
the volume of stormwater runoff before it reaches the groundwater or
surface water bodies
f. To prevent and minimize potential groundwater pollution from improper
waste disposal, release of hazardous materials, and other sources
3. Land to which these regulations apply
These regulations apply to all land within the boundaries of the Candlewood Lake
watershed as delineated on a map on file in the offices of the Commission entitled
“Candlewood Watershed District, Town of Brookfield.”
4. Compliance
Within Town boundaries, the Candlewood Watershed District shall be
superimposed on existing zoning districts. The provisions of these regulations shall
be in addition to all other requirements of applicable statutes, codes, regulations,
or ordinances. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this Regulation
and any other Town regulation, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
5. Permitted Uses
Permitted uses are all uses permitted in the underlying districts except those cited
in Section 5.4D(2).
6. Required Stormwater Management Plan and Data
All new building construction, or an addition, alteration, or enlargement that results
in an increase in the amount of impervious surface (paved drives, walks, patios,
etc.) on a lot where the total impervious surface is ten percent or greater, shall
require a Stormwater Management Plan. In addition to the data required
elsewhere in these Regulations, the following data shall be required:
a. A narrative report prepared by a licensed engineer indicating:
? Any risk or threat to Candlewood Lake or the water resources in its
watershed from site development, site improvements, or on-site
operations proposed in the application and measures
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
115
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
? Methods of assessment and best management practices to prevent
and reduce any such risk or threat
? Supporting documentation, including calculations and engineering
details, shall be provided to illustrate the existing and proposed
development’s compliance with these Regulations, which
development shall be designed in accordance with the stormwater
management design guidelines of the “Connecticut Stormwater
Quality Manual” of 2004, as revised.
b. A site plan indicating
? All relevant data required under Section 5.4(F)
? Location and area of all impervious surfaces on the site
? Location and area of turf cover (lawn areas)
? Location and area of all existing woodland areas
? Location and area of all existing and proposed vegetative buffer
areas
? Location and description of all potential runoff and pollution sources
including erosive soils and steep slopes
? Location and specification of all existing and proposed stormwater
best management practices
7. Best Management Practices
The following practices and methods shall be incorporated into all Stormwater
Management Plans where practicable:
? Vegetated swales, buffers, filter strips
? Level spreaders
? Grassed drainage swales, wet or dry
? Maintain or restore predevelopment vegetation
? Minimize creation of steep slopes
? Bioretention structures/residential rain gardens
? Rainwater harvesting/rain barrels
? Dry detention ponds
? Underground detention ponds
? Proper location and reduction of impervious surface area on site
? Disconnect flows from multiple impervious surfaces
? Permeable pavement choices
? Groundwater infiltration systems (curtain drains, drywells, galleries, etc.)
8. Approval Considerations
a. Prior to the issuance of Zoning Approval or Certificate of Zoning
Compliance, the Commission, acting through its authorized agent, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, shall give consideration to the simplicity,
2019-April-19
Article 5 – Special Districts
116
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
reliability, and feasibility of the individual Stormwater Management Plan
prepared for the site.
b. The Commission, or its agent, may solicit the opinion of the Health
Department, Town Engineer, Inland Wetlands Commission, and the
Planning Commission concerning any application involving the
Candlewood Lake Watershed District.
c. Approval shall not be granted until the Zoning Enforcement Officer
determines that the proposed plan will employ best management
practices to substantially reduce and improve the on-site cleansing of
stormwater runoff from the site.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
117
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 6 – General Standards
6.1 Parking, Loading, and Access
A. Off-Street Parking and Loading
1. Purpose:
a. That all structures and land uses be provided with a sufficient amount of offstreet
vehicular parking space to meet the needs of the users of such structures
and land uses without adversely affecting nearby land uses and surrounding
neighborhoods.
b. Provide safe and convenient pedestrian circulation within the site to be
developed, and between the site and adjacent properties.
c. The following standards and schedules of required parking spaces shall be
considered the minimum necessary to accomplish this purpose unless otherwise
provided in these Regulations.
2. Applicability:
a. This section of the Regulations shall apply to any proposed use or
development activity that requires Zoning Permit, Site Plan, or Special Permit
approval.
b. Structures and land uses in existence, or for which building and zoning
permits have been issued prior to the adoption of these Regulations, shall not
be subject to any additional parking or loading space requirements of this
Section, provided that any existing parking or loading facilities shall not be
reduced below the amounts required by these Regulations.
c. Any change or expansion of an existing use that requires a larger amount of
parking or loading space under these Regulations than is currently provided
shall meet the parking and loading requirements of the new or expanded use,
unless otherwise specified elsewhere in these Regulations.
3. Location Standards
a. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided and maintained on the
same parcel as the use that the parking serves, except that commercial or
industrial establishments may provide and maintain parking facilities on another
parcel within a radius of not more than 900 feet from the principal entrance to
the building or structure containing the use to be served.
b. If parking is provided on a separate lot located on another parcel, the
following standards shall apply:
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
118
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
i. The property owner(s) shall demonstrate that the separate approved
lot has excess capacity to support the dedication of spaces to another
use;
ii. Safe pedestrian walkways must be provided from the separate lot to
the building or structure containing the use to be served;
iii. An easement in force for as long as the subject use, and in a form
acceptable to the Town Attorney, shall be recorded in the land records
identifying the number of spaces on the separate lot dedicated to the
subject use and requiring Zoning Commission approval for any changes
in the easement that would reduce available parking;
iv. In no case shall a use located within a nonresidential district be served
by a separate parking lot located within a residential district;
c. All parking and loading spaces shall be provided with adequate dimensions
for ingress and egress in accordance with Table 6.1 below.
d. No parking area of ten or more spaces shall exit or enter onto a road less
than 75 feet from the center line of the nearest intersecting street.
4. Design Standards
a. Parking and loading spaces and
access aisles shall conform to the
minimum dimensions specified in Table
6.1.
b. Parking and loading spaces and
access aisles shall be surfaced with
concrete, bituminous concrete, or other
equivalent dustless-type material and
shall be suitably marked.
c. To ensure adequate drainage and
prevent the collection of standing water,
all parking spaces shall be sloped at least
1 percent but not more than 10 percent.
d. Up to 25 percent of parking spaces
may be designated for compact car
parking. The layout of these spaces shall
discourage their use by mid and full size
cars. Generally, the compact spaces
shall be clustered in the same area. The
purpose of this section is to encourage a
Table 6.1 Parking Dimensions and Aisles
Parking Space
Dimensions Width Length
90° Parking Space 9' 18'
Diagonal Parking 9' 18'
Parallel Parking 8' 20'
Compact Car Parking
Space 8' 16'
Handicap Accessible
Parking as per ADA reqs.
Loading Space
Dimensions Width Length
Loading Space 12' *
Access Aisle 24' N/A
Minimum Aisle
Width One-Way Two-Way
Parallel or 30° 14' 24'
45° 16' 24'
60° 16' 24'
75° 23' 26'
90° 26' 26'
* Loading space lengths shall be
commensurate with the type of vehicle
anticipated to serve the use
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
119
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
design which will reduce the amount of impervious surfaces and provide
additional landscaped area.
e. Parking designated for handicapped accessibility shall conform in number of
spaces required, location, and dimension to the requirements of the
Connecticut State Building Code, as amended.
f. The perimeter of any parking area for a commercial or industrial use shall be
finished with a curb of not less than six inches in height backfilled with earth
material.
g. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking area shall be in
accordance with Section 6.4.
h. Fire lanes shall be provided as follows:
i. Fire lanes shall be designated by the Zoning Commission in consultation
with the Town of Brookfield Fire Marshal.
ii. Fire lanes and adjacent curbing shall be suitably marked and painted
in traffic yellow
iii. Immediately adjacent to these fire lanes, appropriate signage
indicating a prohibition from parking in fire lanes shall be erected on
stanchions or placed on an adjacent building a minimum of 5’ high from
the pavement surface and at intervals along the fire lanes of not more
than 50 feet apart.
5. Minimum Required Parking Spaces
The number of parking spaces shall be determined using Table 6.2 below. For uses not
shown in the table, the Commission or Board shall apply the recommendations
contained in the Institute of Traffic Engineers “Parking Generation” manual, as may be
revised, or a study of parking generation of comparable projects performed by a
qualified transportation professional.
a. When the computation of required spaces results in a fractional total, any
fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction equal to or
greater than one-half shall be rounded to one off-street parking space
b. When any land or building is used for two or more distinguishable purposes
(i.e. joint or mixed-use development), the minimum total number of parking
spaces required to serve the combination of all uses may be determined in the
following manner.
i. Multiply the minimum parking requirement for each individual use (as
set forth in the Table 6.2) by the appropriate percentage (as set forth in
the Table 6.3, Parking Credit Schedule Chart) for each of the five
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
120
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
designated time periods and then add the resulting sums from each
vertical column. The column total having the highest total value is the
minimum shared parking space requirement for that combination of
land use.
c. The Zoning Commission may permit the construction of some portion of the
required parking spaces to be deferred when it finds that the full number of
spaces are not required immediately. However, construction of stormwater
management systems designed to accommodate the entire parking area shall
not be deferred. The Zoning Enforcement Officer, in consultation with the
Zoning Commission, may require the installation of the deferred parking spaces
at any time if he determines that the constructed parking is insufficient for the
use.
d. The Zoning Commission may permit two or more parcels of land to enter into
a shared parking agreement to satisfy the parking requirements per tables 6.2
and 6.3, based on additional study of parking generation of proposed and
existing land uses on the parcels. The parcels shall be located within 500 feet of
one another and there shall be safe pedestrian access provided between the
parcels, and proposed and existing uses. The shared parking agreement shall
be in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney and shall be recorded in the
Land Records.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
121
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Type of Use Required
Spaces
Per Unit of
Measurement
Notes
1. Community Services
a. Community service facility 1 250 SF GBA
2. Institutional Uses
a. Cemetery 1 acre
b. Daycare (child and adult) 1 4 children Additional drop-off spaces may
be required at the Commission’s
discretion
c. Places of worship/parish houses and
centers, provided a minimum lot area of
one-hundred-twenty thousand (120,000)
sq ft.
1 3 seats
d. Public Buildings (state or federal) 1 250 SF GBA
e. Elementary and Middle Schools and
Preschools – public, private
1 6 students Additional drop-off spaces may
be required at the Commission’s
Plus 1 staff discretion
f. Secondary Schools – public, private,
training schools
1 2 students
design capacity
g. Town of Brookfield buildings 1 300 SF GBA
3. Dwellings and Residential Care
a. Single-family dwellings 2 Dwelling unit
b. Multi-family dwellings, including in
mixed-use developments (1 BR) (see
Section 3.14)
1.5 Dwelling unit
c. Multi-family dwellings,
including mixed-use
developments (2+ BR) (see
Section 3.14)
1.5 Dwelling unit Additional visitor parking may
be required at the Commission’s
discretion.
d. Planned Age Restricted Community
(PARC) (see Section 3.15)
1 Dwelling unit Additional visitor parking may
be required at the Commission’s
discretion.
e. Assisted living facility, congregate
housing, continuing life care community,
or nursing facility.
1 3 beds
f. Accessory Dwelling Unit 1 Dwelling unit Additional to primary residence
g. Home Occupation 1 Employee not
residing in the
dwelling
Additional to primary residence
4. Agriculture and Animals
a. Kennels 1 500 SF GBA
b. Agriculture/Farm Stand 1 Employee Additional customer parking
may be required at the
Commission’s discretion.
c. Commercial livestock or poultry 1 Employee
d. Greenhouses 1 Employee
e. Veterinary offices and animal hospitals 1 250 SF GBA
Definitions: GBA – Gross Building Area; LF – Linear Feet; SF – Square Feet
Table 6.2 Parking Space Requirements
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
122
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Table 6.2 Parking Space Requirements (continued)
Type of Use Required
Spaces
Per Unit of
Measurement
Notes
5. Lodging
a. Hotels/motels/inns/bed and breakfast 1 Room
Plus 1 Employee
Plus 1 4 seats If hotel includes restaurant
and/or bar uses.
b. Conference centers as accessory uses
to hotels/motels/inns
1 100 SF gross
assembly area
Additional customer parking
may be required at the
Commission’s discretion.
6. Retail Sales and Service
a. General Retail 1 300 SF GBA
b. Artisan/craftsman studio/shop 1 300 SF GBA
c. Furniture or carpet store 1 1,000 SF GBA
d. Automobile and boat service (limited or
general motor vehicle repair license)
3 Service Bay
e. Dry Cleaner/laundry 1 250 SF GBA
f. Home Improvement, Hardware, Flower,
nursery, garden centers
1 500 SF GBA
g. Gasoline sales/filling station 1 250 SF GBA
h. Personal service business 1 250 SF GBA
i. Rental or sales of autos, equipment,
and/or supplies
1 Vehicle or
similarly-sized
equipment to be
stored on
premises
Plus 1 250 SF GBA
j. Undertaking and funeral homes 1 4 seats Or 1 per 200 SF gross useable
floor area, if no fixed seats
7. Offices
a. Banks and financial institutions 1 250 SF GBA
b. Medical and dental offices 1 250 SF GBA
c. Professional and business offices 1 300 SF GBA
Plus 1 Company vehicle
8. Food and Beverage Establishments
a. Sit-Down Restaurant, Fast Food
Restaurant, Limited Service Restaurant,
Taverns, Bars, Cocktail Lounges
1 100 SF of public
floor area
Plus 1 200 SF of nonpublic
area
b. Catering establishment where food is
prepared for delivery and consumption off
the premises
1 300 SF GBA
Definitions: GBA – Gross Building Area; LF – Linear Feet; SF – Square Feet
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
123
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Table 6.2 Parking Space Requirements (continued)
Type of Use Required
Spaces
Per Unit of
Measurement
Notes
9. Industrial
a. General industrial, publishing, or
research facilities
1 1,000 SF GBA
Plus 1 300 SF gross
office area
Plus 1 Company vehicle
b. Truck and bus terminals 1 Employee Plus adequate loading, parking,
and/or staging areas to the
Commission’s satisfaction
c. Warehousing and distribution 1 2,000 SF GBA
Plus 1 300 SF gross
office area
Plus 1 Company vehicle
d. Wholesale 1 500 SF GBA
10. Recreation
a. Assembly halls, banquet halls, and
theaters
1 3 seats
b. Health and fitness centers 1 250 SF GBA
c. Indoor courts, pools, sporting areas 1 200 SF GBA Additional spectator parking
may be required at the
Commission’s discretion
d. Marinas, docks and slips 1 Mooring or slip
e. Outdoor courts, fields, or play areas 2 acre Additional spectator parking
may be required at the
Commission’s discretion
f. Pools, skating rinks 1 100 SF rink or
pool area
Additional spectator parking
may be required at the
Commission’s discretion
11. Storage
a. Bulk storage or materials 1 2,000 SF GBA
b. Motor vehicles or boats, indoors 1 3,000 SF GBA
c. Contractor’s equipment, indoor 1 2,000 SF GBA
d. Self-storage facilities 1 5,000 SF GBA
12. Energy and Utilities
a. Utilities (electric, water, natural gas,
public sewer)
1 Employee
b. TV and data facilities 1 Employee
Definitions: GBA – Gross Building Area; LF – Linear Feet; SF – Square Feet
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
124
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Table 6.3 Parking Credit Schedule Chart
Weekday
Night
Weekday
Day
Weekday
Evening
Weekend
Day
Weekend
Evening
Midnight
to 7:00
am
7:00 am
to 5:00
pm
5:00 pm
to
Midnight
6:00 am
to 6:00
pm
6:00 pm
to
Midnight
(percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent)
Residential 100 60 90 80 90
Office/Industrial 5 100 10 10 5
Commercial/Retail
5 80 90 100 70
Hotel 70 70 100 70 100
Restaurant 10 50 100 50 100
Restaurant associated
with hotel
10 50 60 50 60
Entertainment/recreation
(theaters, bowling allies,
cocktail lounges and
similar)
10 40 100 80 100
Day-care facilities 5 100 10 20 5
All other 100 100 100 100 100
B. Outdoor Vehicle Storage
1. Trailer Coaches, Campers, Commercial Trucks, and Storage Trailers
a. Occupancy of trailer coaches and campers is not permitted. This subsection
shall not be interpreted to prevent the use of a trailer coach as a temporary
office in connection with a construction project, provided that suitable
provisions for running water and sanitary sewage disposal are approved in
writing by the Town Sanitarian prior to the issuance of a building permit.
b. Interior Storage
i. Except as provided hereinafter, no roadway vehicle, trailer, or other
similar device shall be used to store equipment, goods, or materials on
premises for an extended period of time.
ii. The Zoning Commission may, in its sole discretion, issue a zoning permit
for storage of equipment, goods, or material for a period not to exceed
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
125
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
60 days once in any given 12-month period. Such a permit shall be
issued for a use in a commercial or industrial zone only.
iii. In granting such a permit, the Commission shall have found that the
placement of such vehicle or trailer is in conformance with the provisions
of this Section, and that no conditions would be created that would
adversely affect traffic safety or the general health, safety, and welfare.
c. Storage of commercial trucks should not be observable from the road or
from any abutting residential zone.
C. Access
Access from subject lots to public rights of way and, where applicable, adjacent lots shall be
in conformance with the following standards.
1. Criteria and Standards
a. No parking or loading space shall be located with direct access to a
driveway leading to and from a public street in the area where traffic is
expected to queue. A minimum queuing area shall accommodate two
vehicles unless otherwise specified in these Regulations.
b. Points of access shall align with opposing streets and driveways unless there is
a specific site or safety condition that precludes such alignment.
c. The width of an access drive from the street shall be a minimum of 12 feet for
one-way traffic and shall not exceed 24 feet for two-way traffic except in
instances where there is a landscaped median or in instances where the width
is controlled by a permit issued by the Connecticut DOT.
d. Except for single-family dwellings, traffic controls and pavement markings
shall be installed and maintained as determined by the Local Traffic Authority
and shall conform to the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices” (MUTCD).
2. In order to reduce existing and potential traffic congestion and safety issues on the
Federal Road corridor, the following standards shall apply to any project or
development with frontage or access onto any portion of Federal Road. In addition
to the standards and regulations described below, applicants should familiarize
themselves with the requirements set forth by the Connecticut Office of the State
Traffic Administration (OSTA) with respect to new traffic control devices, modifications
to existing traffic control devices, and certification of major traffic generators
(pursuant to CGS §14-311).
a. Vehicle access to a property and circulation thereon shall be arranged in
such a manner so as to safeguard against hazards to traffic, property and
pedestrians, to avoid congestion on any street and to provide safe and
convenient circulation in the street and upon the property.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
126
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
b. Where reasonable alternate access is available, the vehicular access to the
lot shall be arranged to avoid traffic use of local residential streets situated in or
bordered by residential districts.
c. Where a property has frontage on two or more streets, the access to the
property shall be provided to the property across the frontage and to the street
where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for hazards to traffic
and pedestrians.
d. The street giving access to the property shall have traffic-carrying capacity
and be suitably improved to accommodate the amount and types of traffic
generated by the proposed use.
e. Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians
and/or to avoid traffic congestion, provision shall be made for turning lanes,
traffic directional islands, frontage roads, driveways and traffic controls within
the streets.
f. Access driveways shall be of a design and have sufficient capacity to avoid
queuing of entering vehicles on any street.
g. Commercial and industrial entrance driveways shall be a minimum of two 12-
foot-wide lanes in each direction of travel. For driveways entering into a town
road, the width of the driveway flare at the edge of the roadway where the
driveway intersects the roadway shall be a maximum of 30 feet for residential
drives and 50 feet for commercial/industrial drives unless the Commission
determines that a wider width of driveway flare will facilitate traffic flow and/or
is required for overriding considerations of safety. Driveways entering into state
highways are under the jurisdiction of the state DOT and/or OSTA.
h. It is the intent of the Commission to minimize the number of curb cuts and
access points along all state highways and Town roads. Provision shall be
made for circulation driveway connections to adjoining properties of similar
existing or potential use whenever possible, based on physical conditions and
ownership agreements.
i. Existing traffic, access management, and safety plans and studies adopted
by the Western Connecticut Council of Governments, its predecessor entities,
and the Connecticut DOT shall be considered in the development of traffic
mitigation measures relating to any development adjacent to Federal Road.
To the extent practicable, improvements and mitigation measures shall
implement or complement previously planned improvements.
j. There shall be no more than one driveway connection from any property to
any street, except that separate entrance and exit driveways may be provided
where necessary to safeguard against hazard, provide access for emergency
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
127
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
vehicles, and to avoid congestion. Additional driveway connections may be
provided particularly for but not limited to large tracts and uses of extensive
scope if traffic flow in the street will be facilitated by the additional connection.
Driveways shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the street line or such lesser width
as will be sufficient to accommodate the traffic to be generated unless a
greater width is required by the Town Road Ordinance.
k. Where it is projected that the additional traffic resulting from the project will
reduce the level of service to D or below, the Commission shall not approve the
project unless and until provision has been made for the improvement of said
condition. In all traffic analysis reports, use of a volume/capacity ratio of 1.00 to
represent either level of Service C or E is acceptable as long as the selected
base is used consistently and clearly indicated.
D. Traffic Impact Analysis
The Commission shall require a traffic impact analysis as part of any application for a
multifamily dwelling project of 20 or more units or any other project containing either 50 or
more parking spaces in a new or expanded parking lot or generating 100 or more vehicle
trips a day.
1. Such analysis shall include, at least, the following information:
a. Existing and projected traffic volumes (average daily traffic, peak a.m. and
p.m.) and peak-hour traffic generation
b. Past and present roadway conditions including location and number of
accidents
c. Existing roadway capacity and volume and capacity ratios
d. Proposed sight lines
e. Location of existing and proposed curb cuts, traffic lights, and intersections
at the development site and within 300 feet from the development site
f. Traffic impact of proposed development, including but not limited to the
effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on abutting streets
and any nearby intersections that would have 100 or more vehicle trips in a
peak hour
g. The patterns of vehicular circulation in relation to the adjoining street system
h. Adequacy of:
i. Right-of-way and travel way
ii. Traffic signalization, traffic channelization, left-turn lanes, and roadway
widths of adjoining streets
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
128
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
iii. Vehicular stacking lanes and/or distances
iv. Pedestrian drop-off areas
v. Other traffic or transportation facilities to accommodate the proposed
development
i. Recommendations for safe pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation
j. Where applicable, the applicant shall include the written recommendations
of the Connecticut DOT, the Brookfield Police Commission, and the
Commission’s engineer
k. Whether a significant traffic impact will occur as identified under subsection
(2) below
2. In evaluating whether the projected impacts of a proposed project are significant,
the Commission shall consider the following factors:
a. The effect of traffic conditions on abutting streets and nearby intersections
that would have 100 or more peak-hour vehicle trips
b. The adequacy of traffic signalization, channelization and turn lanes,
roadway width, length of queues, traffic drop-off areas, and other
transportation facilities
c. A reduction of the peak-hour level of service at an intersection below Level
D (or a further degradation of the level of service if the intersection is already at
or below service D). The Commission may also take into consideration the
incremental degradation of service within a particular level of service.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
129
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6.2 Signage
A. Purposes
The provisions of this section have been adopted to achieve the following purposes:
1. To preserve property values by preventing unsightly and detrimental development
which has a blighting influence upon residential, business, and industrial uses of land.
2. To ensure signs may perform their important functions of identifying and advertising
businesses, while preventing signs from reaching such excessive size that they obscure
one another to the detriment of adjacent businesses.
3. To promote the maintenance and development of an attractive visual environment
and maintain the aesthetic and historic character of the Town of Brookfield and
prevent the blighting influence of large signs.
4. To prohibit billboards, defined as signs that promote an activity, business, or product
that is unrelated to the site on which it is located, and to prevent the blighting
influence of large signs.
5. To foster public safety on streets by assuring that all signs are located and designed
in a safe and appropriate manner that prevents the creation of traffic distractions and
hazards.
6. Notwithstanding any element of this statement of purposes or any other subsection
of these Regulations, any authorized sign may contain non-commercial copy in lieu of
any other copy, so long as the other provisions of these Regulations are complied with,
it not being the intent of these Regulations to regulate sign content.
B. Severability
1. Should a court of law deem any portion of these Regulations, their subparts, or
referring regulations to be Constitutionally infirm, said court may strike or sever such
portion it deems inconsistent with the Constitution of the United States of America or
the Constitution of the State of Connecticut and leave the unoffending portions of
these Regulations intact.
C. Permits
1. Application for a sign permit shall be on an appropriate form provided by the
Zoning Commission, in accordance with the requirements of Appendix 1.
2. The fees associated with a Sign Permit shall be in accordance with the Zoning
Commission Fee Schedule (Appendix 3).
3. No sign shall be installed, enlarged, or relocated unless it conforms to the provisions
of this regulation and a permit has been secured.
4. Permits shall be issued by the ZEO, in accordance with the Zoning Permit procedures
established in Section 8.2 of these regulations.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
130
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
5. Permits are valid only during the time the business is in operation. Signs and all sign
material shall be removed within ten days after the business ceases to be operational.
The period shall begin on the day following the last day the business is open.
D. Prohibited Signs
The signs or sign devices are expressly prohibited:
1. Streamers, banners, inflatables, flag-like, or other sign devices not herein defined,
unless specifically authorized for grand opening events
2. Flashing, rotating, moving, or blinking signs, or optically projected slide signals which
are changed periodically. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit clocks or
time and temperature signs that have been approved by the Commission.
3. Signs illuminated by flashing, rotating, moving, or blinking sources of light, or signs
having an exposed source of illumination.
4. Signs that are illuminated in a manner or with such intensity or brightness that they
may tend to cause glare, distraction, or nuisance to operators of vehicles, pedestrians,
or neighboring property owners and/or occupants.
5. Signs including structural elements that obstruct any window, door, fire escape,
stairway, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress from any building
or structure.
E. General Provisions
1. Construction: All signs shall be constructed of strong material which will not warp or
contort with weather or age, firmly supported so as to withstand wind conditions
normally expected throughout the year, and kept freshly painted or otherwise
maintained in good condition and repair.
2. Design and Appearance: All signs shall be compatible in scale, design, color, and
construction with the architectural character of the building(s) or premises to which
they refer and with the neighborhood within which they are located.
a. The structure portions of signs (columns, cross-beams, braces, etc.) shall be
proportional to the sign panel they are supporting.
b. Freestanding signs shall meet the ground in an attractive manner. The use of
appropriate plantings with year-round attractiveness, mulched with a fine stone
aggregate or bark surface treatment, shall be required in conjunction with the
approval of a new sign if necessary for compliance with this section.
c. The following guidelines should be considered in the design of signs to
maximize their function as a communication tool:
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
131
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
i. Simple fonts and use of a combination of upper and lower-case
lettering (compared to all upper-case lettering) are encouraged to
promote legibility.
ii. Open or negative space surrounding lines of type of graphic elements
should be greater than the copy space for multiple lines of copy.
iii. Signs employing light-colored copy on a contrasting, darker-colored
background is encouraged to enhance sign visibility, as white or lightcolored
backgrounds may be more difficult to read due to the
competing nature of environmental light sources.
iv. A well-defined edge or border to a sign enhances its visibility.
3. Window Signs
Window signs shall not exceed 25% of the total window area for each business,
viewable from a public street or from a parking area, provided no such window sign
shall be located or maintained so as to be a hazard to traffic or pedestrians, to
obstruct any door, ventilation system or cause any other hazard to public health or
safety.
4. Location
a. No sign shall be located closer than 35 feet from the center of the traveled
portion of the road, or closer than 10 feet from the edge of pavement of the
road, in any zone, except names and addresses attached to mailboxes. No
sign location shall obstruct any line of sight. Where a paved or traveled portion
of any street is widened and the sign obstructs the new lines of sight, it shall be
set further back to conform to the requirements.
b. No sign shall be arranged so that it blocks reasonable sight lines for streets,
walks, or driveways. No sign should be confused with a traffic control device by
reason of the sign's color, location, shape, and/or other characteristics or
through any other means. Glare from the sign shall not interfere with traffic.
c. All permitted signs must be located on the same lot as the building or use to
which said signs apply.
d. No sign may be attached to a tree.
5. Wording: Descriptive wording may be changed without a permit provided that the
area dedicated to changing descriptive wording, commonly called “reader boards,”
shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign area and that the coloration and
composition of the text are compatible with the remainder of the sign.
6. Dimensional Standards
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
132
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle,
triangle, or circle which encompasses all lettering, wording, design, or symbols.
If attached to or located on the building, the area of the sign shall include any
background different from the balance of the wall if such background is
designed as an integral part of, and obviously related to, the sign. When the
lettering is placed on a building, the area of the sign shall be computed as the
area of the smallest quadrilateral capable of including all lettering or other
items comprising the sign.
b. Building signs shall be limited in total square footage to the amount of “linear
building frontage” facing each street, main access drive, or interior
courtyard/pedestrian mall. In multioccupant buildings, the allowable signage
facing each street, main access drive, or interior courtyard/pedestrian mall
shall be proportionally divided according to the percentage of the “linear
building frontage” attributable to each occupant on that street, main access
drive, or interior courtyard/pedestrian mall, or such other method as may be
approved by the Commission in unique or unusual circumstances.
c. Roadside signs are to be limited to one per building, or three commercial
buildings in a group with a maximum size of 50 square feet. If there is more than
one establishment, the sign may contain the name of all occupants with each
name appearing on a panel. If the establishment is a retail service station, an
additional sign or signs denoting prices of fuel only, not to exceed 24 square
feet, may be located on the trademark sign stanchion.
d. Where a double-facing sign is allowed, the maximum permitted sign area
shall apply to each face. All framing shall be included in computing the sign
area. Where the sign is not contained within the outer dimension of a frame,
then the area of the sign shall be computed as the area of the smallest
quadrilateral encompassing all lettering and other items comprising the signs.
Legs, posts, pedestals, or monuments supporting the sign and below the sign
quadrilateral shall not be considered in computing the maximum area of the
sign.
e. If a permitted sign is independent of a building, the top of said sign or
support shall be not higher than 18 feet above mean ground level in the
immediate area in which the sign is located. If the sign is mounted on a
monument or pedestal-type base that is more than one foot wide, the height
of the monument type or pedestal base shall not exceed five feet above mean
ground level. Support legs or posts shall not exceed 12 inches in diameter or
width.
f. A sign supported by a wall shall not be set out more than 12 inches from said
wall and shall not project above the roofline or beyond the side of said wall.
g. No building sign shall extend above the roofline or parapet wall.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
133
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
7. Illumination
a. Animation, flashing, moving, or festoon lights or any audio advertising
devices shall not be permitted.
b. Where a building fronts on two streets, each frontage is to be considered
individually, with the limitations applied as for two separate units.
c. Illuminated signs may be permitted by the ZEO, subject to the following
regulations:
i. A drawing showing the general appearance of the proposed
illuminated sign from each street from which such sign may be visible
shall be provided to the ZEO.
ii. A plot plan showing the location of the proposed illuminated sign in
relation to existing buildings on the same lot and on all adjacent lots,
including lots which would be adjacent but for the existence of a street,
shall be provided to the ZEO. The names of the owners of such lots shall
be clearly shown thereon.
iii. Internally illuminated or back-lit signs shall not exceed 225 lumens of
luminous flux for every square foot of signage. Data sheets must be
provided with application.
iv. Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall be carefully located, aimed,
and shielded so that light is directed only onto the sign façade. Light
shall not be aimed toward adjacent streets, roads, or properties, nor shall
the light source be visible from any public right-of-way or from outside of
the lot lines.
v. No LEDs or new internally illuminated signs shall be permitted in the
TCD or any residential zone.
vi. Externally mounted light fixtures shall be mounted on the top of the
sign structure and aimed downward unless it can be demonstrated that
alternative designs will not result in light spillover.
vii. All ground-mounted fixtures shall be screened by bushes or other
appropriate means; all fixtures mounted on the sign itself shall blend in
with the background color of the sign or its surroundings as deemed
appropriate for the site.
viii. Energy-saving and solar lighting are encouraged.
ix. Halo-lit signs may be approved by the ZEO provided that white light
only shall be used, and light intensity shall be subtle and create a low
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
134
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
intensity light wash on the sign board or background surface. Colored
lighting is not permitted.
x. The ZEO may approve a reduced-size sign if halo lighting is requested.
xi. Internally illuminated signs existing at the date of adoption of these
Regulations may remain and may have minor modifications to reflect
changing business names, but more significant changes in location, size,
or structure shall require compliance with these Regulations.
xii. The ZEO may require readjustment or relocation of a sign in order to
prevent glare and to ensure vehicular and pedestrian safety.
8. Sign Types by Zone Categories:
Signs shall be permitted in accordance with Table 6.4, in which the maximum area per
sign is listed as square feet (SF).
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
135
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Residential Districts
Sign Type No Permit By Permit
Name and occupation of occupant 1 sign,
max. 1 SF
Advertisement: sale, rental, or lease of same property 1 sign,
max. 4 SF
Open House signs **, † 5 signs, max.
4 SF
Sign identifying a civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal, or similar organization
and its meeting hours, on a lot where such meetings are regularly held.
1 sign,
max. 6 SF
Historical markers (placed by a bona fide historical organization or government agency) 1 marker,
max. 3 SF
Names and addresses required to be placed on mailboxes by the US Post Office As required
Traffic or other directional signs erected by the Town or other government entity As required
Temporary sign indicating owner or resident’s political preference and located on
premises of such owner or resident (displayed during the period between 60 days before
and one week after Election Day)
1 sign per
elected
office,
max. 4 SF
Temporary sign advertising produce grown and sold on-premises, displayed during
appropriate season only
1 sign,
max. 4 SF
Temporary tag sale signs, as furnished by Zoning Commission (required deposit is $15,
refund is $9 if returned within 15 days)
3 signs,
max. 1.5 SF
Signs prohibiting trespassing, hunting, fishing, trapping, or picnicking on property likely to
be used in such a way by unauthorized persons
4 signs/acre,
max. 1 SF
Temporary sign advertising a subdivision (displayed up to 6 months; may be extended
by Zoning Commission upon request; must be removed after completion of subdivision)
1 sign,
max. 12 SF
Temporary sign listing the contractor, engineer, architect, or other pertinent data
associated with a construction project (displayed up to 6 months; may be extended by
Zoning Commission upon request; must be removed after completion of construction)
1 sign,
max. 12 SF
Temporary directional signs advertising a not-for-profit special public event (displayed
up to 7 days) ***,†
6 signs,
max. 12 SF
Seasonal farmer’s market sign advertising a not-for-profit farmer’s market (displayed up
to 14 days before opening market to 7 days after final market of the season)
1 sign,
max. 12 SF
Municipal Greeting Sign providing a greeting to individuals entering the Town of
Brookfield (including a badge, signia, or seal identifying a not-for-profit entity operating
within the town, with a design acceptable to the Commission; if located on Town
property, Board of Selection must approve). †
1 sign,
max. 60 SF
* For sale, rent, or lease signs: No sign shall be placed in a state or town right of way, notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations. No sign shall be
placed so as to block lines of sight for streets, drives, and walkways as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. No sign shall be placed within four feet
from a property line. Such signs may be added below a permitted roadside sign. The applicable fee for such sign shall be for each premises regardless of the
number of signs permitted.
** Open House signs: No more than one sign shall be permitted on any one intersection. For no longer than 36 hours. The signs shall be generic in nature and
display no advertising. Violators shall be fined according to a schedule established by the Zoning Commission.
*** Temporary not-for-profit special event signs: An application for such signs shall indicate the time period involved, the proposed design of the sign, and the
proposed location of the sign(s). The signs shall be placed in a manner as to not impede lines of sight or otherwise adversely affect traffic safety. Applications
for such signs will be processed on a first-come, first-served basis. No more than two independent signs may be placed at the same location within the same
time period.
† Any application for a sign to be located off of the premises to which it refers must be accompanied by express written consent of the owner of the property
on which it is to be located. Any application for a sign to be located in a Town right of way must be accompanied by express written consent of the abutting
property owner. No sign shall be placed in a state right of way.
‡ See additional sign guidelines and standards of Appendix 2 – TCD Design Guidelines
Table 6.4 Permitted Signs
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
136
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Table 6.4. Permitted Signs ... continued
Commercial and Industrial Districts
Sign Type
Standards
Commercial
(C-1, C-2,
CG-N, CG-S)
Town Center
District
Marine
Commercial
Industrial Corporate
Park
By
Right
By
Permit
By
Right
By
Permit
By
Right
By
Permit
By
Right
By
Permit
By
Right
By
Permit
Roadside sign identifying one or more
permitted use(s) on the premises, bearing
the names of all occupants (may be a
directory sign).
1 sign, max. 50
SF (height 10.5’
in TCD & MC)
X
X
X
X
X
Yard sign in lieu of roadside sign (as
described above)
1 sign,
max. 50 SF
X
X
Building sign identifying a store, shop, office,
or business
1 sign per
tenant, max 1
SF per 1 LF
building
frontage
X
X
X
X
X
Entrance and Exit Signs
1 sign per
street opening,
max. 3 SF and
2.5 ft height
X
X
X
X
X
Street address sign (only when affixed to an
approved road sign, above the context of
the roadside sign, with numerals no greater
than six inches in height).
1 sign per
approved
roadside sign
X
X
X
X
X
Advertisement sales, rental, or lease of
same property
1 sign (or 2
signs if fronting
on 2+ streets),
max. 24 SF*,†
X
X
X
X
X
Open House signs **,† 5 signs,
max. 4 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Sign identifying a civic, charitable, religious,
patriotic, fraternal, or similar organization
and its meeting hours, on a lot where such
meetings are regularly held.
1 sign,
max. 12 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Historical Markers (placed by a bona fine
historical organization or governmental
agency)
1 marker,
max. 3 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Names and addresses required to be
placed on mailboxes by the US Post Office
As required
X
X
X
X
X
Traffic or other directional signs erected by
the Town or other government entity
As required
X
X
X
X
X
Temporary sign indicating owner or
resident’s political preference and located
on premises of such owner or resident
(displayed during the period between 60
days before and one week after Election
Day)
1 sign per
elected office,
max. 4 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Temporary sign advertising produce grown
and sold on-premises, displayed during the
appropriate season only
1 sign,
max. 4 SF
X
X
X
X
Temporary tag sale signs, as furnished by
Zoning Commission (required deposit is $15,
refund is $9 if returned within 15 days)
3 signs,
max. 1.5 SF
X
X
X
X
X
* For sale, rent, or lease signs: No sign shall be placed in a state or town right of way, notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations. No sign shall be placed so
as to block lines of sight for streets, drives, and walkways as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. No sign shall be placed within four feet from a property line.
Such signs may be added below a permitted roadside sign. The applicable fee for such sign shall be for each premises regardless of the number of signs permitted.
** Open House signs: No more than one sign shall be permitted on any one intersection. For no longer than 36 hours. The signs shall be generic in nature and display no
advertising. Violators shall be fined according to a schedule established by the Zoning Commission.
*** Temporary not-for-profit special event signs: An application for such signs shall indicate the time period involved, the proposed design of the sign, and the proposed
location of the sign(s). The signs shall be placed in a manner as to not impede lines of sight or otherwise adversely affect traffic safety. Applications for such signs will be
processed on a first-come, first-served basis. No more than two independent signs may be placed at the same location within the same time period.
† Any application for a sign to be located off of the premises to which it refers must be accompanied by express written consent of the owner of the property on which it
is to be located. Any application for a sign to be located in a Town right of way must be accompanied by express written consent of the abutting property owner. No
sign shall be placed in a state right of way.
‡ See additional sign guidelines and standards of Appendix 2 – TCD Design Guidelines
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
137
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Table 6.4. Permitted Signs ... continued
Commercial and Industrial Districts
Sign Type
Standards
Commercial
(C-1, C-2,
CG-N, CG-S)
Town Center
District
Marine
Commercial
Industrial Corporate
Park
By
Right
By
Permit
By
Right
By
Permit
By
Right
By
Permit
By
Right
By
Permit
By
Right
By
Permit
Signs prohibiting trespassing, hunting,
fishing, trapping, or picnicking on property
likely to be used in such a way by
unauthorized persons
4 signs/acre,
max. 1 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Temporary sign advertising a subdivision
(displayed up to 6 months; may be
extended by Zoning Commission upon
request; must be removed after completion
of subdivision)
1 sign,
max. 12 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Temporary sign listing the contractor,
engineer, architect, or other pertinent data
associated with a construction project
(displayed up to 6 months; may be
extended by Zoning Commission upon
request; must be removed after completion
of construction)
1 sign,
max. 12 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Temporary directional signs advertising a
not-for-profit special public event (displayed
up to 7 days) ***,†
6 signs,
max. 12 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Seasonal farmer’s market sign advertising a
not-for-profit farmer’s market (displayed up
to 14 days before opening market to 7 days
after final market of the season)
1 sign,
max. 12 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Municipal Greeting Sign providing a
greeting to individuals entering the Town of
Brookfield (including a badge, signia, or seal
identifying a not-for-profit entity operating
within the town, with a design acceptable
to the Commission; if located on Town
property, Board of Selection must approve).
†
1 sign,
max. 60 SF †
X
X
X
X
X
Trademark sign stanchion displaying prices
of fuel only (for a retail service station only)
1 sign (single or
double faced),
max. 24 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Off-premise directional signs † As permitted,
max. 1.5 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Sign advertising a special event, sale,
promotion, or opening/closing of business
(displayed up to 30 days, not more than
twice annually unless otherwise permitted
by the Zoning Commission) †
1
single/double
faced sign,
max. 24 SF
X
X
X
X
Individual business signs perpendicular to
the building line under a covered walkway
1 sign per
business,
max. 1.5 SF
X
X
X
X
X
Theater marquee signs (for a theater use
only; placed flat against the face of such
marquee and not extending beyond any
edge of such face)
1 sign, max 1 SF
per 1 LF
building
trantage
X
X
X
X
* For sale, rent, or lease signs: No sign shall be placed in a state or town right of way, notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations. No sign shall be placed so
as to block lines of sight for streets, drives, and walkways as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. No sign shall be placed within four feet from a property line.
Such signs may be added below a permitted roadside sign. The applicable fee for such sign shall be for each premises regardless of the number of signs permitted.
** Open House signs: No more than one sign shall be permitted on any one intersection. For no longer than 36 hours. The signs shall be generic in nature and display no
advertising. Violators shall be fined according to a schedule established by the Zoning Commission.
*** Temporary not-for-profit special event signs: An application for such signs shall indicate the time period involved, the proposed design of the sign, and the proposed
location of the sign(s). The signs shall be placed in a manner as to not impede lines of sight or otherwise adversely affect traffic safety. Applications for such signs will be
processed on a first-come, first-served basis. No more than two independent signs may be placed at the same location within the same time period.
† Any application for a sign to be located off of the premises to which it refers must be accompanied by express written consent of the owner of the property on which it
is to be located. Any application for a sign to be located in a Town right of way must be accompanied by express written consent of the abutting property owner. No
sign shall be placed in a state right of way.
‡ See additional sign guidelines and standards of Appendix 2 – TCD Design Guidelines
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
138
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6.3 Landscaping
A. Purpose, Applicability, and Design Principles
1. Purpose: These landscaping requirements are adopted for the purpose of
protecting property values by:
a. Preserving existing vegetation, planting of new materials, and use of
planters and similar landscape devices that enhance the environmental
quality and visual appearance of sites, buildings, and parking
b. Providing buffers between land uses that enhance privacy and
minimize the intrusion of light, dust, and noise
c. Preventing the erosion of soil
d. Improving water quality through the reduction of sedimentation and
promotion of runoff infiltration
e. Improving the environmental quality and aesthetic quality of the Town
of Brookfield
2. Applicability: These regulations shall apply to any proposed use or
development activity that requires Site Plan or Special Permit approval.
Additionally, the requirements contained in Section 6.3(B) shall apply to any
application requiring subdivision approval. The Commission may approve
alternate landscape treatments consistent with the purpose and intent of these
standards.
3. Design Principles: to the greatest extent practicable, landscape design and
specific treatments shall:
a. Preserve the existing landscape in its natural state with respect to trees
and vegetation, grade changes, and existing landscape features such as
stone walls.
b. Use natural, planted slopes rather than retaining walls.
c. Retain existing healthy, mature trees and provide protection during
construction.
d. Use native species or cultivars of native species for the majority of the
planted area that can survive on the natural rainfall cycle and require
minimal or no fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides.
e. Incorporate stormwater management systems into the overall
landscape plan for the site, including rain gardens, depressed planting
islands, permeable pavers, and ponds.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
139
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
4. Landscape Plan: compliance with all requirements of this Section shall be
demonstrated and all plantings and proposed landscape architectural features
indicated, on a landscape plan of at least the same scale as the required site
plan. Such plan shall include a plant list with plant names, size at planting, and
size when mature. It shall also provide planting instructions conforming to good
horticultural practice. The plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect.
B. General Landscaping Standards
1. To the extent practicable, the existing landscape shall be preserved in its
natural state. Existing mature vegetation shall be maintained insofar as practical
and may be credited toward meeting landscape requirements with the
approval of the Board or Commission.
2. Where existing large trees have been removed prior to the submission of an
application, the installation of additional landscape materials to preplace the
removed trees may be required. The number, size, quality of the vegetation,
amount of lost shade, and similar factors shall be considered when determining
the amount of additional landscape materials to be installed.
3. Steep Slopes
a. Any slope in excess of 20 percent (1:5) shall be considered a steep
slope.
b. Steep slopes and other areas subject to erosion shall require
improvements and appropriate landscape treatments to ensure the
stability of soils and viability of planted materials. Steep slopes shall be
planted with shrubbery or ground cover. Riprap and other nonvegetative
material may be allowed at the Commission’s discretion.
c. No slope extending over 100 feet in length measured in any direction
across the contours of a lot may be created with a grade that exceeds 33
percent on average. All site plans shall identify any existing slopes that
exceed this criteria.
4. A variety of plant species shall be integrated into a landscaping plan, and the
use of monocultures shall be avoided.
5. The use of invasive plant species, as identified by the Connecticut Invasive
Plant Council, is prohibited (see https://cipwg.uconn.edu).
6. Plant materials used in or adjacent to parking areas shall be salt tolerant and
capable of sustaining snow loads. Plant materials used in or adjacent to
stormwater areas, including depressed landscape islands in parking lots, shall be
tolerant of wet soils.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
140
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
7. At the time of planting, plant materials shall meet the following size criteria:
a. Shade trees: 3” caliber or greater, measured at 6” above ground
b. Flowering or understory trees: 2.5” caliber or greater, measured at 6”
above ground
c. Evergreen trees: 6’ height or greater
C. Landscape Buffers
1. Buffers shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Zone/Use
Front Yard
Side/Rear Yard
(Adjacent to R Zone)
Buffer Landscape
Requirement
Buffer Landscape
Requirement
Corporate Park (any Use) 25’ 25’ 150’ 25’
TCD Zones (any Non-Residential Use) 6’ – 25’ 6’ – 25’ 75’ 25’
CG-N Zone (any Use) 25’ 25’ 50’ 25’
CG-S Zone (any Use) 25’ 25’ 50’ 20’
Marine Commercial Zones (any Use) 20’ 20’ 10’ 10’
Other Commercial/Industrial Zones
(any Non-Residential Use)
25’ 25’ 100’ 25’
Multi-Family Residential (any Use) 25’ 25’ 50’ 25’
2. Landscaped buffer areas within a front yard shall be planted with lawn and/or
ground cover as well as street trees in accordance with the following schedule
and standards.
Buffer Type Trees Required Other Requirements
Street Frontage Buffer 1 shade tree and 2 understory
trees per 50’ frontage
6 shrubs per 50’ frontage;
landscaped berm
Side/Rear Buffer 1 shade tree per 1500 SF area Lawn, ground cover, flower
beds, shrub beds
Side/Rear Buffer (if
adjacent to R zone)
2 shade trees per 50’
frontage, or alternatives
acceptable to Commission
Alternatives include 3
understory trees, 6 evergreen
trees, 12 shrubs per 50’
frontage, or natural state;
landscaped berm
Building Separation Buffer N/A 1 to 4 shrubs per 10’ building
perimeter
a. Landscaped buffer areas shall contain only plantings, required berms,
driveways and/or accessways, sidewalks, and/or pedestrian walkways as
approved by the Commission.
b. If deemed necessary by the Commission to provide a visual and traffic
safety barrier between the use and adjacent roadway, a designed
landscaped berm of a height and configuration approved by the
Commission shall be located in this buffer strip.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
141
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
c. No berm, planted material, fencing, or other obstruction located within
the buffer area shall be required, installed, or allowed to grow so as to
obstruct required lines of sight of vehicle drivers at any intersection.
D. Landscaping for Parking and Loading Areas
1. Any parking lot containing 10 or more spaces shall be provided with an
amount of interior landscaped islands or planting strips equivalent to 10% of the
total impervious area of the parking lot.
a. Such parking lots shall have landscaped islands at the end of each row
of parking spaces.
b. All required landscaped islands shall have a minimum width of 8’
exclusive of the curb and any walkway within such island, and a length of
18’ in a direction perpendicular to the row. All landscaped islands shall
include at least one shade tree.
c. Landscaped “divider islands”, a minimum of ten feet (10’) in width,
separating opposing rows of vehicles. One (1) deciduous shade tree of a
minimum of 3.5” in caliper shall be planted every twenty-five feet (25’)
along the divider island and shrubs every ten feet (10’) along the divider
island.
2. At least one shade tree shall be provided within the parking lot for every 10
parking spaces or portion thereof, which shall be provided within landscaped
islands with an area of at least 150 square feet.
a. A minimum clear branch height of 8’ shall be maintained above all
parking and loading areas and pedestrian walkways.
3. Where soils are suitable, landscape islands shall be designed to filter runoff
from the parking lot as part of the overall stormwater management system. In
such cases, the landscape island shall be depressed from the pavement surface
and protected with a suitable curb stop or guiderail system. Trees planted in
such islands should be tolerant of wet environments.
4. A landscaped buffer shall be provided between any building and parking
area or access drive, which may contain a sidewalk with the balance of the
buffer planted with trees, shrubbery, or groundcover. This requirement shall not
apply to any driveway providing access to an internal garage or loading area.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
142
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Schematic Illustrations of Parking Area Terms
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
143
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6. 4 Outdoor Lighting
A. Purpose
It is the purpose of this standard to regulate the illumination of land uses in order
to avoid unnecessary upward illumination, minimize indirect light trespass onto
adjacent properties, and reduce glare so as to eliminate deleterious physical
effects and promote public safety.
B. Applicability
1. These Regulations shall apply to any uses requiring Site Plan or Special Permit
approval with the exception of agricultural uses.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may require post-construction lighting surveys
to demonstrate compliance with these standards.
3. The following types of lighting are exempted from these regulations:
a. Temporary lighting used by emergency service personnel.
b. Temporary lighting for holiday seasons, displayed between
November 20 and January 5 each year.
c. Lighting for special events permitted under the provisions of Section 7.1.
d. Marina lighting direct at or towards a body of water not visible on other
land areas and not presenting a danger to navigation.
e. Aircraft warning lights and navigation beacons.
C. Standards
1. General Standards: All exterior light sources shall be directed downward (at an
angle of 90 degrees or less from vertical) and the illumination confined to
necessary and useful areas. An excessively high level of illumination, spillage of
unwanted illumination beyond lot lines and lighting designed or situated in such
a manner as to detract from recognition of traffic signals or presenting a hazard
to safe driving is prohibited. Improved effectiveness of lighting, rather than
higher levels of intensity, is to be achieved wherever possible.
2. Exterior and Interior Lighting: exterior lighting shall be limited to all lights
mounted on the exterior of buildings and structures as well as freestanding or
ground lights. For the purposes of this regulation, interior lighting visible from the
exterior shall be treated as exterior lighting.
3. Prohibited Lighting Types: The following types of lighting are prohibited in all
zones.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
144
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. Flood, spot, or searchlights directed upwards, except for lights directed
upwards towards structures, vegetation, or artistic or decorative features
and not exceeding 1000 lumens.
b. Illuminated signs and advertising devices, including any animated,
flashing, moving, or festooned lighting, or any type of lighting producing
changing colors.
c. Any unshielded exterior lighting.
4. Shielding: all exterior lighting shall be designed so that the filament, light source
or lenses are shielded with opaque material in such a way that they will not be
visible at any point five feet or higher above ground level at any property line.
5. Security Lighting: Lighting installed for purposes of security of a building shall be
directed toward the building(s).
6. Maximum Luminaire Height
a. General uses: 20’ measured from bottom of source to grade level.
b. Parking areas with more than 200 parking spaces: 36’ measured from
bottom of source to grade level, provided that any lighting fixture
mounted at greater than 20’ shall not exceed 13,000 lumens.
c. Outdoor fields, stadiums, or similar recreational uses: 80’ measured from
bottom of source to grade level. Sporting event lights shall be scheduled
to terminate by 11:00PM.
7. Lighting Fixtures: The following types of fixtures are acceptable:
a. Fully shielded full cut-off for parking lots
b. Fully shielded cut-off for pedestrian areas
c. Fully shielded “period” fixtures
d. Flush mounted canopy fixtures
8. Approved Sources: The following light sources are acceptable:
a. Metal halide with a coated lamp and LED
b. LED with temperatures 3,500 degrees Kelvin or less for uses located in
residential or commercial zones, or temperatures 4,000 degrees Kelvin or
less for uses located in industrial zones.
9. Prohibited Sources: The following light sources are prohibited:
a. Halogen
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
145
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
b. Mercury vapor
c. Non-shielded laser fixtures
d. High-pressure sodium
e. LED with temperatures greater than 4,000 degrees Kelvin
10. Lighting Intensity measured above grade:
a. Industrial and Commercial sites shall not exceed 1.0 foot candles at the
property line.
b. Any use abutting a residential use shall not exceed 0.5 foot candles at
the property line. House side shields may be required by the Commission
as applicable.
c. The following light intensity levels are based on the Illumination
Engineers Society of America recommendations for lighting based on
activity levels.
i. Parking spaces shall be maintained at a .5 foot candle minimum.
ii. Parking lot aisles shall be maintained at 0.2 foot candles
minimum.
iii. Building entry surfaces shall be maintained at not less than 0.5
foot candles.
iv. Sidewalks shall be maintained at an average of 1.0 foot candles.
v. The Zoning Commission reserves the right to restrict excessive light
levels under a fixture.
11. Uniformity of Lighting: Parking lot lighting shall be maintained at a uniformity
ratio of 4:1 (highest horizontal illuminance point at grade divided by the lowest
horizontal illuminance point).
12. Screening: Vegetative screen shall not be used as a means of controlling
glare or lighting intensity.
6.5 Earthwork and Grading
A. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this subsection is to provide for excavation, filling, grading, and removal
of earth materials in a manner that protects the public health, welfare, and safety
during the duration of site preparation and construction activities. These Regulations
are intended to:
1. Protect the Town’s natural resources, including soil and ground and surface
water supplies, from potential adverse impacts, including erosion, sedimentation,
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
146
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
the alteration of drainage flows, disruption of on-site sewage disposal systems,
and pollution or contamination.
2. Protect neighboring properties from potential adverse impacts of noise, dust,
visual impacts, and other nuisances that may result in a lowering of property
values.
3. Protect the traveling public from potential vehicular or pedestrian traffic
hazards.
4. Promote safe site conditions.
5. Provide for appropriate site restoration and future uses of the subject property.
B. Applicability
1. Any excavation, filling, grading, or soil removal or processing activity
associated with development of a proposed or approved site plan or special
permit which exceeds 10% of the total lot area shall not commence without the
issuance of an excavation permit for such activities in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8.14.
2. Necessary excavation grading for a subdivision road for which plans have
been approved by the Planning Commission of the Town of Brookfield.
3. The removal or filling by or for the owner from one part of his property to
another of topsoil or subsoil when such removal is for the purpose of
landscaping, farming or otherwise improving the property to a maximum of one
hundred (100) cubic yards of material in a Residential District or two hundred
cubic yards of material in a Commercial or Industrial District. Above these
maximums will require a Special permit and Excavation Permit.
4. Material that may be otherwise excavated or filled in any one (1) calendar
year without the required permit in an amount not to exceed one hundred (100)
cubic yards.
C. Standards
1. Scheduling of Work: All earthwork and grading activities shall be completed
within one year from the commencement of such activity, and all commercial
and earth moving equipment must be promptly removed after such activities
are complete. All approved work shall be performed between the hours of 7AM
and 6PM, Monday through Friday, except state recognized holidays, unless such
hours are specifically modified by the Commission. The Commission shall have
the right to modify these time restrictions to more permissive or more restrictive
hours, in accordance with potential impacts on adjacent land uses.
2. No slope extending over 100 feet in length measured in any direction across
the contours of a lot may be created with a grade that exceeds 25%.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
147
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. No fill material which is reduced in volume by fragmentation or decomposition
may be used beneath footings, foundations, structures, walkways, drives or onsite
sewer disposal systems. Fill under such areas, when permitted by the Building
Official, Town of Brookfield, must be clean earth, loam, humus, sand, gravel,
clay, stone, soil, subsoil or other earthen products only and shall be properly
compacted in accordance with good engineering practice.
4. Natural or building product wastes or debris which result from construction on
the premises only and are not transported from elsewhere may be buried and
covered over with a minimum of 12” of clean fill of the types indicated in
Subsection C(3) above only with the written approval of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer who, after inspection of the site, shall have satisfied himself/herself that
adequate provisions have been made to prevent adverse impacts listed in
Subsection A above or such other conditions as might adversely affect the
public health, safety and welfare. The locations of such materials shall be
indicated on the approved plot plan.
5. The burial of material resulting from demolition activity is specifically prohibited.
6. Truck access to site shall be so arranged as to minimize nuisance to
surrounding properties, and such access on the premises shall be provided with a
dustless surface.
7. Any permittee or agent thereof who shall cause damage to any road or roads
in the Town of Brookfield shall immediately be liable to the Town for repairing said
damage, which shall be under the supervision of the Board of Selectmen of the
Town of Brookfield.
8. No screening, sifting, washing, crushing or other forms of processing shall be
conducted upon the premises unless located within an industrial or commercial
district where such may be permitted, at the discretion of the Commission. No
fixed machinery shall be erected or maintained within three hundred feet (300’)
of any property line or street line.
6.6 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
A. Purposes
It is the intention of this subsection to provide guidelines and standards for the control of
erosion or sedimentation during or after the execution of any project, development, or
mining operation involving excavation, filling, and/or grading activity. The
management of erosion and sedimentation shall be undertaken in conjunction with the
management of stormwater quality described in Section 6.9 of these Regulations.
B. Applicability
All development requiring a Zoning Permit, Site Plan, or Special Permit approval and
which would have a cumulative disturbance of ½ acre of land or more shall receive
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
148
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
approval for an erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to the commencement of
work.
C. Standards and Implementation
Minimum measures to control erosion and reduce sedimentation are set forth in the
Connecticut DEEP Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control adopted in
2002, or as amended (hereafter “DEEP guidelines”). Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plans shall employ the best available technologies consistent with DEEP Guidelines, and
shall be prepared by a professional engineer or landscape architect. Such Plans shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
1. A narrative describing project elements, nature of the construction, timing and
phasing of project elements, sequence of construction, and the installation of
the erosion control measures.
2. A site plan at appropriate scale showing the following elements:
a. Location of existing and proposed improvements.
b. Existing topography, soil types, wetlands, and watercourses.
c. Proposed grading and drainage.
d. Location of proposed erosion and sediment control measures.
e. Sequence for installing such control measures.
f. Permanent measures for stabilizing the site including vegetation where
appropriate.
g. Design criteria for the erosion and sediment control measures.
h. Construction details specific to the site.
i. Operation and maintenance plan.
3. Implementation of Controls: Site development shall not commence in any
area of any site until the appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls have
been installed and are functioning. Such controls shall be maintained in good
functional order throughout the duration of construction, as dictated by the
Plan. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to inspect erosion
or sediment control measures for their effectiveness, and may, in his or her sole
discretion, require the installation of additional measures to effectively control
erosion and sedimentation.
4. Financial Guarantee: The Board or Commission may require the filing of a
financial guarantee prior to the issuance of a permit for which an Erosion or
Sedimentation Control Plan is required, in an amount securing to the Town the
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
149
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
cost of installing and maintaining the approved erosion and sedimentation
controls.
6.7 Performance Standards
A. Purposes
The purpose of these Performance Standards is to protect the health of Brookfield’s
residents and the integrity of its natural resources from potential adverse effects that
may result from the construction and operation of land use activities.
B. Applicability
The standards of this Section shall apply to all land uses, including those that do not
require a specific approval by the Commission. The standards shall constitute
continuing obligations of all land uses in the Town.
1. Any existing use which is not in compliance with these performance standards
shall not be varied or changed in such a way as to increase the degree of such
violation.
2. All land use activities must also comply with all other applicable sections of
these Regulations, as well as the requirements of any local, state, or federal
agencies with permitting jurisdiction.
C. Measurement and Certification
1. Compliance with each performance standard shall be based on criteria
contained or referenced in each regulatory section. Where compliance is
unclear, the standards and criteria of pertinent state and federal agencies shall
be applied.
2. To determine compliance with the established performance standards, a
property owner or developer may be required to provide a written certification
of compliance from a licensed engineer, architect, or appropriate qualified
professional that all applicable standards have been met. Certifications may be
required during the permit review process, prior to the issuance of a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance, or after the subject use has begun.
D. Standards
1. Air Pollution: No land use shall create or cause to be created a degradation of
air quality which is injurious to human health or property. Emissions of gas, smoke,
dust, dirt, fly-ash, and other potential atmospheric contaminants shall comply
with all applicable rules, regulations, and standards promulgated by CT DEEP.
2. Odor: With the exception of permitted agricultural uses, no land use shall
create or cause to be created offensive odors which are readily discernible or
detectable beyond the subject property lines. Detailed plans for the prevention
of odors crossing property lines may be required of a property owner or
developer.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
150
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. Noise: Compliance with the Town’s noise ordinance is required.
4. Vibrations and Electrical Disturbances: With the exception of temporary
construction projects, no land use shall create or cause to be created
objectionable vibration or electrical disturbances which are readily discernible or
detectable beyond the subject property lines.
5. Radiation: No activity, operation, or use shall create or cause to be created
levels of radiation or radioactivity which are in violation of state or federal
standards.
6. Fire or Explosive Hazard: All land uses, particularly those involving the storage,
use, or manufacture of flammable or explosive substances, shall be conducted
with reasonable precautions against fire or explosive hazards, as required by all
applicable federal, state, and local fire safety standards.
7. Glare and Heat: Land use activities shall not produce glare or heat which
extends beyond a site’s property lines and creates a hazard or nuisance to
neighboring property owners or on adjacent roadways.
8. Hazardous Materials: All land uses which produce, utilize, or store hazardous
materials as identified by state and federal sources, including Section 3001 of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as may be modified, must
safely transport, store, handle, and dispose of all hazardous materials in
accordance with current state and federal standards.
9. Liquid or Solid Discharges: No land use shall discharge into the ground, a
wetland, a surface water body, or a storm drainage or waste disposal system
any liquid or solid matter which endangers the public’s health and safety, or is
likely to cause detrimental effects on surface or groundwater quality or property
values.
10. Waste Disposal and Storage: All wastes created in conjunction with any land
use activity shall be properly stored in a screened area and expediently
removed to prevent health or safety hazards, visual nuisances, or conditions
conducive to the attraction of insects, rodents, or other pests.
6. 8 Stormwater Management
A. Purposes
The purposes of these stormwater management regulations are to:
1. Protect public health, safety, and general welfare from threats of runoff on
downstream properties, and promote the goals and objectives of the Plan of
Conservation and Development with respect to Brookfield’s water resources.
2. Preserve the pre-development site hydrology to the extent practical in order
to maintain stream base flow conditions, maintain groundwater recharge, and
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
151
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
minimize flooding, erosion, and the effects from runoff on downstream
properties.
3. Minimize the sources and amounts of pollution transported by stormwater
runoff to wetlands, watercourses, groundwater, and other natural resources, and
minimize impacts to downstream properties.
4. Encourage appropriate operation, monitoring, and maintenance of site
stormwater conditions and facilities to perpetuate these purposes over time.
B. Applicability
These Regulations shall apply to any new development and to modifications to existing
land uses that result in the disturbance of 20,000 square feet or more of land, or any
development where stormwater will discharge to a wetland or watercourse. For such
uses, a Stormwater Management Plan conforming to the provisions of Section 6.8(C)
below.
C. Stormwater Management Plan
1. A Stormwater Management Plan (“SWM Plan”) prepared in accordance with
these Regulations is required to be include as part of the site plan for all
applicable developments.
2. Guiding Principles: The SWM Plan shall be consistent with the purposes of
Subsection 6.8(A) above, the principles and guidance set forth in the 2004
Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, and sound engineering and site
planning practices, including known low impact development (LID) best
management practices (BMPs). Bioretention techniques are preferred.
3. The SWM Plan shall include, at a minimum, the following components. All
documents included in such Plan shall be signed and sealed by the professional
engineer by or under whose direction the SWM Plan was prepared.
a. A stormwater management evaluation and design report, as described
below.
b. A stormwater management system improvement plan, as described
below.
c. A narrative describing the sequence of construction of stormwater
management system improvements.
d. A program for operation, monitoring, and maintenance of the
stormwater management system, including scheduling of operation,
monitoring, and maintenance activities, and observable physical signs of
significant inadequate maintenance or function of the stormwater
management system.
4. The stormwater management evaluation and design report shall include:
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
152
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. An evaluation of existing site, and relevant off-site, conditions that may
affect or be affected by the selection, design, location, and operation of
measures and facilities for the proposed SWM system. Such conditions
shall include, as applicable:
i. Wetlands and vernal pools
ii. Watercourses and drainageways
iii. Drainage patterns
iv. Depth to groundwater/ledge
v. Soils, with special regard to infiltration capacity, erodibility, and
runoff computations
vi. Topography and slopes
vii. Vegetation
b. An evaluation of existing and proposed post-development site, and
relevant off-site, hydrology; such evaluation shall include for all scenarios:
i. Identification of the location, direction, manner of conveyance,
and contributing area for all stormwater runoff within the site,
exiting the site, and, where flow characteristics (which include
increases in peak flowrates amongst other characteristics) are
altered as a result of the subject development, off-site until the
runoff will discharge to a receiving watercourse or off-site
maintained conveyance system where the applicant has secured
appropriate permission accounting for the altered characteristics
of the discharge.
ii. Calculate estimated discharges at all identified locations for the
2-, 10-, 25-, and 100-year storm events.
iii. Evaluation of the effects (e.g. travel paths, flow and ponding
depths, flow velocities, facilities impacted, hydrologic assumptions)
of stormwater facilities being overwhelmed during the 100-year
storm event.
c. A discussion of the particular stormwater treatment and control
measures proposed in association with the subject development. Such
discussion shall include the reasoning, in relation to the purposes,
requirements, and guidance of these Regulations, for the selection and,
as appropriate, design of the particular measures proposed.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
153
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
d. Supporting background, observations, assumptions, references,
calculations, and other pertinent information regarding the design of the
proposed SWM system treatment and control measures.
5. The stormwater management system improvement plan shall:
a. Be designed to provide zero net increase in peak discharge to
receiving watercourses and, as may be applicable, onto adjacent
properties for the 2-, 10-, 25-, and 100-year storm events unless it is
sufficiently demonstrated that there will be no significant deleterious
effects downstream as a result of any peak discharge increase.
b. Be designed to treat the Water Quality Volume (runoff from the first inch
of rainfall) from the subject developed area.
c. Conveyance systems shall be designed at a minimum in accordance
with applicable provisions of the latest edition and amendments of the
Connecticut DEEP Drainage Manual.
d. Properly depict and detail the various stormwater management (and
related) measures, facilities, and improvements proposed to adequately
provide for evaluation for purposes of these Regulations and construction
of the same.
e. Incorporate appropriate vegetation in proposed measures wherever
practical.
f. Incorporate appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures in
accordance with Section 6.6.
g. Stormwater management facilities which may be visible from streets or
other public areas shall appropriately take aesthetics into consideration in
their selection and design.
h. Where the proposed development involves modifications or
disturbance of existing developed area, as related to the extents of the
same, the Commission may take into additional consideration site and
project-specific factors such as physical constraints, age and condition of
existing stormwater management facilities, and relative project scope in
the application of the stormwater management regulations set forth in this
Section.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
154
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6.9 Outdoor Display, Dining, and Storage Areas
A. Outdoor Sales, Display, and Storage
1. Outdoor display of goods shall be permitted by use and zone as follows:
a. Residential Zones (R-7, R-15, R-40, R-60, R-80, R-100): Nothing may be
displayed outside of a house as a result of a home occupation.
b. Commercial establishments: Outdoor sales, display, or storage of goods
shall be approved by special permit as a primary or accessory use. Sales,
display, and storage activities must occur at least 35’ from the shoulder of
the road, not in an area dedicated for parking, and may not obstruct
walkways or sidewalks.
c. Industrial establishments: Outdoor sales, display, or storage of goods or
materials shall be approved by special permit as a primary or accessory
use. Storage or display of products or materials used in process or for sale
must not be in the front setback or in any area reserved for parking, or
walkways or sidewalks, and may not obstruct walkways or sidewalks.
i. Outdoor storage of raw, unfinished, or scrap materials shall not be
permitted in any area visible from the lot line or any public right of
way. Any storage of such materials shall be screened from public
view by means of fencing or evergreen vegetation.
B. Outdoor Dining
1. Outdoor dining areas shall be permitted by use and zone as follows:
a. Residential Zones: outdoor dining areas shall not be permitted in any
commercial establishment located in a Residential Zone.
b. Commercial Zones (C-1, C-2, CG-N, CG-S, MC): outdoor dining areas
must be located at least 35’ from the shoulder of the road, not in any area
dedicated for parking, and may not obstruct walkways or sidewalks. Any
outdoor dining area shall be enclosed by a fence, velvet rope, or similar
barrier. Provision of overhead weather protection above outdoor dining
areas is encouraged.
c. Town Center District: outdoor dining areas may be located within the
front setback or on sidewalks within public rights of way. Such areas may
not be located alongside vehicle accessways, must not obstruct
walkways or sidewalks, and must include overhead weather protection.
Outdoor dining areas in the Town Center District shall conform to all
standards and requirements of Appendix 2 – TCD Design Guidelines.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
155
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6.10 Fences and Walls
A. Location and Design Standards
1. Fences under eight feet in height may be constructed in any residential zoning
district without Zoning Approval. Fences eight feet or higher in height require
Zoning Approval prior to construction and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance
after construction. A site plan sketch is required with the application for fences
eight feet or higher in height to document that the fence will be located on the
subject lot.
2. Fences constructed in such a manner as to inhibit visibility through the fence
(e.g., lattice, slats, panels, boards, etc.) shall not exceed eight feet in height. All
other fence types shall not exceed 12’ in height.
3. If a fence has a “finished” side, (i.e., the side opposite from the horizontal
supports to which it is applied), this side must face to the exterior of the lot.
Fences may be either a full or partial visual barrier. Their material and color shall
be in harmony with the design of buildings on the lot and the surrounding area
and dwellings, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
4. Fences shall be constructed in such a manner and of such materials as to
prevent injury to those coming in contact with said fencing. Barbed wire, razor
wire, or other similar types of fencing are specifically prohibited in all zones.
5. Suitable animal fencing may be employed in conjunction with the regulations
concerning “noncommercial livestock and poultry” of Section 3.8 when
specifically approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
6. Fences shall be kept in good repair or replaced when they become prone to
collapse or visual deterioration. Fences shall not be placed in such a manner as
to inhibit lines of sight or otherwise effect traffic safety.
7. Stone walls shall be considered a historic and scenic asset and shall be
preserved in new development to the maximum extent possible.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
156
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6.11 Architectural Guidelines
A. Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose of this section to provide general guidelines on the design of
buildings and structures with the objective of promoting development projects
that preserve and improve the appearance, beauty and character of the
community.
It is the goal of the Commission to foster economic development by
encouraging the harmonization of design and appearance across Brookfield’s
commercial districts and to create welcoming and attractive gateways to the
Town Center District.
It is also the goal of the Commission to minimize the impacts of the Town’s
commercial uses on adjoining residential areas; thereby protecting the property
values of both adjoining commercial properties as well as adjoining residential
zones.
B. Background
During the preparation of the Plan of Conservation and Development in 2000,
surveys and considerable public comment indicated a high degree of
dissatisfaction with the physical appearance of many structures within the Town’s
Commercial and Industrial zoning districts. The public consensus was that
building design should follow traditional New England architectural design and
style concepts, and that modern, monolithic structures were not compatible with
the desire for more historic architectural themes. This consensus was reaffirmed
in subsequent plans, studies, including the Four Corners Revitalization Plan
prepared in 2012, the establishment of the Brookfield Design Review Team in
2013, and the 2015 update of the Plan of Conservation and Development. This
consensus is consistent with the stated zoning purpose of protecting and
conserving the character of the town.
C. Applicability and Procedure
Any Site Plan or Special Permit application for a non-residential or mixed-use
structure proposed in any zoning district shall conform to the architectural
guidelines set forth in Section 6.11(D - F) below, except if such use is proposed
within the Town Center District. Uses or structures proposed in the Town Center
District shall instead conform to the standards, guidelines, and procedures of the
TCD Design Guideline, presented in Appendix 2 of these Regulations.
1. The Zoning Commission shall make a determination of whether the design of
any use or structure(s) conforms with these standards.
2. In the case of any proposed use or structure to be located outside of the Town
Center District, the Land Use Department professional staff and/or its designee
shall evaluate the application’s general conformance with the architectural
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
157
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
guidelines and standards set forth below. The Zoning Commission may refer to
such evaluation in its decision making regarding the application.
3. In the case of a proposed use or structure to be located within the Town
Center District, the Design Review Team shall consider the proposed
development and make recommendations relative to the conformance of the
proposed site plan with the TCD Design Guidelines and Standards Manual, in
accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 3.0 of that document.
4. In the case of a proposed use or structure to be located in a Commercial or
Industrial zone (including the C-1, C-2, C-GS, C-GN, I-1, CP or MC districts) the
applicant shall schedule a pre-application meeting.
a. Land Use Department professional staff and/or its designee will meet
with the applicant to discuss the incorporation of the guidelines and
standards set forth below. Land Use Department staff will keep notes of
the discussion and prepare a summary of the meeting outcomes.
b. Land Use Department staff and/or its designee will submit the summary
of meeting outcomes from its pre-application review meeting with the
Applicant, and its recommendations relative to the proposed
development to the Zoning Commission. Such recommendations are
advisory in nature only. The Applicant should make any adjustments he or
she deems appropriate to the proposed site plan based on the feedback
from the pre-application review meeting in advance of formal submittal
to the Zoning Commission.
c. The Zoning Commission will refer to the advisory recommendations of
Land Use Department Staff and/or designee in its decision making
regarding the application.
D. I-1 and CP Design Standards
The following standards are applicable to Site Plan and Special Permit applications in
the I-1 and CP districts.
1. Relationship of buildings to site
a. The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition along the
streetscape an adjoining properties, safe pedestrian movement and
adequate public parking area;
b. Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district,
the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and
existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings;
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
158
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
c. Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by
exterior alterations shall be underground.
2. Building design
a. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the
quality of its design and relationship to surroundings.
b. Buildings shall be in scale with permanent neighboring development.
c. Predominant exterior building materials on street-facing facades shall
be high quality materials, including, but not limited to, brick, wood, stone,
or textured concrete masonry units. Building materials shall be selected for
suitability to the type of building and the design in which they are used,
and shall be of durable quality.
d. Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets
shall have good proportion and relationships to one another and the
overall building structure.
e. Building facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth
tone colors. The use of high intensity colors or fluorescent colors is
prohibited.
f. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or
buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious
with the building, or they shall be located as not to be visible from any
public ways.
E. C-1 and C-2 Design Standards
The following standards are applicable to Site Plan and Special permit applications in
the C-1 and C-2 districts.
1. Relationship of buildings to site
a. The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition along the
streetscape an adjoining properties, safe pedestrian movement and
adequate public parking area;
b. Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district,
the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and
existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings;
c. Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by
exterior alterations shall be underground.
2. Building design
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
159
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. Architectural style is not restricted; however, traditional New England
architectural themes are preferred. Evaluation of the appearance of a
project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to
surroundings.
b. Buildings shall be in scale with permanent neighboring development.
c. The main entrance façade shall be designed in a manner to clearly
distinguish it from other façades and to define the consumer entry. This
faced shall contain some of the following elements to add scale to the
entry:
- canopy
- gables and dormers
- pilasters
- display windows
- outdoor seating area
- recesses or projections in keeping with the scale of the building
- peaked roof
- unique architectural details in keeping with the overall building
design
- other features designed to add scale and visual interest to this
façade
d. Building designs shall not present large, blank, continuous planes of a
single material towards primary accessways or public rights of way. Such
building walls shall be designed with architectural features and/or varying
materials that break up large building volumes and should incorporate
fenestration.
e. Selection of building materials and colors shall be compatible with and
complement the building design, the appearance of adjacent buildings,
and the Town as a whole. The number of different materials on the
exterior of the building shall be limited in order to avoid unnecessary visual
complexity or a cluttered appearance.
f. The use of traditional building materials and historic Colonial color
palettes is preferred; the use of vinyl or aluminum siding or exterior
insulation and finish systems is discouraged.
g. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or
buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious
with the building, or they shall be located as not to be visible from any
public ways.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
160
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
h. Accessory buildings and functions (e.g. trash containers, storage sheds,
and emergency generators) shall be screened from public view with
materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be located as not to
be visible from any public ways.
i. Garage doors and loading areas shall be screened from view from
public ways. If a garage door or entrance facing a public right of way is
integral to the building’s design and functioning, the garage door shall
have a complimentary design to the building’s architecture as a whole,
and shall use materials compatible with that design and the building’s
material palette.
F. CG-N and CG-S Design Standards
The following standards are applicable to Site Plan and Special permit applications in
the CG-N and CG-S districts. These districts are intended to create an attractive
entrance to the Town Center District, while encouraging coordinated development
with high design standards. The goal is to promote compact development that has a
scale and form consistent with the natural landforms of the site and character of the
Town.
1. Relationship of buildings to site
a. The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the
streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian
movement and parking area;
b. Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district,
the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and
existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings;
c. All buildings shall be oriented to create usable, safe and attractive
pedestrian spaces, preserve significant site features and minimize the
appearance of parking areas.
d. Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by
exterior alterations shall be underground.
2. Building design
a. Architectural style is not restricted; however, traditional New England
architectural themes are preferred. Evaluation of the appearance of a
project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to
surroundings.
b. Buildings shall be in scale with permanent neighboring development. In
the case of the first new structure in an area which has been designed for
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
161
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a particular character, the design shall reflect the desired high quality,
welcoming gateway
c. The main entrance façade of individual buildings shall be designed in a
manner to clearly distinguish it from other facades and to define the
consumer entry. This faced shall contain some of the following elements to
add scale to the entry:
- canopy
- gables and dormers
- pilasters
- display windows
- outdoor seating area
- recesses or projections in keeping with the scale of the building
- peaked roof
- unique architectural details in keeping with the overall building
design
- other features designed to addscale and visual interest to this
façade
d. Building designs shall not present large, blank, continuous planes of a
single material towards primary accessways, public rights of way, or
internal access drives, to the extent practicable. Such building walls shall
be designed with architectural features and/or varying materials that
break up large building volumes, and should incorporate fenestration.
e. Building materials shall consist of high quality materials, including, but
not limited to, brick, wood, stone, or textured concrete masonry units.
Building materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of building
and the design in which they are used, and shall be of durable quality.
The number of different materials on the exterior of the building shall be
limited in order to avoid unnecessary visual complexity or a cluttered
appearance.
f. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or
buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious
with the building, or they shall be located as not to be visible from any
public ways.
g. Accessory buildings and functions (e.g. trash containers, storage sheds,
and emergency generators) shall be screened from public view with
materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be located as not to
be visible from any public ways or internal access drives.
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
162
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
h. Garage doors and loading areas shall be screened from public view
from public ways or internal access drives. If a garage door or entrance
facing a public right of way is integral to the building’s design and
functioning, the garage door shall have a complimentary design to the
building’s architecture as a whole, and shall use materials compatible
with that design and the building’s material palette.
6.12 Neighborhood Anti-Blight
A. Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to promote and preserve the general health, safety
and welfare of the residents and property owners of Brookfield by regulating and
preventing, reducing or eliminating litter, junk, trash rubbish, refuse and debris, and
other blight or potential blight in the township through the prevention or elimination of
certain environmental causes of blight or blighting factors which exist or which may in
the future exist in the Town. The regulation is also necessary to prevent any detrimental
effect upon the property values of neighboring properties.
B. Regulation
1. Unless otherwise determined by the Commission, uses, items, or materials to be
specifically prohibited from placement within any residential front yard are:
a. A “junkyard” as defined in Section 2 of these regulations.
b. Litter, junk, trash, rubbish, refuse or debris of any kind.
c. The parking, storage or accumulation of non-motorized vehicles or
conveyances not usable for the purposes for which they were
manufactured, or parts or components thereof.
d. The outdoor storage or accumulation of appliances, televisions or
furniture, or parts or components thereof.
e. The parking of any vehicle except within the designated driveways and
turn-arounds.
f. The parking or storage of mobile homes not meeting the minimum
standards for inhabitation by humans.
g. The parking, storage or accumulation of trailers or watercraft not usable
for the purposes for which they were manufactured, including parts or
components thereof.
h. The storage or accumulation of:
2019-April-19
Article 6 – General Standards
163
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
i. building materials as defined in Section 2 of these regulations
(except for a project of specified duration for which a valid
building permit has been issued),
ii. home or garden supplies in bulk or containerized; and
iii. similar materials.
Such items or materials do not include firewood or garbage containers
awaiting refuse removal by an authorized waste hauler within fourteen
(14) days.
2. Side and Rear Yards
Items and materials indicated in Section 6.12(B)(1) above may be permitted in
residential side and rear yards provided that they are screened from adjacent
properties or from visible roadways by dense tree/shrubs, fencing, or other appropriate
screening devices.
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
164
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
7.1 Temporary Events
Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent a church, school, civic association, social
club, volunteer fire department, or other nonprofit organization located in the Town of
Brookfield from holding a fair, carnival, circus, horse show, athletic meet, or similar event
on its own premises for a period not to exceed seven consecutive days and the profits
of which are for the sole benefit of such organization or its civic, religious, or
philanthropic purposes. The Commission may issue a permit to any of the abovenamed
organizations located in the Town of Brookfield to hold an event as described
and limited in the preceding sentence upon other premises than those of such
organization.
The Commission or the ZEO may grant a permit to conduct an event, sale, or promotion
on the commercial/industrial property of an applicant for a period not to exceed 30
consecutive days not more than twice annually without the permission of the
Commission. Such event(s) may be temporarily housed within a tent, which may not be
located closer than 20 feet from a property line. In the event that a tent is placed
within an area dedicated to parking, a corresponding area for parking must be
temporarily provided elsewhere. Provisions must also be made for adequate traffic
control at the location. For temporary event signs, please refer to Section 6.2.
7.2 Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
A. Intent and Purpose
It is the intent and purpose of these Regulations to accommodate the communication
needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the community, subject to jurisdictional limitations imposed by
Section 16-50g et seq. of the CGS. These regulations are necessary in order to:
1. Facilitate the provision of wireless communication services to residents and
businesses
2. Minimize the adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting
standards
3. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
structural standards and setback requirements
4. Minimize any health hazards associated with use of such equipment
5. Reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community by maximizing
the use of existing and approved suitable facilities, existing water towers, or
similar buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
165
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6. Minimize the perception of diminution of adjoining property values due to the
location of such devices
7. Review the electromagnetic radiation interference to receptor devices on
adjoining properties to ensure consistency with the requirements of the Federal
Communications Commission
8. Enable the Commission to find that the above purposes are met together with
the requirements of Section 8.5 and this Section in approving any Special Permit
or Site Plan Modification application
B. Jurisdiction and Applicability
1. The Commission asserts jurisdiction over the siting, construction, and
modification of any and all telecommunications towers and telecommunications
equipment not designated as exclusive jurisdiction of the Connecticut Siting
Council under the authority of 16-50g et seq. and as defined by CFR Title 47, Part
22, as amended.
2. If by any act of the Connecticut General Assembly or any other legislative
body or rule-making entity any type of telecommunications tower or
telecommunications equipment shall cease to be designated the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Connecticut Siting Council, jurisdiction over the siting, design,
construction, and modification of such tower or equipment shall henceforth be
asserted by the Commission and governed under these Regulations.
C. General Standards
In addition to the requirements for special permit outlined in Section 8.5, the following
guidelines, standards, procedures, and considerations shall apply.
1. Location Criteria:
a. Distance: Any tower should be constructed a minimum distance of one
mile from any existing towers.
b. Lot Size and Setbacks: Any site should be the minimum lot size required
for the zoning district in which it is located and should be of sufficient size
to accommodate a setback from all adjoining property liens equal to the
maximum height of the tower and all appendages plus 25 feet.
c. Scenic Ridge Lines: Antenna towers should not be sited on any property
that may be designated as a scenic ridgeline by the Planning Commission
pursuant to the Plan of Conservation and Development.
d. Co-Location: Antenna(s) should be located on existing towers where
available. If no existing towers are available, antennas may be located
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
166
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
on new towers or other structures, whichever provides the greatest
amount of screening.
e. Building and Roof-Mounted Antennas: Building or rooftop-mounted
antenna(e) should be located or screened so as not to be visibly intrusive
from abutting public streets or adjoining residences. The area of the
equipment enclosures and other structures should not occupy more than
15 percent of the roof area. If the equipment is located on the roof,
setbacks from the roof edge should be ten feet or ten percent of the roof
depth, whichever is greater. Antenna(s) installed on buildings should be
compatible with the underlying structure.
2. Plans and Specifications: Plans and specifications for the antenna and the
antenna tower shall be prepared and signed by a Connecticut licensed
Professional Engineer and shall be designed to withstand sustained winds of at
least 80 miles per hour.
3. Site Simulations: The Commission may require the applicant to provide
simulations of tower locations and impacts as part of the review of the special
permit application. Such simulations may entail the erection of balloons or other
devices necessary to visualize the proposed facility.
4. Consolidation of Facilities: The proposed support structure shall be designed for
additional facilities including other wireless communication companies and local
police, fire, and ambulance needs unless it is determined to be technically
unfeasible. The Commission may require independent outside evaluation of
such determination at the applicant’s expense. The applicant shall make
payment for such expenditures prior to the decision by the Commission on the
application.
5. Distance Requirement: No tower may be constructed within a one-mile radius
of an existing tower.
6. Lot Size and Setbacks: The minimum site shall be the minimum lot size required
for the zoning district in which it is located, and the site shall be of sufficient size
to accommodate a setback from all adjoining property lines equal to the
maximum height of the tower and all appendages plus 25 feet.
7. Antenna Size: Directional or panel antenna(s) shall not exceed six feet in
height or two feet in width. Omnidirectional antenna(s) shall not exceed 20 feet
in height or seven inches in diameter. Satellite and microwave dish antenna(s)
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
167
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
shall not exceed two feet six inches in diameter in residential districts and six feet
in diameter in all other districts.
8. Height Limitations: Any proposed radio or television antenna tower, earth
station, dish, or other such device shall not exceed the allowable building height
plus 12 feet in residential zones or 100 feet in height, above existing grade, in any
other permitted zone.
9. Fencing: A fence with a height of eight feet shall be required around the
tower and its ancillary equipment.
10. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be required around the fence, which shall
consist of a row of evergreen trees planted not less than ten feet on center. The
evergreen plantings shall be a minimum height of six feet at planting and shall
reach a minimum height of 15 feet at maturity. Such screening shall be
maintained by the owner of the property to ensure its effectiveness.
11. Scenic Ridge Lines: Antenna towers on any property that may be designated
as a scenic ridge line by the Planning Commission pursuant to the Plan of
Conservation and Development are prohibited.
12. Design Compatibility: Structures shall be designed to be in harmony with the
surrounding neighborhood properties and with due consideration for the impact
that the tower will have on these properties, i.e., structures in residential districts
must have characteristics such as roof lines, siding, fenestration, etc. that are
compatible with residential structures in the immediate area as determined by
the Commission. The Commission may impose conditions that foster a
compatible design of the tower with the site and surrounding environment.
13. New Towers: Only monopole antennas shall be permitted as new towers and
only after exhausting co-locations on existing towers or buildings. The
economical situation associated with a site should not be a reason for
exhausting a site.
14. Existing Towers: Antenna(s) shall be located on existing towers where
available. If no existing towers are available, antennas may be located on new
towers or other structures, whichever provides the greatest amount of screening.
15. Associated Equipment: The related unmanned equipment areas and/or
building shall not contain more than 750 square feet of gross floor area or be
more than 12 feet in height. Manned equipment incidental to the business
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
168
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
office, maintenance depot, and vehicle storage is prohibited. All site utilities shall
be provided underground.
16. Building and Roof-Mounted Antennas: Building or rooftop-mounted
antenna(s) shall be located or screened so as not to be visibly intrusive from
abutting public streets or adjoining residences. The area of the equipment
enclosures and other structures shall not occupy more than 15 percent of the
roof area. If the equipment is located on the roof, setbacks from the roof edge
shall be ten feet or ten percent of the roof depth, whichever is greater.
Antenna(s) installed on buildings shall be compatible with the underlying
structure.
17. Noise: All operations on site, including the operation of generating
equipment, shall comply with all state and local noise regulations.
18. Interference: Subject to Federal Communication Commission regulations and
requirements, any communications equipment or devices shall not cause
electromagnetic interference with receptor devices located on adjoining or
nearby properties, nor shall they interfere with any existing or proposed public
safety communications activities.
19. Illumination: Illumination shall not be permitted on the tower unless required
by the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Agency, or
Connecticut Siting Council.
D. Applications
In addition to the requirements for special permit outlined in Section 8.5, the following
application requirements shall apply, if required by law.
1. A description of the proposed tower/antenna and associated equipment
including height, design features, structural analysis, access roads, and power
lines, if any
2. A map showing the extent of planned coverage within the Town of Brookfield
and the location of the proposed facilities
3. Plan and elevation drawings showing the proposed tower/antenna,
associated equipment, antennas, and other structures on site
4. A topographic profile showing the proposed tower and its associated
equipment
5. A description of the slopes, wetlands, watercourses, scenic vista, and other
environmental characteristics of the site; any historically designated areas of the
site; and the impact that the tower will have on these resources
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
169
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6. An architectural rendering of the view of the tower/antenna from adjoining
properties
7. A statement from the applicant shall be required, if appropriate, or a report or
certification from the applicant or his engineer shall be required if that is more
appropriate, containing a description of the siting criteria and the process by
which other possible sites were considered and eliminated.
8. A statement from the applicant shall be required, if appropriate, or a report or
certification from the applicant or his engineer shall be required if that is more
appropriate, of technological alternatives and their costs for the proposed tower
and a statement containing the reasons for the choice of the proposed facility.
9. A statement from the applicant shall be required, if appropriate, or a report or
certification from the applicant or his engineer shall be required if that is more
appropriate, describing the impact on human health, if any, of signal frequency
and power density at the proposed site to be transmitted and/or received by
the proposed facility.
10. The Commission may waive any of these requirements for an application for
a modification or change to an existing tower if it finds that the modification or
addition will not have a significant impact.
11. All applications for a Special Permit to construct and operate wireless
communications towers in a residential district shall include an inventory of all
antenna equipment and apparatus not contained within fully enclosed buildings
and the power and frequency of all transmission to be broadcast from the
facility.
E. New Antenna
Any proposal within the jurisdiction of the Commission to add an antenna to an existing
tower or building shall require a Site Plan Modification as outlined in Section 8.4. In
addition to the requirements of the Site Plan Modification, applications shall include the
information listed in Sections 7.2(D)1-3, 6, 8-9, and 11 above. Applications for multiple
antenna(s) on an existing tower may be submitted in one Site Plan Modification
application.
F. Termination or Nonuse Removal
A facility not in use for more than one year or whose use is terminated shall be removed
by the service facility owner. This removal shall be completed within 90 days of the end
of the one-year period. Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its previous
appearance. The owner shall submit an annual report indicating that the facility is still
in use.
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
170
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
G. Bonding
The Commission may require the posting of a bond to:
? secure compliance with the approved installation of all towers and antenna(s);
and
? to ensure the timely and proper removal of said tower and/or antenna upon
termination or nonuse.
7.3 Firing Ranges, Target Shooting, and the Discharge of Firearms for
Recreational Purposes
A. Prohibition
Firearm activities are prohibited in all zones unless an application for a Firearm Plan is
submitted to and approved by the Commission.
B. Firearm Plan Requirement
1. No Firearm Plan shall be approved by the Commission unless the use of the
property for firearm activities:
a. Predates November 8, 2000, the effective date of this section, and;
b. Constitutes a valid nonconforming use as provided by law.
2. No Firearm Plan shall be approved by the Commission unless it incorporates
the following structures:
a. A sound attenuation enclosure surrounding the firing discharge area,
which shall reduce the noise measured at the property lines to the
standards outlined in Section 6.7D of these Regulations and any noise
regulations provided by local, state, or federal statute or regulation,
whichever more restrictive
b. A target barrier which shall not be less than 12 feet in height and shall
be backed by an earthen berm of four feet or more in thickness, which
structure shall be set back not less than 30 feet from any property line and
shall be sufficient to act as a complete deterrent to any ammunition used
on the property from passing onto an adjoining property
c. An elevation-limiting device, which shall prevent any round from being
fired above the target barrier
d. The area in which firearm activities may take place shall be completely
surrounded by means of a fence or wall not less than four feet above the
ground at any point, and all openings in the fence or wall shall be
secured by a gate or door equipped with a self-closing, self-latching
mechanism that is inaccessible from the outside to small children. A
natural barrier is not permitted as an enclosure.
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
171
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. An application for approval of a Firearm Plan must contain at a minimum, the
following documents:
a. A Firearm Plan, which shall consist of a Class A-2 survey of the property,
in recordable form, prepared by a licensed and certified land surveyor. In
addition to the standard requirements for a Class A-2 survey, the Firearm
Plan shall contain the following information:
i. The location of all existing and proposed structures on the
property;
ii. The location of all existing and proposed locations of firearm
activities;
iii. The location of all structures required by this Section, particularly
those enumerated in subsection B(2) above;
iv. A written narrative detailing all restrictions imposed by this
Section particularly those enumerated in subsection B(3)[b] below;
v. Elevations of all existing and proposed site structures;
vi. The distances of the existing and proposed firearm activities from
structures on adjoining properties;
vii. The location of any wetlands, underground aquifers, and
underground aquifer wells providing drinking water, including the
distances of the existing and proposed firearm activities from such
areas and the depth of such aquifer resources; and
viii. Evidence that the range is constructed in such a manner that
all shot, debris, and discharge are confined to the target area and
that there is no danger or risk of injury to persons and property.
b. An agreement from the applicant, to be recorded on the Land
Records, that firearm activities on the property will be subject to the
following limitations:
i. Firearm activities will be conducted on the property only by the
owners and/or occupants thereof and their invited guests;
ii. There will be no charge or fee for the conduct of firearm activities
on the property;
iii. The property owner must be present during the conduct of
firearm activities on the property at all times;
iv. There shall not be more than four individuals simultaneously
conducting firearm activities on the property;
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
172
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
v. All individuals conducting firearm activities on the property must
be duly licensed to carry and discharge firearms in accordance
with state and federal law;
vi. No firearm activities shall be conducted on Sundays or on legal
holidays;
vii. No firearm activities shall be conducted except between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; and
viii. No ammunition may be used in connection with any firearm
activities except that which can be safely discharged in
accordance with state and federal law and the provisions of this
Section and be stopped by the target barrier.
c. An enumeration of the specific firearm activities to be conducted on
the property, to be detailed on the Firearm Plan
d. A plan of operation for the property, detailed on the Firearm Plan,
including an enumeration of the safety precautions and procedures to be
implemented
e. A letter report from the Chief of the Brookfield Police Department
stating that the Firearm Plan has been reviewed and that the plan
incorporates adequate safety measures
f. A plan for the property, detailed on the Firearm Plan, to ensure that no
ammunition remains, pellets, spent shells, spent shot, target debris, or other
residual material, especially that containing lead, is allowed to enter any
watercourse or wetlands or accumulate on the property in violation of
any federal, state, or local rule, regulation, or statute
g. If lead shot is to be utilized, a lead discharge permit for the property,
issued by the Connecticut DEEP;
h. Copies of all required governmental firearm licenses issued to the
applicants for the firearm activities to be conducted on the site
i. A written statement, under oath, from the applicant that the property
had frequently and regularly been used for the specific firearm activities
to be conducted on the property for at least the one-year period prior to
the adoption of these regulations.
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
173
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
7.4 Small Wind Turbines
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to accommodate distributed generation/small wind
energy systems whose primary purpose is to supply electrical power to the structures or
facilities located on the same lot while minimizing any adverse visual, safety, and
environmental impacts of the system. Distributed generation/small wind energy systems
whose primary purpose is to generate power for commercial purposes or augment the
supply of power to utilities are prohibited in the Town of Brookfield.
In addition, this section provides a permitting process for small wind energy systems to
ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements and standards established
herein.
The regulations and permitting process are the same for all zones in the Town of
Brookfield.
B. Permits Required
1. Special Permit: No small wind energy system or testing apparatus shall be
erected, constructed, installed, or modified without first obtaining a Special
Permit.
2. Building Permit: After Special Permit approval as stated above, a building
permit is required for the installation, construction, or modification of a small wind
energy system.
C. Procedure for Review
1. Application: An application for Special Permit shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.5 with the following modifications:
a. Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant’s property
drawn to scale, including names of adjoining property owners
b. Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the
property shown to scale
c. Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations, guy
anchors, and associated equipment
d. Setback requirements as outlined in this section
e. The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the property
f. Any overhead utility lines
g. Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer,
model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type (freestanding or guyed)
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
174
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
h. If the small wind energy system will be connected to the power grid,
documentation shall be provided regarding the notification of the intent
with the utility regarding the applicant’s installation of a small wind energy
system
i. System/tower foundation blueprints or drawings
j. system/tower blueprint or drawings
k. Sound-level analysis prepared by the wind turbine manufacturer or
qualified engineer
l. Confirmation that the manner of installation will conform to the National
Electrical Code (usually provided by the manufacturer)
m. Estimated costs of physically removing the small wind energy system to
comply with surety standards
n. Evidence of compliance or nonapplicability with Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) requirements
o. The site plan must be stamped by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Connecticut
p. Documentation describing the containment plan for ice that may
accumulate on the turbine surfaces such that the ice will not become a
hazard
q. Copies of certified mail receipts and copy of the Neighbors/Adjoining
Property Owner Notification as provided by Section 8.11E
r. Documentation from public utility company noting interconnection
approval
D. Standards
1. Setbacks
a. Small wind energy system shall be set back a distance equal to 110
percent of the total height from:
1. Any public road right-of-way unless written permission is granted
by the governmental entity with jurisdiction over the road.
2. Any overhead utility lines.
3. All property lines unless the affected landowner provides written
permission through a recorded easement allowing the small wind
energy system’s fall zone to overlap with the abutting property.
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
175
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
4. Any travel ways to include but not be limited to driveways,
parking lots, nature trails, or sidewalks.
b. Small wind energy systems must meet all setbacks for principal
structures for the zoning district in which the system is located.
c. The setback shall be measured to the center of the tower’s base.
d. Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small wind
energy system setback requirements.
2. Tower
a. Wind turbines may only be attached to freestanding or guy-wired
monopole towers. Lattice towers are explicitly prohibited.
b. The tower height shall not exceed 15 feet above any structure on the
property.
c. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed tower height
does not exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer of the
wind turbine.
3. Sound Level: The small wind energy system shall not exceed 45 decibels using
the A scale (dBA), as measured at the property line, except during short-term
events such as severe wind storms and utility outages.
4. Shadowing/Flicker: Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner that
does not result in significant shadowing or flicker impacts on neighboring
properties. The applicant has the burden of proving that this effect does not
have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses either through
siting or mitigation.
5. Signs: All signs, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the small
wind energy system, except as follows:
a. Appropriate warning signs and placards
b. Signs shall not be more than 2 square feet in size.
6. Code Compliance: The small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable sections of the Connecticut State Building Code.
7. Aviation: The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with all
applicable FAA regulations, including but not limited to markings, placement,
and detection lighting. Evidence of compliance or nonapplicability shall be
submitted with the application.
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
176
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8. Visual Impacts: Small wind energy systems may pose some visual impacts due
to the tower height needed to access the wind resources. The purpose of this
section is to reduce the visual impacts without restricting the owner’s access to
the wind resources.
a. The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and
proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system’s visual impacts will
be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the community. This may
include but not be limited to information regarding site selection, turbine
design or appearance, buffering, and screening of ground-mounted
electrical and control equipment. All electrical conduits shall be
underground.
b. The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the stock color
from the manufacturer or painted with a nonreflective, unobtrusive color
that blends in with the surrounding environment and minimizes ice
buildup.
c. A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such lighting
is required by the FAA. If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a
copy of the FAA determination to establish the required markings and/or
lights for the small wind energy system.
d. All systems shall be located in the rear yard, side yards, or on rooftops,
unless testing clearly demonstrates these locations are not suitable.
9. Utility Connection: A utility connection is necessary if the proposed small wind
energy system is to be connected to the power grid through net metering.
10. Access
a. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled
and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
b. The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts
or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight
feet above the ground.
c. All connections and cabling shall be underground.
11. Clearing: Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation, and maintenance of the small wind
energy system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and
ordinances.
2019-April-19
Article 7 – Miscellaneous Provisions
177
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
7.5 Outdoor Wood-Burning Furnaces
No person shall construct, install, modify, operate, or use an outdoor wood-burning
furnace unless the outdoor wood-burning furnace complies with the requirements of
Section 22a-174k of the CGS, as revised, as well as the following requirements:
? Installation of the outdoor wood-burning furnace is not less than 200 feet
from the nearest residence not serviced by the outdoor wood-burning
furnace.
? Installation of the chimney of the outdoor wood-burning furnace is at a
height that is more than the height of the roof peaks of the residences
that are located within 500 feet of the outdoor wood-burning furnace,
which residences are not serviced by the outdoor wood-burning furnace,
provided the chimney height is not more than 55 feet.
? No other materials are burned in the outdoor wood-burning furnace other
than wood that has not been chemically treated.
? Installation and operation of the outdoor wood-burning furnace is in
accordance with the manufacturer's written instructions provided such
instructions do not conflict with the provisions of this section.
? The outdoor wood-burning furnace shall comply with the 2010
Environmental Protection Agency Phase 2 emission guideline limits or any
subsequent revisions thereof.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
178
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 8 – Procedures
The intent of this Section is to provide applicants, commissioners, and staff a clear
understanding of the procedures required for the most common zoning applications in
order to avoid misunderstandings and unnecessary defects or delays in the application
process. The application requirements and fee schedule are included in Appendices 1
and 3 of these Regulations. All appendices are incorporated into these Regulations and
are a part thereof.
8.1 Preliminary Concept Plan and Pre-Application Review
A. Purpose and Applicability
Applicants proposing projects of a scale or complexity as to require significant expense
in the preparation of Site Plan or Special Permit application materials are encouraged
to request staff and/or Commission pre-application review of a Preliminary Concept
Plan. This pre-application review process is intended to provide informal guidance to
the applicant to:
1. Enhance the applicant’s understanding of the submission requirements,
standards, and provisions of these Regulations
2. Advise the applicant of any known site or utility difficulties or other major areas
of concern that should be addressed in a Site Plan or Special Permit Application
3. Enhance staff and the Commission’s understanding of the goals, constraints,
and considerations of the applicant
4. Avoid unnecessary delays or expense in the processing of subsequent
applications through avoidance of errors, omissions, or misinterpretations of
either substantive or procedural provisions of these Regulations
5. Any pre-application review is for informational purposes only.
B. Submission and Procedures
1. A Preliminary Concept Plan may be submitted to the Land Use Department
and should be accompanied by plans and/or other information as specified in
the Appendix 1. Any omissions in materials submitted with a Preliminary Concept
Plan may hinder Staff and/or the Commission’s ability to provide guidance to the
applicant of potential concerns, conditions, or requirements relevant to any
subsequent application.
2. The Commission, a subcommittee thereof, and/or Land Use and other Town
staff may informally review the Concept Plan for general conformance with
these and other applicable regulations and may request additional information
where deemed necessary.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
179
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. Pre-application review of a Preliminary Concept Plan shall be considered only
informational and advisory in nature; no development rights shall attach to the
review or consideration of any Preliminary Concept Plan.
4. Such review and any results or information obtained from it may not be
appealed under any provision of the CGS and do not imply any final possible
action by the Commission.
5. Such preliminary review shall not constitute or be treated as a substitute for
complying with all requirements of these Regulations when a final plan is
submitted for review as required herein.
6. A Preliminary Concept Plan shall be placed on file in the Land Use Department
for reference purposes only for any subsequent application.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
180
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.2 Zoning Permit
A. Applicability
No building or land shall be occupied or used; the use of an existing building or land
shall not be changed; site work and site improvements shall not be undertaken; and no
building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended, or
enlarged in whole or in part for any purpose, until a Zoning Permit shall have been
issued by the ZEO showing conformance:
1. With these Regulations
2. With all required Zoning, Planning and Inland Wetlands approvals
B. Submission and Procedures
1. An application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by plans and/or
information that complies with the requirements in the Appendix 1 of these
Regulations.
2. If the submitted application materials document to the satisfaction of the ZEO
that the proposed activity or use is in compliance with these Regulations, the ZEO
shall issue a Zoning Permit setting forth the date on which the permit was issued.
3. If the ZEO finds a Zoning Permit application meets all of the requirements of
these Regulations, the ZEO will make best efforts to issue a Zoning Permit within 30
days of the receipt of the completed application.
4. In the event that any Zoning Permit is issued based on incorrect information or
the specific conditions of approval are not adhered to strictly, such Zoning Permit
shall be null and void.
5. Approval of an Application for a Zoning Permit or issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance shall not be construed to constitute compliance with any
other regulation, ordinance, or law or to relieve the applicant from responsibility
to obtain any other required permit thereunder.
6. An application for a Zoning Permit may be withdrawn, in writing, by the
applicant at any time prior to final action.
C. Notice Provisions
In accordance with CGS 8-3(f), the recipient, or their authorized agent, of a Zoning
Permit may publish notice of issuance of the Zoning Permit in order to establish the
appeal period per CGS Section 8-7. Any such notice to be published by the recipient,
or authorized agent, shall contain:
1. A description of the building, use, or structure and its location
2. The identity of the applicant
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
181
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. A statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-7
D. Foundation Survey Required
The property owner shall notify the ZEO of the completion of the foundation of any new
structure or addition thereto within seven days after such completion. It is required that
a Class A-2 boundary survey prepared by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor be filed
with the ZEO showing the foundation location of the new building, structure, or addition.
Such filing would be beneficial to the landowner in helping to ensure that any errors in
location are found at an early time in the construction process.
E. Zoning Permit Expiration
1. Any Zoning Permit issued by the ZEO under the provisions of these Regulations
shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within six months
after issuance of the Zoning Permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or
abandoned for a period of six months after the time of commencing the work.
2. A permit may be renewed up to two times for an additional six months each
time, for a total of twelve additional months, upon filing a written request to do
so.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
182
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.3 Certificate of Zoning Compliance
A. Applicability
1. No structure, land, or premises shall be occupied for use or converted to a
new use until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the ZEO or
his designee.
2. The ZEO shall determine whether any use, building, structure, or alteration for
which a Zoning Permit has been issued conforms in all respects to the Zoning
Regulations.
3. In accordance with CGS 8-3, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a
building, use, or structure subject to these Regulations without certification in
writing by the ZEO that such building, use, or structure is:
a. In conformity with these Regulations; or
b. Is a valid nonconforming building, use or structure under these
Regulations.
B. Procedures
1. An application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be accompanied
by plans and/or other information that complies with the requirements in the
Appendix 1 of these Regulations.
2. The ZEO or his designee will inspect the premises.
3. If all requirements of these Regulations are met, including requirements of
approved site and plot plans, the ZEO will make best efforts to issue the
certificate within 30 days of application.
4. In the event that any permit or certificate is issued based on incorrect
information or the specific conditions of approval are not adhered to strictly,
such permit or certificate shall be null and void.
5. A certificate of zoning compliance shall remain in effect as long as the
specified uses and conditional requirements are properly maintained, but shall
cease whenever such conditions and uses are terminated or no longer
maintained.
C. Notice Provisions
1. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(f), the recipient of a certificate of zoning
compliance may publish notice of issuance of the certificate of zoning
compliance in order to establish the appeal period per CGS Section 8-7.
2. Any such notice to be published by the recipient or authorized agent shall
contain:
a. A description of the building, use, or structure,
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
183
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
b. The location of the building, use, or structure,
c. The identity of the applicant, and
d. A statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Board of
Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-7.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
184
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.4 Site Plan Application
A. Applicability
A Site Plan application shall be submitted for any activity designated as requiring Site
Plan approval in these Regulations.
B. Submission
1. A Site Plan application shall be submitted to the Land Use Department and
shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee.
2. A Site Plan application shall be accompanied by detailed plans, signed and
sealed by an appropriate professional, for review by the Commission and its
designees that comply with the requirements of Appendix 1 of these Regulations.
3. If a site plan application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36
to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the
Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such application is filed with
the Zoning Commission.
4. Upon written request by the applicant, the Commission may waive specific
requirements for application, if, in its sole discretion, it finds that the particular
information is not required or may be deferred to render a decision on the
application.
5. A complete site plan application must be submitted a minimum of ten days
before a regular meeting in order to be considered by the Commission at that
meeting. Nothing in this section shall be construed to extend the time limits for
action as specified in the CGS.
C. Procedures
1. For new construction or other activity considered to be significant in the sole
judgment of the Commission, the Commission may hold a public hearing on the
application in accordance with the requirements of CGS 8-7 and Section 8.11(E)
of these Regulations.
2. The date of receipt for the site plan application shall be determined in
accordance with Section 8.11(B).
3. An incomplete site plan application may be denied in accordance with
Section 8.11(C).
4. All required notices and referrals by the Commission and/or applicant shall be
completed as required by Section 8.11(E).
5. The Commission may refer any Site Plan Application to any Town department,
commission, or other agency in accordance with Section 8.11(F).
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
185
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
6. Whenever a Site Plan application is required in conjunction with another
application requiring a public hearing (such as a Special Permit application or a
Zone Change application):
a. The time period for acting on the Site Plan application shall coincide
with the time period for acting on the related application, and
b. A decision on the application shall be rendered within 65 days after the
close of the public hearing on such other application except that the
applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period
provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not
exceed 65 days.
7. Whenever approval of a Site Plan is the only approval required, a decision on
the application shall be rendered within 65 days after the date of receipt of such
Site Plan application except that the applicant may consent to one or more
extensions of such period provided the total period of any such extension or
extensions shall not exceed 65 days, in accordance with CGS 8-7d.
8. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw
such application.
D. Approval Considerations
In reviewing any site plan under this Section, the Commission shall find that the
application meets all site plan requirements. In addition, the Commission shall consider
whether the site plan fulfills the following objectives:
1. To promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity,
amenity, and other aspects of the general welfare
2. To ensure that the layout of the proposed use shall be in harmony with the
surrounding area and shall contribute to its desirable and orderly development
3. To ensure that traffic generated by the proposed use will not adversely affect
the surrounding area or public health, safety and welfare, and will not disrupt the
orderly movement of vehicles and pedestrians in the area
4. To protect and preserve the supply of potable drinking water by protecting
and preserving subsurface aquifers
E. Commission Action
1. The Commission shall render a decision on such application within the period
of time specified in Section 8.11(D).
2. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Site Plan application, it shall state
upon the record the reasons for its decision.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
186
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. The Commission may approve the plan, approve the plan with modifications
and/or stipulations, or deny the plan in accordance with CGS §8-3.
3. Written notice of the final decision of the Commission shall be sent by certified
mail to the applicant within 15 days of its action.
4. The Commission shall have published in a newspaper with significant
circulation in the Town of Brookfield notice of its final decision within 15 days of its
action. If such notice is not published within the 15-day period, the applicant
may provide for publication of such notice within 10 days of thereafter.
F. Submission of an Approved Plan
When an approval has been granted by the Commission, the applicant shall submit five
sets of final plans, on which all modifications imposed by the Commission as part of the
approval have been clearly indicated and noted in the revision block for signature by
the Chairman of the Commission, within 60 days after approval. One final set of plans
and associated documents shall be submitted in PDF digital format.
G. Modifications to an Approved Site Plan
1. Modifications or amendments to an approved site plan are permitted in
accordance with Section 4.2 of these Regulations.
2. In addition, for those changes as indicated in Section 4.2 that require coming
before the Commission, the ZEO shall have the authority to approve minor
changes to an approved Site Plan if in the judgment of the Zoning Commission
such changes do not materially or substantially alter the character, quality,
density, intensity, types of uses, amenities or other major features of the Site Plan
as approved, and such changes are in conformity to the requirements of these
Regulations
3. If the Zoning Commission determines that changes in the Site Plan, or any
change of use within a building or structure or on a lot, may materially or
substantially alter overall character, quality, density, intensity, uses, amenities,
traffic generation, parking facilities or other major features of the Site Plan as
approved, said modification shall require a new application.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
187
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.5 Special Permit Application
A. Applicability
A Special Permit Application shall be submitted for any activity designated as requiring
Special Permit approval in these Regulations.
B. Pre-Application
Prior to the submission of a Special Permit application to the Commission, the applicant
may request an informal conference with Land Use Department for a pre-application
review with appropriate Town agents and staff. Applicants are encouraged to request
an informal conference prior to preparing application materials in order maximize
efficiency in the application process.
C. Submission
1. A Special Permit application shall be submitted to the Land Use Department
and shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee.
2. A Special Permit application shall be accompanied by detailed plans, signed
and sealed by an appropriate professional, for review by the Commission and its
designees that comply with the requirements of Appendix 1 of these Regulations.
3. The Commission may, in accordance with the requirements of these
Regulations and its Appendices, require the submission of additional information
as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
4. Upon written request by the applicant, the Commission may, by resolution
determine that the required submission of all or a part of the information required
under Appendix 1 is not necessary or may be deferred in order to render a
decision on the application, and need not be submitted.
5. The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that the applicable
criteria in Subsection 8.5E of these Regulations are addressed to the
Commission’s satisfaction.
6. The Commission shall not be required to hear an application relating to the
same request or substantially the same requests more than twice in a 12-month
period.
D. Procedures
1. The date of receipt of the Special Permit application shall be determined in
accordance with Section 8.11(B).
2. An incomplete Special Permit application may be denied in accordance with
Section 8.11(C).
3. All required notices and referrals by the Commission and/or applicant shall be
provided as required by Section 8.11(E).
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
188
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
4. If a Special Permit application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS
Section 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive the applicant shall submit an application for a
permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such
application is filed with the Commission.
5. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Special Permit application.
The Commission and applicant shall provide all required notices and referrals in
accordance with Section 8.11(E).
6. The Commission may refer any Special Permit application to any Town
department, commission, or other agency in accordance with Section 8.11(F).
7. The Commission shall process the Special Permit application within the period
of time provided by CGS Section 8-7d.
8. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw
such application.
E. Approval Criteria
The Commission, in determining the acceptability of the proposed project, shall
consider and evaluate the following criteria:
1. Zoning - Conformance of the proposed project with the Brookfield Zoning
Regulations, including such land use standards and design criteria as may be
included therein, Brookfield Subdivision Regulations (where applicable), and the
Road Ordinance, Town of Brookfield
2. Plan of Conservation and Development - Consistency with one or more of the
goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation
and Development, as amended
3. Environmental Protection and Conservation - Whether appropriate
consideration has been given to the protection, preservation, and/or
enhancement of natural, scenic, historic, and unique resources including, where
appropriate, the use of conservation restrictions to protect and permanently
preserve natural, scenic, historic, or unique features that enhance the character
and environment of the area
4. Neighborhood Compatibility - Whether the proposed use will have a
detrimental effect on neighboring property values
5. Suitable Location - Whether the location and size of the site, the nature and
intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in connection with the use,
and the location of the site with respect to streets giving access to it, are such
that the use will not adversely impact the public health, safety and welfare of
the Town
6. Appropriate Improvements -
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
189
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. Whether the design elements of the proposed development will be
attractive and suitable in relation to the site characteristics, the style of
other buildings in the immediate area, and the existing and probable
future character of the neighborhood in which the use is located
b. Whether the location, nature, and height of buildings, walls, and
fences; planned activities; and the nature and extent of landscaping on
the site will be such that the use shall not hinder or discourage the
appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or
impair the value thereof
c. Whether the proposed use or activity will have an adverse effect upon
the neighboring area resulting from the use of signs, exposed artificial
lights, colored lights of any nature, flashing lights, loudspeakers, or other
noisemaking devices
d. In cases where it is proposed to convert a structure designed and built
originally for other uses, whether the structure is adaptable to the
proposed use from the point of view of public health and safety
7. Suitable Transportation Conditions -
a. Whether the design, location, and specific details of the proposed use
or activity will adversely affect safety in the streets, or unreasonably
increase traffic congestion in the area, or interfere with the pattern of
vehicular circulation in such a manner as to create or augment unsafe
traffic conditions
b. Whether the parking area or areas will be of adequate size for the
particular use and suitably screened from adjoining residential uses, and
whether entrance and exit drives shall be designed so as to prevent traffic
hazards and nuisances
c. Whether the streets and other rights-of-way are or will be of such size,
condition, and capacity (in terms of capacity, width, grade, alignment,
and visibility) to adequately accommodate the traffic to be generated
by the particular proposed use
8. Adequate Public Utilities and Services -
a. Whether the provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, and
stormwater drainage conform to accepted engineering practices,
comply with all standards of the appropriate regulatory authority, and will
not unduly burden the capacity of such proposed and existing facilities
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
190
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
b. Whether the proposed use or activity will provide easy and safe
accessibility for fire apparatus, ambulance and police protection and is
designed and equipped to further the provision of all emergency services
9. Nuisance Avoidance –
a. Whether the design and use incorporate measures to control noise,
light, parking visibility, erosion, water contamination, and stormwater
runoff on the site and in relation to the surrounding area
b. Whether the hours of operation need to be regulated in order to
protect public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and property values
F. Decision Considerations
1. Before the Commission approves a Special Permit application, in its sole
discretion, it shall determine that the application:
a. satisfies the Special Permit criteria in Subsection 8.5(E) of these
Regulations
b. is in conformance with other applicable provisions of these Regulations,
and
c. is consistent and in harmony with the purposes and intent of these
Regulations.
2. When a Special Permit application involves an activity regulated pursuant to
CGS Section 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive, the Commission shall:
a. wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has
submitted a report with its final decision, if required by CGS, and
b. give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands
Commission when making its decision.
3. On a Special Permit application involving notice to adjoining municipalities
under Subsection 8.11(E) or notice to water companies under Subsection 8.11(E),
the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
4. In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may:
a. stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to protect or
promote the public health, safety, and welfare; property values; the
environment; sound planning and zoning principles; improved land use,
site planning, and land development; or better overall neighborhood
compatibility, and
b. impose additional requirements, conditions, or safeguards as a
prerequisite to the issuance of the Zoning Permit by the ZEO, if it finds
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
191
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
necessary to ensure compliance with these Regulations and any decision,
and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the Town.
5. Any condition or safeguard attached to the granting of a Special Permit:
a. shall remain in force and effect as long as the Special Permit use is still in
operation, and
b. shall continue in force and effect regardless of any change in
ownership of the property.
6. The Commission shall not approve any Special Permit for any property on
which there exists a zoning violation unless such Special Permit application will
remedy or eliminate such violation.
G. Commission Action
1. Decision
a. The Commission shall render a decision on such application within the
period of time permitted under CSG Section 8-7d and in Section 8.11(D).
b. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Special Permit application, it
shall state upon the record the reasons for its decision.
2. Final decisions made by the Commission on an application for Special Permit
approval in accordance with this section shall be appealed directly to the
Superior Court in accordance with CGS §8-8, as amended.
H. Following Approval
1. The applicant shall submit one set of final plans on a reproducible material
suitable for filing in the Town Clerk’s Office and five copies of the approved plan,
on which all modifications imposed by the Commission as part of the approval
have been clearly indicated and noted in the revision block for signature by the
Chairman of the Commission within 60 days after approval. One final set of plans
and associated documents shall be submitted in PDF digital format. A Special
Permit granted by the Commission shall only become effective upon the filing of
a copy, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the Town, in
accordance with the provisions of CGS §8-3d.
2. A Special Permit shall only authorize the particular use or uses specified in the
Commission's approval.
3. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions, and/or
safeguards approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a violation of these
Regulations, and the Commission shall have the authority to revoke the permit at
any time the use is found to be in noncompliance with the approval.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
192
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
I. Amendments and Modifications to an Existing Special Permit
1. A Special Permit may be amended or modified, in accordance with Section
4.2 of these Regulations.
2. Any other modification or amendment to an approved Special Permit not
allowed by Section 4.2 shall meet all requirements of a Special Permit
application.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
193
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.6 Zone Text Amendment or Zoning Map Amendment Application
A. Applicability
A Text Amendment Application shall be submitted for any proposal to alter the text of
these Regulations.
B. Submission
1. A Text or Zoning Map Amendment application shall be submitted to the Land
Use Department and shall include a completed application form and the
appropriate fee.
2. A Zone Text Amendment shall be accompanied by the exact wording of the
proposed additions and deletions to the text of these Regulations, including
reference to relevant section numbers, and shall include all other materials
necessary to comply with the requirements of Appendix 1 of these Regulations. A
Zone Map Amendment shall be accompanied by two prints of the Zoning Map
of the town, indicating, in color, the area for which the change is proposed to be
applied, the proposed boundary line, and the proposed zoning district
designation and shall include all other materials necessary to comply with the
requirements of Appendix 1 of these Regulations.
3. In accordance with CGS Section 8-7(d), an application for a zone change
shall be accompanied by documentation confirming that all adjacent property
owners affected by the changes have been notified by a certificate of mailing
of the proposed changes. This documentation shall include, at minimum, the
following information:
a. Name and addresses of all adjacent property owners
b. Graphic representation confirming the inclusion of all the property
owners on a Key Map
c. Copy of the letters sent to each owner advising them of the proposed
zone change signed by the applicant (or designated agent)
d. Copies of documentation from the US Postal Service confirming the
dates the letters were mailed for each property owner.
e. Applications that do not contain the documentation specified in items
2(a-d) above in the initial submission will be considered incomplete. This
requirement cannot be waived by the Commission.
4. The Commission may, in accordance with the requirements of these
Regulations and its Appendices, require the submission of additional information
as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
5. The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition or application
relating to the same Text or Zoning Map Amendments, or substantially the same
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
194
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
changes, more than once in a period of 12 months unless it finds, on facts
presented in writing, that a material or substantial change of circumstances
justifies the new petition or application.
C. Procedures
1. The date of receipt of the Text or Zone Map Amendment application shall be
determined in accordance with Section 8.11(B).
2. An incomplete Text or Zone Map Amendment application may be denied in
accordance with Section 8.11(C).
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Text or Zone Map
Amendment application and:
a. Shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with Section
8.11(E).
b. May publish the full text of the proposed text amendment in full in such
notice or may publish reference to the full text of the proposed text
amendment as made available elsewhere, such as on the website of the
Town of Brookfield.
4. The Commission shall refer the Text or Zone Map Amendment application to
the Planning Commission, in accordance with CGS §8-3a.
5. The Commission shall give written notice of the Text or Zone Map Amendment
to the regional council of governments, in accordance with CGS §8-3b.
6. The Commission may refer any Text or Zone Map Amendment Application to
any Town department, commission, or other agency in accordance with Section
8.11(F).
7. A copy of the proposed Text and/or Zone Map Amendment shall be filed by
the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten
days before the public hearing.
8. The Commission shall process the Text or Zone Map Amendment application
within the period of time provided pursuant to CGS Section 8-7d as detailed in
Section 8.11(D) of these Regulations.
9. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw
such application.
D. Approval Considerations
1. The Commission, in determining whether to act upon the changes requested
in a Text of Zone Map Amendment Application, shall consider and evaluate the
following criteria:
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
195
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. Any report received from the Planning Commission; regional council of
governments; other towns; or other Town department, commission or
agency.
b. The Commission shall state on the record its findings on consistency of a
proposed Text or Zone Map Amendment with the Plan of Conservation
and Development, as amended.
c. Whether the proposed Text or Zone Map Amendment will:
i. Protect the public health, safety, welfare, or property values
ii. Attain the purposes of these Regulations
E. Commission Action
1. Decision
a. The Commission shall render a decision on such application within the
period of time specified in Section 8.11(D).
b. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Text or Zone Map Amendment
application, it shall state upon the record the reasons for its decision.
c. A majority vote of all members of the Commission is required.
d. If a valid protest petition is filed as provided by the CGS, then a twothirds
vote of all members of the Commission is required.
e. If the Planning Commission, on referral, disapproves a proposed Text or
Zone map Amendment, then a two-thirds vote of all members of the
Commission is required.
2. As part of approving a Text or Zone Map Amendment application:
a. The Commission shall establish an effective date for the Regulation
change provided that a copy of the approved zone map or regulation
has been filed in the Town Clerk’s office and notice of the decision has
been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in
Brookfield before such effective date, in accordance with CGS §8-3.
b. If notice of the Commission’s decision is not published in a newspaper
within 15 days, any applicant or petitioner may provide for publication of
such notice within 10 days thereafter, in accordance with CGS §8-3.
c. All other notice, publication and filing requirements provided by the
CGS, in particular CGS §8-3, shall be complied with.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
196
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.7 Variance Application
A. Purpose and Applicability
1. The Variance Application process allows that the Zoning Board of Appeals
(Board) may vary the application of these Regulations, in harmony with their
general purpose and intent and with due consideration for conserving the public
health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a
parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but
not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of
such regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that
substantial justice would be done and the public safety and welfare secured.
2. A Variance Application shall be submitted for any proposal to vary the
application of the Zoning Regulations with regard to any parcel(s) of land or part
thereof.
B. Submission
1. A Variance Application shall be submitted to the Land Use Department and
shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee.
2. Such application shall be accompanied by all materials prescribed in
Appendix 1 of these Regulations for a Variance Application.
3. The Board shall require the filing of a survey prepared by a licensed land
surveyor when the variance is dimensional in nature, or such survey is integral to
the understanding of the application.
4. The Board shall not be required to hear any application for the same variance
or substantially the same variance for a period of six months after a decision by
the Board or by a court on such an earlier application, as provided by CGS
Section 8-6.
5. If a Variance Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS
Section 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a
permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such Variance
Application is filed with the Board.
C. Procedures
1. The date of receipt of the Variance Application shall be determined in
accordance with Section 8.11(B).
2. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the Variance Application and:
a. Shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with Section
8.11(E).
b. Shall require that the applicant give notice to property owners in
accordance with Section 8.11(E).
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
197
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
c. At such hearing, any party may appear in person or may be
represented by an agent or attorney.
3. All required notices and referrals by the Board and/or applicant shall be
completed as provided by Section 8.11(E).
4. An incomplete Variance Application may be denied in accordance with
Section 8.11(C).
5. The Board shall process the Variance Application within the period of time
permitted under CGS Section 8-7d, as described in Section 8.11(D) of these
Regulations.
6. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Board, withdraw such
Variance application.
D. Decision Considerations
1. Before granting a variance, the Board shall find that a literal enforcement of
these Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship:
a. Solely with respect to the parcel of land that is the subject of the
application.
b. Owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting
generally the district in which it is situated.
2. The Board shall only grant the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the
exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship:
a. In harmony with the general purpose and intent of these Regulations.
b. With due consideration for conserving the public health, safety,
convenience, welfare, and property values.
c. So that substantial justice shall be done and the public safety and
welfare secured.
3. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to
approve a Variance application.
4. No use variance shall be granted where a dimensional variance would relieve
the exceptional difficult or unusual hardship.
5. No use variance for a business use or an industrial use shall be granted in a
Residential zone.
6. A use variance shall only be granted where, without the use variance, the
private property would be rendered valueless.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
198
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
E. Board Action
1. Whenever the Board grants or denies a Variance Application, the Board shall
state upon the record:
a. The reason for its decision
b. The Regulation which is varied in the decision
c. A specific description of the exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship
upon which its decision is based
2. Notice of the decision of the Board shall be sent by certified mail to the
applicant within 15 days after such decision has been rendered. Such notice
shall:
a. State the name of the owner of record.
b. Contain a description of the premises to which it relates.
c. State the nature of the hardship claimed.
d. Specify the nature of such variance including the Regulation which is
varied in its application.
3. Notice of the decision of the Board shall be published in a newspaper having
a substantial circulation in Brookfield within 15 days after such decision has been
rendered.
a. In any case in which such notice is not published within such 15-day
period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice
within 10 days thereafter.
b. A variance granted by the Board shall only become effective upon the
filing of a copy, certified by the Board, in the land records of the Town in
accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-3d.
4. A variance shall only authorize the particular activity specified in the Board’s
approval.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
199
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.8 Certificate of Location Approval Application
A. Purpose
1. In accordance with CGS Section 14-54, an application for a Certificate of
Location Approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any
person who desires to obtain a license for dealing in or repairing motor vehicles
in Brookfield, except that this requirement shall not apply to:
a. A transfer of ownership of a vehicle to a spouse, child, sibling, or parent
of a licensee;
b. A transfer of ownership of a vehicle to or from a corporation in which a
spouse, child, sibling, or parent of a licensee has a controlling interest; or,
c. A change in ownership involving the withdrawal of one or more
partners from a partnership.
2. In accordance with CGS Section 14-321, an application for a Certificate of
Location Approval shall be submitted to the Commission by any person who
desires to obtain a license for the sale of gasoline or any other product, under
the provisions of CGS Section 14-319, including the alteration or changing of
adjoining physical properties for such purposes, except that this requirement shall
not apply:
a. In the case of a renewal of a license by the holder of the license;
b. To the transfer of the last issued license from one person to another,
provided no more than one year has elapsed since the expiration of such
license; or,
c. In the case of the addition or discontinuance of pumps.
B. Submission
1. An application for a Certificate of Location Approval shall be submitted to the
Land Use Department and include a complete Application for Automobile
Dealer’s or Repairer’s License (DMV form K-7) and the appropriate fee.
2. Such application shall be accompanied by all additional information and
certifications required by the Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles
publication “Procedure for Obtaining a Connecticut Automotive Dealer’s or
Repairer’s License” (DMV form K-36) and Appendix 1 of these Regulations for a
Certificate of Location Approval Application.
C. Procedures
1. In reviewing a Certificate of Location Approval application, the Board and
Commission, as applicable, act as agents of the State of Connecticut, and the
notice provisions of CGS Section 8-1 et seq. shall not apply.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
200
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2. The Board or Commission, as applicable, may hold a public hearing on the
Certificate of Location Approval application, and if such hearing is to be held:
a. Shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.11(E).
b. May require that the applicant give notice to nearby property owners
in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.11(E).
3. The Commission, in reviewing a Certificate of Location Approval application,
may consider such application simultaneously with an application for site plan
and/or special permit approval and may consolidate the public hearings for
such applications.
4. Whenever it grants or denies a Certificate of Location Approval application,
the Board or Commission, as applicable, shall state upon its records the reason
for its decision.
5. Notice of the decision of the Board or Commission, as applicable, shall be sent
by certified mail to the applicant within 15 days after such decision has been
rendered. Such notice shall state the name of the owner of record, contain a
description of the premises to which it relates, and state the reason why the
application was approved or disapproved.
D. Approval Considerations
As an agent of the State of Connecticut, the Board and Commission serve solely to
determine whether a Certificate of Location Approval should be issued based on such
considerations as:
1. Whether the use is permitted in the zoning district
2. The suitability of the location in view of traffic, intersecting streets, width of
highway, effect on the travelling public, and other considerations
3. The relationship of the proposed use or operation with respect to schools,
churches, theaters, playhouses, or other public gathering places
4. Whether the proposed use of the location would imperil the safety and
welfare of the public
5. Whether the proposed use of the location would have a detrimental effect on
the value of nearby properties or development thereof
6. Whether there has been a material change in conditions which might reverse
a decision of granting or denying a previous application
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
201
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.9 Floodplain District Development Permit Application
A. Purpose and Applicability
1. A Development Permit provides for review by the Commission of proposed
building sites located within flood-prone areas to determine whether building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
2. A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established under Section 5.5.
B. Submission
1. A Development Permit application shall be submitted to the Land Use
Department and shall include a completed application form and the
appropriate fee.
2. Such application shall be accompanied by detailed plans, signed and sealed
by an appropriate professional, for review by the Commission and its designees
that comply with the requirements of Appendix 1 of these Regulations.
C. Procedures
1. The date of receipt for the Development Permit application shall be
determined in accordance with Section 8.11(B).
2. All required notices and referrals by the Commission and/or applicant shall be
completed as provided by Section 8.11(E).
3. An incomplete Development Permit application may be denied in
accordance with Section 8.11(C).
4. All projects on parcels contained wholly or in part in the Floodplain District, as
defined in Section 5.5, shall be submitted by the applicant for a permit to the
Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such Development Permit
application is filed with the Zoning Commission, if required by law.
5. The Zoning Commission shall not render a decision on such application and
site plan until a report has been submitted by the Inland Wetlands Commission.
This information, along with a copy of the Inland Wetlands permit and all other
data as prescribed by Section 5.5, shall become a criterion to be considered in
the approval or disapproval of the application and shall be made part of the
applicant’s site plan approval file.
D. Approval Considerations
In reviewing any Development Permit under this Section, the Commission shall consider:
1. Whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
202
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2. The conformance of all new construction and improvements proposed within
a flood-prone area with the permit requirements of Section 5.5
3. Whether all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state,
or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required
4. When BFE data has not been provided in accordance with Section 5.5, the
Commission shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE and floodway
data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the
standards of Section 5.5.
E. Commission Action
1. The Commission shall render a decision on such application within the period
of time specified in Section 8.11(D).
2. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Development Permit application, it
shall state upon the record the reasons for its decision.
3. The final decision of the Commission shall be in permit form addressed to the
applicant and dated and signed by the Chairman of the Zoning Commission.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
203
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.10 Brookfield Aquifer Protection District Review
A. Purpose and Applicability
1. The Brookfield Aquifer Protection District (APD) provides for review by the
Commission of proposed uses located within aquifer areas to determine that
existing or potential water supply sources are protected from potential
contamination.
2. Additional review under the Brookfield Aquifer Protection District Regulations in
Section 5.3 is required for any use permitted by Special Permit on any land within
the boundaries of the Brookfield APD delineated on a map on file in the offices
of the Commission which shows both primary and secondary recharge areas of
the designated aquifer and is entitled "Aquifer Protection District, Town of
Brookfield effective January 1, 2000” and that are not serviced by a public water
company (e.g. Aquarion, etc.).
B. Submission
In addition to that required by other sections of these Regulations, the following data is
required for all applications for Special Permit involving areas within the Brookfield APD:
1. Complete description of the type, size, and intended content of a storage
tank and transfer piping, as well as a listing of all other potentially toxic or
hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises
2. Evidence of approval by the cognizant regulatory agency for disposal systems
or any wastewater treatment systems over 1,500 gallons per day capacity
3. Analysis certifying compliance with Subsection D(3) of this Section completed
by a technically qualified expert acceptable to the Commission
4. Distance to the nearest public or private drinking water supply and nearest
watercourses
5. Availability of public sewer and proposed hookup location
6. Location, size, and capacity of septic tank, sewage lift station, force mains,
and grease traps
7. Expected types and amounts of discharge to sewers and to ground and
surface water
8. Provision for stormwater runoff controls, which must minimize suspended solids
and maximize groundwater recharge, including a detailed drainage plan
showing the location and points of discharge for building, roof, and floor drains
and dry wells and drainage pipes, whether pervious or impervious
9. Location and description of outside storage areas and materials to be stored
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
204
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
C. Procedures
1. The additional information required in Subsection B above shall be submitted
at the time the Special Permit application is filed in accordance with Section 8.5.
2. Incomplete information, as required by the Section, may be cause for the
Commission to deny a Special Permit application in accordance with Section
8.11(C).
D. Approval Considerations
1. In making a determination under Section 8.5(F), the Commission shall give
consideration to the simplicity, reliability, and feasibility of the control measures
proposed and the degree of threat to water quality that would result if the
control measures fail.
2. The Commission shall solicit the opinion of the Health Department, Town
Engineer, Inland Wetlands Commission, and the Planning Commission
concerning any application involving the Brookfield APD
3. Approval shall not be granted until the Commission determines that the
groundwater quality of the site resulting from proposed on-site operations will not
fall below federal or state standards for drinking water quality or if existing
groundwater quality is already below those standards that on-site operations will
result in no further deterioration.
4. The applicant shall submit a report from a licensed engineer setting forth any
risk or threat to water quality or the underlying aquifer from the site development,
site improvements, or on-site operations proposed in the application and
procedures and steps to prevent any risk or threat.
5. The Commission hereby delegates to the ZEO the following authority: When
the application concerns itself with a tenant fit-up where the exterior of the
building, the parking lot, and appurtenant facilities, such as drainage, lighting,
and utilities, are not being materially or substantially modified or changed from a
previously approved Special Permit for the site, the ZEO shall review the
application, and he/she may grant a Zoning Permit for the permitted use only.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
205
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.11 Procedural Requirements for Applications
A. Application Submittal Requirements
1. Applications to the Commission and applications or appeals to the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be submitted to the Land Use Department.
2. When an application involves activity regulated by Section 5.5, the Floodplain
District, a floodplain development permit application shall be submitted
concurrently with any application to the Commission and prior to any
application or appeal to the Board.
3. When an application involves activity regulated by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission (IWWC), an application to the IWWC shall be
submitted prior to or concurrently with any application to the Board or
Commission, or application or appeal to the Board.
4. Applications and appeals shall be submitted on forms obtained from the Land
Use Department for the respective type of application being submitted.
5. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s), except that the
Commission and the Town shall be exempt from application fees.
6. Applications shall be submitted with any supporting plans, materials, and other
information required by these Regulations and the Appendix 1.
7. Applications shall be signed by the applicant and the owner of the property,
where applicable.
B. Receipt of Application
1. The date of receipt of an application to the Board or Commission shall be the
day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board or Commission
immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Land Use
Department, or 35 days after the day of submission, whichever is sooner.
2. Upon receipt, the Board or Commission shall schedule a public hearing, if
applicable, within the prescribed time periods described in Section 8.11(D).
C. Incomplete Applications
1. Each application shall be reviewed by Land Use Department staff to
determine whether the application is substantially complete.
2. An application shall not be considered substantially complete until all of the
information required by these Regulations and any additional information
required by the Board or Commission has been received by the Board or
Commission at a regular or special meeting.
3. An incomplete application may be received by the Board or Commission and
denied for lack of information or required fee.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
206
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
D. Statutory Time Frames, Public Hearings and Decisions
1. In any case where a public hearing relative to an application, request, or
appeal is required by statute or these Regulations or scheduled by the
Commission or the Board, such hearing shall be scheduled in accordance with
the following guidelines, in accordance with CGS Section 8-7d. In the case of
any conflict between these Regulations and statutory time frames, the state
Statutes shall govern.
a. A public hearing shall commence within 65 days after receipt by the
Commission or Board of the associated application or request and shall
be completed within 35 days after such hearing commences.
b. All decisions on applications, requests, or appeals considered during a
public hearing shall be rendered no later than 65 days after the
completion of such hearing.
c. The petitioner or applicant may consent to one or more extensions of
any statutory period provided the total extension of all such periods shall
not be for longer than 65 days.
d. The petitioner or applicant may withdraw any application, request, or
appeal at any time prior to the rendering of a decision by the Commission
or Board.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection D(1) above, any Zone Change or
Text Amendment application initiated by the Commission is exempt from the
above statutory time lines.
3. For any case in which a proposed development or activity requires multiple
applications, the Commission or the Board may conduct any public hearings
simultaneously, as a single combined hearing, or in the order the Commission or
Board deems appropriate.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (C) above, for any application for
which the approval of a site plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining
to be met under the Zoning Regulations for any building, use, or structure, a
decision shall be rendered on such application no later than 65 days after
receipt of such site plan application, subject to any extensions provided by CGS
§8-7.
E. Notice Requirements
1. When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled by the
Commission or the Board, the Land Use Department shall cause notice of the
hearing to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in
Brookfield. Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
207
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
than two days, the first not more than 15 days nor less than ten days and the last
not less than two days before the date of the hearing.
2. Personal Notice to Property Owners
a. When required by these Regulations, the applicant shall by certificate
of mailing notify owners of property within 100 feet of the subject property
(including owners of all condominium units both on and adjacent to the
subject property), whether inside or outside Brookfield, of a pending
application by mailing a notice at least 15 days prior to the first scheduled
hearing.
b. At a minimum, such notice shall consist of:
i. A description of the proposed activity
ii. Notification of the date, time, and place of the first scheduled
hearing
iii. A copy of the application form submitted to the Commission or the
Board
c. The most recent Assessor's records on file in the Brookfield Assessor's
Office shall be utilized to determine the owner of each property for the
purpose of this mailing.
d. The applicant shall certify to the Commission or Board 10 days prior to
the public hearing that the required notices were mailed to all parties
identified in subsection (a) above. This certification shall include the
following:
i. A copy of the complete package of information sent to affected
property owners
ii. A list of the property owners to whom the notices were sent
iii. Proof of mailing in the form of a certificate of mailing
3. Notification to Abutting Municipalities
a. The Commission or Board shall, in accordance with CGS Section 8-7d,
notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application concerning
any project on any site in which:
i. Any portion of the property affected by a decision is within 500 feet
of the boundary of the adjoining municipality.
ii. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project shall use
streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
208
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
iii. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project
shall flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage
system within the adjoining municipality.
iv. Water runoff from the improved site shall impact streets or other
municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
b. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested
and shall be mailed within seven days of the day of the submission of the
subject application to the Land Use Department of the application,
petition, request, or plan.
c. No hearing shall be conducted on any such application unless the
adjoining municipality has received the notice required under this Section.
d. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear
and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request,
or plan.
4. Notification to Water Companies
a. In accordance with CGS Section 8-3i, an applicant shall provide written
notice to a water company and the Commissioner of Public Health when
an application is filed with the Commission or Board concerning any
project on any site that is within:
i. An aquifer protection area, provided such area has been delineated
in accordance with CGS Section 22a-354c
ii. The watershed of a water company, provided such water company
or said commissioner has filed a map with the Commission or the Board
and on the Brookfield land records showing boundaries of the
watershed
b. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested
and shall be mailed within seven days after the date of the day of the
submission of the subject application to the Land Use Department.
c. At least 10 days prior to the first scheduled hearing regarding the
application, the applicant shall submit the following to the Land Use
Department, or the Commission or Board may determine the application
incomplete or require that such notice be resent prior to commencing the
public hearing:
i. A copy of the complete package of information sent to the water
company and Commissioner of Public Health
ii. Proof of the certified mailing
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
209
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
d. Such water company and the Commissioner of Public Health may,
through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any
such application, petition, request, or plan.
5. Notification to DEEP
a. If any portion of the property which is the subject of an application is
located within a Natural Diversity Data Base Area as depicted on the
most recently updated Endangered Species Maps as produced by the
DEEP, the applicant shall, by regulation, notify DEEP of the pending
project and provide a copy of such notification to the Commission or
Board at least 10 days prior to the commencement of the public hearing.
b. A report from DEEP shall be required for any application for a zoning
permit, site plan, special permit, variance application, and/or zone
change request requiring DEEP notification under subsection (a) above.
Any such application submitted without a DEEP report shall be considered
incomplete.
6. Notification to Regional Council of Governments
a. The Commission shall give written notice to the regional council of
governments when any portion of the land affected by a proposed zone
change is located within, or a text amendment affects property located
within, 500 feet of the boundary of another municipality.
b. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested.
c. Such notice shall be made not later than 30 days before the public
hearing.
d. The regional council of governments may submit its advisory findings
and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing, but if
such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does
not disapprove of the proposal.
F. Consultation
1. On any application, the Commission may seek the advice and opinion of
other officials, boards, agencies, or commissions to assist it in evaluating the
application and may request such entity to submit a report to the Commission
documenting any concerns such entity may have in connection with its areas of
responsibility and/or expertise.
2. On any application, the Commission or Board may retain an architect,
landscape architect, professional land use planner, or other consultant to
review, comment, and guide its deliberations on any application.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
210
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. The Planning and Zoning Official may make a preliminary determination of the
need for such technical assistance to be provided by non-Town personnel
following a review of the application with other Town staff provided that such
preliminary determination shall be subject to review by the Commission or the
Board.
4. Prior to retaining an outside consultant, the Commission or the Board shall
make findings that the nature and intensity of the development may have a
significant impact on the Town of Brookfield and that:
a. the Town staff will not be able to complete a technical review of the
application in a timely fashion, or
b. that the project is of such a nature as to require expertise not available
from staff.
5. The ZEO shall estimate the cost of such services based upon information
received from qualified technical experts.
6. Upon determining the need for such technical assistance, the Commission or
the Board shall require that the applicant:
a. deposit funds with the Town for 150 percent of the estimated costs of
any consulting review fees before review of the application by the
Commission or Board, on commencement of the public hearing, if such
hearing is necessary, or
b. reimburse the Town for the cost of such consulting review.
7. Upon completion of the technical review and final action by the Commission
on the application, the Commission shall determine the costs incurred for the
review and refund excess funds (if any) to the applicant.
8. The applicant shall not be responsible for costs incurred for technical
assistance that exceeds the amount deposited unless the applicant agrees to
such additional costs.
9. No application shall be approved and no building permit shall be issued if
there are any outstanding fees, bills, invoices, or costs relative to the review of
the application.
G. Professional Responsibility for Plans and Designs
1. Drainage: A Professional Engineer, licensed in the State of Connecticut, shall
perform all drainage design, except that in order to prevent unnecessary
hardship in connection with small alterations or expansions the Town Engineer
may determine that professional drainage design is not required.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
211
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
2. Survey: A licensed Land Surveyor shall survey all sites to a Class A-2 survey
standard, except that when recommended by the Town Engineer or ZEO, the
Commission may determine that a survey is not needed for small expansions or
alterations.
3. Site Plan: Unless specifically allowed by the Commission, relevant design
professionals shall seal all site plans involving new buildings of more than one
story or any new building of more than 2,000 square feet as established in the
State Statutes, as amended.
4. Landscaping: A landscape architect shall design the landscaping for all site
plans involving new construction in excess of 10,000 square feet of floor area. The
Commission may determine that such landscape plan is not necessary because
of existing conditions associated with the site or that the proposal, as submitted,
adequately addresses landscaping requirements provided in these Regulations.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
212
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.12 Bonds
A. Bond Form
1. Where a bond is required by any Section of these Regulations, it shall be in one
of the following forms, and the Commission, or its designated agent (e.g. ZEO),
shall require evidence of compliance with the following standards before
accepting any bond:
a. Cash deposited with the Town
b. Certified bank check to the order of the Town when the amount of the
check is fully insured by the FDIC
c. Bank deposit (such as a passbook savings account) assigned
irrevocably and solely to the Town when the amount of the deposit is fully
insured by the FDIC
d. Irrevocable letter of credit naming the Town as sole beneficiary
provided that:
i. such letter of credit shall be issued by, and drafts thereunder
presentable at, a branch of a bank in Connecticut provided that;
1. such bank is included in the most recent list issued by the
Securities Valuation Office of the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (NAIC) (or any successor office or organization) as a
bank meeting NAIC standards for issuing letters of credit for
reinsurance purposes; or
2. the long-term unsecured debt of such bank (or the long-term
unsecured debt of its holding company) is rated BBB or better by
Standard & Poor's rating service or Baa or better by Moody's rating
service.
ii. The terms and conditions of such letter of credit shall be acceptable
in form and substance to the Town, and
iii. if and when such letter of credit shall, through the passage of time,
have less than 30 days remaining until its expiration or lapse date, and
such date shall not have been extended, the Town may draw under
said letter of credit the full amount thereof, and the proceeds may be
retained by the Town as the bond.
e. Other form of bond (such as a performance bond) acceptable in form
and substance to the Town.
B. Bond Release
Any required bond shall not be released by the Commission until:
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
213
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
1. the release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant,
2. the Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or Town Engineer has submitted a letter
stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and
that all conditions and requirements of the Commission's approval have been
satisfied, and
3. the applicant's licensed engineer or licensed surveyor has certified to the
Commission, through submission of a set of detailed "Record" plans on Mylar, that
all improvements and other work are in accordance with submitted site plans.
C. Collection Costs
The applicant or provider of the bond shall be responsible for any and all costs and fees
associated with collecting a bond, including without limitation attorney, bank, and
other collection fees and expenditures. Any such costs and fees may be deducted
from amounts released in Subsection 8.12B.
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
214
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
8.13 Excavation Permit
A. Applicability
An Excavation Permit application shall be submitted for any activity designated as
requiring Excavation Permit approval in these Regulations.
B. Submission
1. When an Excavation Permit is sought in association with a proposed Site Plan
or Special Permit application, the Excavation Permit will be considered a part of
the Site Plan or Special Permit approval with no separate Excavation Permit
issued. Applicants shall notify the Commission on the appropriate application
forms that an Excavation Permit is required, and all additional requirements
described below shall be provided.
2. When an Excavation Permit is the sole permit required or is associated with a
Zoning Permit, the applicant shall submit a completed application form and the
appropriate fee.
3. An Excavation Permit application shall be accompanied by detailed plans,
signed and sealed by an appropriate professional, for review by the Commission
and its designees that comply with the requirements of Appendix 1 of these
Regulations.
4. If the application is approved, the applicants (contractors or owners) shall file
a bond in accordance with Section 8.13 of these Regulations.
5. No excavation shall commence until the application is approved and the
bond filed with the Commission.
6. The application must be signed by the persons intending to carry out the
excavation operations and by the owner of the property, if the excavation is not
being carried out by the owner.
7. The Commission may waive in whole or in part the provision of certain
documents provided for in this section when they are not deemed necessary for
reasonable review of the application, especially when considering the
documentation submitted with a related Site Plan or Special Permit application.
C. Procedures
1. The additional information required in Subsection B above shall be submitted
at the time the Excavation Permit application is filed in accordance with Section
8.13.
2. Incomplete information, as required by the Section, may be cause for the
Commission to deny an Excavation Permit application in accordance with
Section 8.11(C).
2019-April-19
Article 8 – Procedures
215
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
3. For excavation activities considered to be significant in the sole judgment of
the Commission, the Commission may hold a public hearing on the application
in accordance with the requirements of CGS 8-7 and Section 8.11(E) of these
Regulations.
4. The date of receipt for the site plan application shall be determined in
accordance with Section 8.11(B).
5. The Commission shall process an Excavation Permit application associated
with a Special Permit within the period of time permitted under CGS Section 8-
7d, as detailed in Section 8.11(D)(1) of these Regulations. The Commission shall
process an Excavation Permit associated with a Site Plan or Zoning Permit
Application or as the sole application within the period of time permitted under
CGS 8-7d, as detailed in Section 8.11(d)(4) of these Regulations.
6. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw
such application.
D. Approval Considerations
A permit may be granted or denied by the Commission after consideration of the
public health, safety, and general welfare; the comprehensive plan of development;
soil erosion; drainage; impact upon the water table; lateral support slopes and grading
of abutting streets and land; effect on land values and uses in the area; damage to
existing landscape; and traffic access and safety. A permit may be granted only if the
Commission finds compliance with the conditions set forth in Section 6.7(D) of these
Regulations.
E. Commission Action
1. The Commission shall render a decision on such application within the period
of time specified in Section 8.11(D).
2. Whenever the Commission acts upon an Excavation Permit application, it shall
state upon the record the reasons for its decision.
3. The final decision of the Commission shall be in permit form addressed to the
applicant, dated and signed by the Chairman of the Commission. This decision
shall be separate from any associated Zoning Permit, Site Plan, or Special Permit,
if applicable.
2019-April-19
Article 9 – Administration and Enforcement
216
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
Article 9 – Administration and Enforcement
A. Enforcement
In accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission is solely
responsible for enforcement of the Zoning Regulations. In carrying out these
responsibilities, the Commission may employ, but shall not be limited to, use of the
following techniques:
? Promulgation of required applications forms and appropriate check-lists.
? Review and approval of appropriate permits and certificates, including stipulations
or conditions thereupon.
? On-site inspections.
? Investigation of complaints.
? Issuance of: letters of warning, requests for corrective action, summons for
appearance before the Commission, Cease and Desist Orders.
? Revocation of permits or approval actions.
? Appropriate legal proceedings.
? Such other techniques as may be authorized by law, regulation, ordinance or
statute.
B. Designation of Enforcement Agent(s)
The Commission may delegate specific administrative and enforcement activities to one
or more of its membership and to the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO), an individual
acting as an “agent” of the Commission. The ZEO so delegated, shall have such
credentials as the Commission, in its sole determination, shall deem appropriate and shall
otherwise be acceptable to the Commission. The Commission shall present any such
candidate(s) to the cognizant authority for appointment as required by Town Charter.
C. Enforcement Actions
The main purpose of an enforcement action is the elimination of a violation. Upon verbal
or written complaint and/or inspection, the ZEO shall determine if a violation of the
regulations has indeed occurred. If the ZEO determines that a violation has occurred, the
ZEO is empowered to immediately take action to cure the violation. Priority action shall
be taken in situations where there are overriding concerns of health and safety or where,
unless immediate action is taken to halt an activity, an irreversible event may occur
which is not in accordance with generally accepted zoning or good environmental
practice. The ZEO shall maintain a chronological record of all complaints and
subsequent enforcement action and shall prepare summary violation reports for
Commission meetings.
1. Issuance of an order
When the ZEO has determined that a violation exists, he/she shall issue a written
order to the responsible party to:
2019-April-19
Article 9 – Administration and Enforcement
217
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
a. cease and desist in all illegal activity,
b. perform corrective action to comply with the regulation.
2. Compliance/Show Cause Hearing/Appeal
After receiving an order, the individual receiving the order may either:
a. comply with the order, or
b. schedule an informal hearing before the Commission at the next
regularly scheduled meeting to show cause why a CITATION should not
be issued. If the action of the ZEO is upheld by the commission, the
individual in violation shall promptly comply with the compliance order.
3. Issuance of a citation
If an Order is not complied with within the prescribed time period, the Commission
may direct the ZEO to issue a citation and impose such fines as are provided for by
Town Ordinance (Zoning Violation Penalty Ordinance). The ZEO may NOT initiate
this action without the prior consent and direction of the Zoning Commission. The
Commission shall insure that the file of the violation is current, accurate and
complete prior to directing this action by the ZEO. If the violation continues
unabated, despite timely payment of fines, a subsequent Citation or Citations may
be issued. Any person who has received a Cease and Desist Order within ten (10)
days after receipt of the Order, schedule an informal hearing before the Zoning
Commission to show cause why a CITATION should not be issued.
4. Notice of citation
After the expiration of the ten day period, but within one year, as stated in the
Citation, the ZEO shall send a notice which restates the rights and appeal period,
all of which are cited in the Citation itself.
5. Payment of Fines
Payment of fines normally closes the Citation matter.
a. If the Respondent fails to pay or file an appeal within the required time
frame the following action shall be taken:
i. The ZEO shall certify that:
? The Respondent has failed to pay the fine or file an appeal;
? That as a consequence of the failure to respond, the
Respondent is deemed to have admitted liability for the
violation(s) pursuant to CGS §7-152c(d);
? The total amount of fines accrued as of the date of the
certification;
2019-April-19
Article 9 – Administration and Enforcement
218
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
? A copy of the Citation and Notice of Citation Form if
applicable, are true and exact copies and are attached to
the certification.
ii. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall provide the certification
and attachments to the cognizant Hearing Officer.
iii. The cognizant Hearing Officer, upon receipt of the ZEO’s
certification shall:
a. Render a “Decision and Notice of Assessment Without
Hearing”
b. Send the above decision form to the Respondent by first
class mail and a copy to the ZEO
c. If the amount of the assessment is not paid within 30 days
of the mailing of the decision notice, and no petition is filed
pursuant to CGS §7-152c(g), then after 30 days (but within
one year of the mailing) the cognizant Hearing Officer shall
file a “certified” copy of “Decision and Notice of
Assessment” with the Clerk of the Danbury Superior Court
together with the appropriate filing fee.
iv. The Clerk of the Superior Court thereafter shall enter judgment in
accordance with the “Decision and Notice of Assessment” in the
amount stated therein, plus $8.00 in Court costs in favor of the Town
of Brookfield.
b. If the Respondent files an appeal, the following action shall be taken:
i. The ZEO or other Brookfield Town Official shall:
a. Give written notice of the date, time and place of a
hearing on the appeal, which shall be a date more than 15
days, but not more than 30 days from the date of the notice.
b. File a certified copy of the Citation and Notice of Citation,
if applicable, with the cognizant Hearing Officer.
ii. The cognizant Hearing Officer shall:
a. Conduct a hearing and review in accordance CGS §7-
152c(e);
b. Render a decision at the end of the hearing in the form of
“Decision and Notice of Assessment After Hearing”;
c. If the assessment is not paid on the date of the hearing,
the Hearing Officer shall follow the procedure in CGS §7-
152c(f) and as set forth above in subparagraph (a)[3].
6. Legal Proceedings
Any matter which is not resolved using the above procedures, may be referred to
Commission Counsel for appropriate legal proceedings. Payment of attorney fees
2019-April-19
Article 9 – Administration and Enforcement
219
Introduction Definitions Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Special
Districts Standards Miscellaneous Procedures Administration/
Enforcement
for any subsequent legal action shall be the responsibility of the Respondent
Defendant, if allowed by law.
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
220
Application Requirements
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
1.1 Purpose
Appendix 1 provides a complete listing of materials to be submitted with any
application to the Commission or Board.
1.2 Preliminary Concept Plan and Pre-Application Review
Any preliminary concept plan submitted under the provisions of Section 8.1 should
include the following materials. Any omissions in materials submitted with a preliminary
concept plan may hinder staff and/or the Commission’s ability to accurately advise the
applicant of concerns, conditions, or requirements relevant to any subsequent
application. With the exception of item A. Completed Application Form, 9 copies of all
items for review shall be provided unless otherwise noted.
A. Completed application form
B. A statement describing the intended use(s) and the nature, size, and extent
of proposed use(s)
C. Concept Plans (X copies) illustrating:
a. Existing conditions including general topography, existing major
features (including wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, and adjacent
buildings), and property boundaries
b. Proposed improvements such as the location of proposed buildings or
structures, parking areas, drives, and other major alterations
c. Proposed infrastructure strategies, including water, sewerage, and
drainage
D. Additional information as may be relevant or desirable for the Commission to
make a reasonable review of the conceptual development
1.3 Zoning Permit
Any zoning permit application submitted under the provisions of Section 8.2 shall
include the following materials. With the exception of items A and B, 3 copies of all
items for review shall be provided unless otherwise noted.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. A narrative statement describing the proposed project, including the
intended use(s) and sufficient data on the nature, size, and extent of
proposed uses for the ZEO or their designee to determine compliance with
these Regulations
D. Property identification – copy of the Assessor's card and property deed
E. Applicable Zoning Section # for the approval being sought
F. Property survey meeting standards for a Class A-2 survey
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
221
Application Requirements
G. Site or plot plans at an acceptable scale incorporating a Class A-2 survey of
the premises or parcel of land, stamped with an embossed seal and signed
by a professional land surveyor and/or professional engineers/landscape
architect showing the following information, as applicable:
a. The name of the proposed project, developer, and landowner of
record
b. Zoning classification of the parcel to be built upon or used
c. Names of abutting property owners
d. North arrow, scale, and date of preparation
e. The actual dimensions of the parcel to be built upon or used
f. The location of the parcel in relation to public and/or private streets,
accessways, and abutting lots
g. Locations, dimensions, and types of all existing buildings, structures,
and signs
i. If deemed necessary by the ZEO to determine compliance with
these Regulations, setback distances from the front, side, and
rear lot lines
h. Proposed location, dimensions, and types of any new buildings,
additions, signs, or structures to be built, with proposed setback
distances from the front, side, and rear lot lines
i. Current and proposed:
i. Total building floor area
ii. Percent building coverage
iii. Percent impervious coverage
iv. Current and proposed total disturbed area
v. Current and proposed building heights
j. The general topography of the site and any proposed area alterations,
including areas to be cleared, excavated, filled, or graded
k. Wetlands and watercourses as delineated by a professional certified
or licensed soil scientist
l. Flood hazard zones as delineated by the FIRM and published by FEMA
m. The location of any conservation and preservation restrictions,
including open space
n. Existing and proposed roadways, drives, walkways, malls, paths,
curbing, entranceways and exits from and to town and state roads
o. Current and proposed location and dimensions of loading, storage,
refuse collection, exterior machinery, and equipment
p. Current and proposed septic systems, wells, and utility connections
q. A parking plan showing the number, dimensions, and location of
existing and any proposed parking spaces, demonstrating how needs
will be met (for proposed change in or expansion of use)
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
222
Application Requirements
r. Location, description, and dimensions of all current and proposed
signs
s. Location and dimensions of all current and proposed walls and fences,
including a description of the type
t. Technical data sufficient to demonstrate compliance with
performance standards and design criteria as set forth in Section 6 of
these Regulations
u. For proposals in excess of 80,000 square feet in area, the site plan shall
bear the seal of a registered professional engineer licensed to practice
in the State of Connecticut.
v. The ZEO may waive documentation determined not necessary for the
review of such zoning permit, if such waiver is requested, in writing, by
the applicant.
H. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan in accordance with the requirements
of Section 6.6, if applicable.
I. A written copy of any approval, and any conditions associated with such
approval, required by any other applicable local, state, or federal
department, bureau, or agency, including but not limited to:
a. Zoning Board of Appeals variance
b. Well/Septic Health Permit and/or Public Water/Sewer Approval
c. Driveway Permit
d. Inland Wetlands Permit
e. Floodplain Permit
f. Aquifer Protection Permit
g. Town Engineer Approval of Drainage/Sewer Plans
h. Connecticut DOT Permit
i. OSTA Approval
j. Connecticut DEEP Permit
k. Army Corp of Engineers Permit
l. Planning and Zoning Commission Approval
m. Sediment and Erosion Control Plan Certification
n. Historic District Certificate of Appropriateness
1. 4 Certificate of Zoning Compliance
Any certificate of zoning compliance application submitted under the provisions of
Section 8.3 shall include the following materials.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. A paper copy of an as-built property survey meeting standards for a Class A-2
survey similar in content and scale to the approved plan, if applicable, and
indicating the exact locations of all construction
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
223
Application Requirements
D. An electronic copy in AutoCAD format (or other format acceptable to the
Town Engineer) of the as-built property survey
E. Other relevant site plans and plot plans
F. Sufficient data on the nature, size, and extent of proposed uses for the ZEO to
determine compliance with these Regulations
G. Any other information determined required to confirm compliance with all
conditions of approval, if applicable.
1.5 Site Plan
Any site plan application submitted under the provisions of Section 8.3 shall include the
following materials. With the exception of items A and B, 14 copies of all items for
review shall be provided unless otherwise noted.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. A narrative statement describing the proposed project, including the
following items:
a. A narrative description of the intended use(s) and sufficient data on
the nature, size, and extent of proposed uses to determine
compliance with these Regulations
b. Provisions made for water supply, sewage disposal, solid and liquid
waste disposal, drainage, and other utilities
c. The basis for determining the parking and loading requirements for the
use
d. An estimate of the type of vehicular traffic and number of vehicle trips
to be generated on a daily basis and at peak hours
D. Property survey meeting standards for a Class A-2 survey
E. Copies of draft deeds or easements for any road widening, access,
driveways, drainage, conservation, utilities, or other easements, restrictions, or
covenants proposed
F. Site or plot plans (X copies) drawn to scale and displaying the following
information, as applicable:
a. The name of the proposed project, developer, and landowner of
record
b. Zoning classification of the parcel to be built upon or used
c. Names of abutting property owners
d. North arrow, scale, and date of preparation
e. The actual dimensions of the parcel to be built upon or used
f. The location of the parcel in relation to public and/or private streets,
accessways, and abutting lots
g. Locations, dimensions, and types of all existing buildings, structures,
and signs
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
224
Application Requirements
i. If deemed necessary by the ZEO to determine compliance with
these Regulations, exact existing setback distances from the
front, side, and rear lot lines
h. Proposed location, dimensions, and types of any new buildings,
additions, signs, or structures to be built, with proposed setback
distances from the front, side, and rear lot lines
i. Current and proposed:
i. Total building floor area
ii. Percent building coverage
iii. Percent impervious coverage
iv. Current and proposed total disturbed area
v. Current and proposed building heights
j. Existing and proposed topographical contours at intervals of two feet
or less and proposed area alterations, including areas to be cleared,
excavated, filled, or graded; and other unusual features
k. Wetlands and watercourses as delineated by the professional licensed
or certified soil scientist
l. Flood hazard zones as delineated by the FIRM and published by FEMA
m. Identification of areas listed in the Connecticut DEEP Natural Diversity
Data Base
n. Existing trees and shrubs to be retained and proposed trees and shrubs
to be located in the project, including type, common name, height,
and caliper. Location of existing trees greater than 12” caliber shall be
identified.
o. The location of any conservation and preservation restrictions
p. Existing and proposed roadways, drives, walkways, malls, paths,
curbing, entranceways and exits from and to town and state roads
q. Location and dimensions of loading, storage, refuse collection, exterior
machinery, and equipment
r. A parking plan showing the number, dimensions, and location of
existing and any proposed parking spaces, demonstrating how needs
will be met (for proposed change in or expansion of an existing use)
s. Locations and amount of open space, with type and use described
t. Location, dimensions, description, and capacity of all proposed utilities
and their structures, including water supply, sewage disposal,
electricity, gas and drainage, including the location and dimensions of
catch basins, manholes, conduits, and grade and elevation of same.
Such utilities shall be constructed underground unless otherwise
permitted by the Commission and shall be in accordance with the
standards contained in Technical Standards – Section 6.
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
225
Application Requirements
i. If septic sewage disposal is proposed, the location and results of
soil test pits and percolation tests, accompanied by design
computations certified by a professional licensed engineer
u. Location, description, and dimensions of all signs in accordance with
the Brookfield Sign Regulations as provided in Section 6.2
v. Location and dimensions of walls and fences, including a description
of the type
w. Technical data sufficient to demonstrate compliance with
performance standards and design criteria as set forth in Section 6 of
these Regulations
x. For site plans in excess of 80,000 square feet in area, the site plan shall
bear the seal of a registered professional engineer licensed to practice
in the State of Connecticut.
y. Project start and completion dates, schedule of major construction
milestones, sequence or phasing of construction as indicated by
supplementary boundary markings
G. Architectural Plans
a. Where applicable, X copies of architectural plans at acceptable scale
prepared by a professional architect, including:
i. Building elevations
ii. Identification of texture, color, and type of building materials
iii. Façade and fenestration details
iv. Roofscape details
v. Wall and screening details
vi. Identification of lighting fixtures, including illumination and
intensity data regarding outdoor lighting
H. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan in accordance with the requirements
of Section 6.6
I. A stormwater management study, if required under Section 6.8, and/or
written certification by a professional licensed engineer that the proposed
stormwater management system has been designed in accordance with the
DEEP 2004 Stormwater Quality Manual and complies with the standards of
Section 6.8.
J. A written copy of all approvals, and any conditions associated with such
approval, required by any other applicable local, state, or federal
department, bureau, or agency, including but not limited to:
a. Zoning Board of Appeals variance
b. Well/Septic Health Permit and/or Public Water/Sewer Approval
c. Driveway Permit
d. Inland Wetlands Permit
e. Floodplain Permit
f. Aquifer Protection Permit
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
226
Application Requirements
g. Town Engineer Approval of Drainage/Sewer Plans
h. Connecticut DOT Permit
i. OSTA Approval
j. Connecticut DEEP Permit
k. Army Corp of Engineers Permit
l. Planning and Zoning Commission Approval
m. Sediment and Erosion Control Plan Certification
n. Historic District Certificate of Appropriateness
K. Evidence of notification of the Site Plan application as may be required by
Section 8.11(E), and, if applicable, to the holders of any easements or
restrictions on the property that is the subject of the Site Plan application.
1.6 Special Permit
Any special permit application submitted under the provisions of Section 8.5 shall
include the following materials. With the exception of items A and B, 14 copies of all
items for review shall be provided unless otherwise noted.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. A previously approved site plan filed with the Town of Brookfield Town Clerk or
an application submitted for approval of a site plan in conjunction with the
application for a special permit
D. Property survey meeting standards for a Class A-2 survey.
E. Proof of notification of the Special Permit application of abutting property
owners and any other parties required in accordance with Section 8.11(E)
F. A statement describing the following:
a. The proposed use or uses in detail
b. Compliance with the criteria identified for Special Permits under
Section 8.5(E)
G. For any proposed development meeting the criteria set forth in Section 6.1 or
which, in the Commission’s judgment, could generate high levels of traffic,
exacerbate existing traffic conditions, or create a traffic safety issue, the
applicant shall provide a traffic impact analysis, in accordance with the
Institute of Transportation Engineers' requirements for traffic impact studies.
Such analysis shall evaluate traffic generated by a proposed development
and its probable impact on existing roads and intersections in the area in
accordance with Section 6.1 and shall include the following:
a. Existing and projected traffic volumes (average daily traffic, peak a.m.
and p.m.) and peak-hour traffic generation
b. Past and present roadway conditions including location and number
of accidents
c. Existing roadway capacity and volume and capacity ratios
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
227
Application Requirements
d. Proposed sight lines
e. Location of existing and proposed curb cuts, traffic lights, and
intersections at the development site and within 300 feet from the
development site
f. Traffic impact of proposed development, including but not limited to
the effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on
abutting streets and any nearby intersections that would have 100 or
more vehicle trips in a peak hour
g. The patterns of vehicular circulation in relation to the adjoining street
system
h. Adequacy of:
i. Right-of-way and travel way
ii. Traffic signalization, traffic channelization, left-turn lanes, and
roadway widths of adjoining streets
iii. Vehicular stacking lanes and/or distances
iv. Pedestrian drop-off areas
v. Other traffic or transportation facilities to accommodate the
proposed development
i. Recommendations for safe pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular
circulation
j. Where applicable, the applicant shall include the written
recommendations of the CT DOT, the Brookfield Police Commission,
and the Commission’s engineer
k. Whether a significant traffic impact will occur as identified under
Section 6.1
H. If a multifamily development, 14 copies of a report documenting:
a. The number of units proposed and breakdown of dwelling unit types
b. The density of the proposed development in dwelling units per gross
acre
c. Anticipated number of persons and school-age children per unit and
for the development as a whole
d. Projected dwelling-unit floor areas
e. A draft of any proposed or required covenants and restrictions
I. Phasing and Construction Schedule
a. A narrative describing construction stages
b. A statement describing the proposed staging if the development is to
be constructed over a period of years
J. Any other information which in the Commission’s judgment will assist in
evaluating the proposal
K. Evidence of notification of the Special Permit application as may be required
by Section 8.11(E), and, if applicable, to the holders of any easements or
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
228
Application Requirements
restrictions on the property that is the subject of the Special Permit
application.
1.7 Text Amendment
Any text amendment application submitted under the provisions of Section 8.6 shall
include the following materials. With the exception of items A and B, 30 copies of all
items for review shall be provided unless otherwise noted.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. The proposed text amendment identifying all sections to be added,
removed, or modified by reference to appropriate Article, section,
subsection, and paragraph numbers, with the precise wording of existing and
proposed text, with deletions and additions clearly marked
D. A narrative statement describing:
a. The reasons for the proposed text amendment
b. The effects of the proposed text amendment on the general health,
safety, and welfare of the Town of Brookfield
c. How the proposed text amendment is consistent with the existing Plan
of Conservation and Development
E. Proof of notification of any parties required in accordance with Section
8.11(E)
F. A copy of the proposed Regulation shall be filed by the applicant at the
office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten days before the
public hearing, as required by CGS §8-3.
1.8 Zone Change
Any zone change application submitted under the provisions of Section 8.6 shall
include the following materials. With the exception of items A and B, 30 copies of all
items for review shall be provided unless otherwise noted.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. A map at an appropriate scale showing:
a. The property or properties to be rezoned indicating the existing zoning
district designation, the proposed boundary line(s), and the proposed
zoning district designation
b. A key map showing the location of the property in relation to
surrounding areas
c. Properties within 500 feet in all directions of the property or properties
to be rezoned, and the names and addresses of the owners of such
parcels as indicated on the most recent Grand List
D. A narrative statement describing:
a. The reasons for the proposed zone change
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
229
Application Requirements
b. The effects of the proposed zone change on the general health,
safety, and welfare of the Town of Brookfield
c. How the proposed zone change is consistent with the existing Plan of
Conservation and Development
E. A simple metes and bounds description defining in writing the boundaries of
the proposed zoning map change
F. Proof of notification of abutting property owners and any other parties
required in accordance with Section 8.11(E)
G. A copy of the proposed zone change, and all support documentation, shall
be filed by the applicant at the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection
at least ten days before the public hearing, as required by CGS §8-3.
1.9 Certificate of Location Approval Application
Any certificate of location approval application submitted under the provisions of
Section 8.8 shall include the following materials. With the exception of items A, B, and
C, X copies of all items for review shall be provided unless otherwise noted.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. Completed Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles Form K-7
D. A narrative describing the nature of the proposed automobile dealer or
repairer business, including the type(s) of vehicles to be sold or repaired
under the license, and estimated number of employees
E. Site drawings meeting the requirements of Connecticut Department of Motor
Vehicles Form K-93
1.10 Floodplain District Development Permit
Any floodplain district development permit application submitted under the provisions
of Section 8.9 shall include the following materials. With the exception of items A and B,
X copies of all items for review shall be provided unless otherwise noted. A floodplain
district development permit application submitted simultaneously with a site plan or
special permit application for the same project may provide item D (Site or Plot Plans)
below in place of similar required site or plot plans under Section 1.5 of this Appendix,
provided that such plans contain all information required for a complete site plan or
special permit application.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. Property survey meeting standards for a Class A-2 survey
D. Site or plot plans (X copies) drawn to scale and displaying the following
information, as applicable:
a. The name of the proposed project, developer, and landowner of
record
b. Zoning classification of the plot to be built upon or used
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
230
Application Requirements
c. Names of abutting property owners
d. North arrow, scale, and date of preparation
e. The actual dimensions of the plot to be built upon or used
f. The location of the plot in relation to public and/or private streets,
accessways, and abutting lots
g. Locations, dimensions, and types of all existing buildings, structures,
and signs
i. If deemed necessary by the ZEO to determine compliance with
these Regulations, exact existing setback distances from the
front, side, and rear lot lines
h. Proposed location, dimensions, and types of any new buildings,
additions, signs, or structures to be built, with proposed setback
distances from the front, side, and rear lot lines
i. Current and proposed:
i. Total building floor area
ii. Percent building coverage
iii. Percent impervious coverage
iv. Current and proposed total disturbed area
v. Current and proposed building heights
j. Existing and proposed topographical contours at intervals of two feet
or less, and proposed area alterations, including areas to be cleared,
excavated, filled, or graded; and other unusual features
k. Wetlands and watercourses as delineated by the Brookfield Inland
Wetland Commission
l. Flood hazard zones as delineated by the FIRM and published by FEMA
m. Identification of areas listed in the Connecticut DEEP Natural Diversity
Data Base
n. Existing trees and shrubs to be retained and proposed trees and shrubs
to be located in the project, including type, common name, height,
and caliper. Location of existing trees greater than 12” caliber shall be
identified.
o. Existing and proposed roadways, drives, walkways, malls, paths,
curbing, entranceways and exits from and to town and state roads.
The layouts of such drives and interior roadways shall use Town of
Brookfield road specifications and §234-22J and § 234-24 through 234-
29 of the Brookfield Subdivision Regulations (see Brookfield Code §234)
as a design guide.
p. Location and dimensions of loading, storage, refuse collection, exterior
machinery, and equipment
q. A parking plan showing the number, dimensions, and location of
existing and any proposed parking spaces, demonstrating how needs
will be met (for proposed change in or expansion of use)
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
231
Application Requirements
r. Locations and amount of open space, with type and use described
s. Location, dimensions, description, and capacity of all proposed utilities
and their structures, including water supply, sewage disposal,
electricity, gas, and drainage, including the location and dimensions
of catch basins, manholes, conduits and grade and elevation of
same. Such utilities shall be constructed underground unless otherwise
permitted by the Commission and shall be in accordance with the
standards contained in Technical Standards – Section 6.
i. If septic sewage disposal is proposed, the location and results of
soil test pits and percolation tests, accompanied by design
computations certified by a professional engineer
t. Location, description, and dimensions of all signs in accordance with
the Brookfield Sign Regulations as provided in Section 6.2.
u. Location and dimensions of walls and fences, including a description
of the type
v. Technical data sufficient to demonstrate compliance with
performance standards and design criteria as set forth in Section 6 of
these Regulations
w. For site plans in excess of 80,000 square feet in area, the site plan shall
bear the seal of a registered professional engineer licensed to practice
in the State of Connecticut.
x. Project start and completion dates, schedule of major construction
milestones, sequence or phasing of construction as indicated by
supplementary boundary markings
y. The location, dimensions, and type of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures, including the elevation in relation to mean
sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings and
structures
z. The elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any building or
structure is to be floodproofed
E. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in Section 5.5.
F. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development
1.11 Excavation Permit
Any excavation permit application submitted under the provisions of Section 8.13 shall
include the following materials. With the exception of items A and B, X copies of all
items for review shall be provided unless otherwise noted. An excavation permit
application submitted simultaneously with a site plan or special permit application for
the same project may provide item C (Site or Plot Plans) below in place of similar
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
232
Application Requirements
required site or plot plans under Section 1.5 of this Appendix, provided that such plans
contain all information required for a complete site plan or special permit application.
A. Completed application form
B. Correct application fee (see Land Use Fee Schedule)
C. Property survey meeting standards for a Class A-2 survey
D. A map drawn to scale by an engineer or surveyor registered to practice in
the State of Connecticut showing the following:
a. The property on which the excavation is to be made
b. The location of all buildings on the property
c. Adjacent roads and the location of proposed access roads to
proposed excavations
d. At the option of the Commission, existing and proposed contours in the
area to be excavated and in the surrounding area within 20 feet of
the excavation, shown on a map drawn to scale containing not more
than 100 feet to the inch and with contour lines at intervals of not more
than five feet
e. Adjacent property ownership within 100 feet indicated
f. Existing and proposed drainage on the premises, if any, including the
proposed level and area of any impounded water
g. The location and design of structural and nonstructural sediment
control measures, such as diversions, waterways, grade stabilization
structures, debris basins, check dams, water breaks, silt fences, and the
like; and the location of temporary and permanent erosion control
measures
E. A written statement with the following information:
a. The approximate starting and completion dates, number and types of
trucks, machines to be used and hours of operation
b. The kind and amount of material to be excavated
c. The safety precautions that are to be taken
d. The purpose of the excavation or removal
e. The types and number of buildings to be erected
f. The sequence of operations, including time periods for major
development phases, temporary and permanent sediment control
measures to be employed, specifications for temporary and
permanent vegetative and structural stabilization, and general
information relating to the implementation and maintenance of the
sediment control measures, including the name of the individual
responsible for implementing the plan
g. Details regarding any revegetation at the conclusion of the project or
at the conclusion of such phases of the project as the Commission
may require
2019-April-19
Appendix 1 – Application Requirements
233
Application Requirements
2019-April-19
Appendix 2 – TCD Design Guidelines
234
Appendix 2: TCD Design Guidelines
Existing Design Guidelines and Standards, Incentive Housing Zone & Town Center District
(eff. June 1, 2014) to be appended. [corrected eff. 2019-Apr-19]
2019-April-19
Appendix 3 – Fee Schedule
235
Appendix 3: Fee Schedule
2019-April-19
Appendix 4 - Revisions
236
Appendix 4: Revisions
Revision List, as of 2019-April-19
Section # Title Effective Date Page(s)
2.2 Definitions – Building, Accessory 2019-Apr-19 25
3.4 C.1 Permitted by Zoning Permit – Accessory Structures 2019-Apr-19 53
3.4 D.1 Permitted by Special Permit – Accessory Structures 2019-Apr-19 53
Various Typographic corrections for Appendix references
and IP reference (which should have been CP).
2019-Apr-19 various

Chapter 11
BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
§ 11-1. Appointment authorized.
The Selectmen are hereby authorized and empowered to appoint a Building
Code Board of Appeals of five members, in conformity with Section 19-402
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Chapter 13
BUILDING COMMITTEE, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code Board of Appeals — See Ch. 11.
Economic Development Commission — See
Ch. 19.
Park and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
46.
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
51.
§ 13-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established a Municipal Building Commission of the Town
of Brookfield, which shall be known as the "Municipal Building Committee."
§ 13-2. Membership.
The Municipal Building Committee shall consist of five members and three
alternates, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance
with the provisions of § C4-12, § C7-4, § C7-5 and § C7-6 of the Town
Charter. The qualifications of said members and alternates shall be as set
forth in § C7-3 of the Town Charter. The terms of office of said members and
alternates shall be as set forth in Exhibit A of the Town Charter, except that
the current members and alternates of the Committee shall serve for the
balance of the terms for which they were appointed.
§ 13-3. Ex officio members.
A member of the Board of Selectmen, appointed pursuant to the provisions
of § C5-2F of the Town Charter, shall serve as an ex officio member of the
Committee.
11:1
§ 13-4. Officers, procedures and records.
The procedures of the Committee, including election of officers, shall be as
set forth in § C7-1 of the Town Charter, subject to the following additional
requirements:
§ 13-5. Powers and duties.
The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
Regular meetings of the Committee shall be held not less than once
every three months. The Committee may hold such special meetings as
it deems appropriate.
A.
The Committee shall maintain separate files and records for each
municipal construction project and all other matters entrusted to it.
Said records shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
All preliminary and final plans for each project, together with
all modifications thereto.
(a)
The preliminary budget for the project, the final budget
therefore and all change orders or other budget modifications.
(b)
A statement of the scope and purpose of the project as
presented to, approved and funded at Town Meeting or at
Referendum, together with any and all subsequent
modifications thereto.
(c)
All bid documents and modifications thereto, all bids received,
all construction contracts and change orders and all
architectural contracts and changes thereto.
(d)
The itemized project budget and the itemized amount
expended to date on each construction and architectural
contract and on all other expenditures related to the project.
(e)
Copies of the portion of the minutes of each meeting of the
Commission and all subcommittees thereof wherein the project
was discussed or decisions made regarding the project.
(f)
Copies of all correspondence and notes with reference to the
project, except privileged communications.
(g)
(1)
Said records shall be maintained in the office of the Brookfield
Town Clerk and shall be available for public inspection during
normal business hours.
(2)
B.
To undertake, supervise, manage, control and execute authorized and
funded building construction projects upon the written request and
authorization of the Board of Selectmen.
A.
§ 13-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 13-5
13:2
§ 13-6. Scope of projects and reports.
Chapter 15
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inland Wetlands Commission — See Ch. 34. Planning and Zoning Commissions — See Ch.
51.
To advise, consult with and make recommendations to the Board of
Selectmen, Board of Education, Planning Commission, Zoning
Commission, Park and Recreation Commission, Board of Finance and
other Town boards, commissions, agencies and departments
concerning the scope, cost and feasibility of both contemplated and
approved municipal building construction projects.
B.
To negotiate and recommend to the Board of Selectmen the approval
and execution of architect, construction and other contracts for
municipal building construction projects which are within its
jurisdiction and for which necessary funds have been appropriated.
C.
To have all other powers which are necessary to enable it to perform its
duties as herein set forth.
D.
Prior to the authorization of construction funds for any municipal
building project within its jurisdiction, the Committee shall prepare and
submit to the Board of Selectmen and Board of Finance a report setting
forth the scope of the project, including but not limited to a description
of the nature, size and type of facility to be constructed and an estimate
of all costs of construction, including architect fees and all other costs
associated with the project. Once a project has been approved and
funded, the Committee shall not alter the scope of the project without
the prior approval of the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance
and, in the case of school facilities, the Board of Education.
A.
The Committee shall submit progress reports to the Board of Selectmen
and Board of Finance not less than once every three months during
the course of construction, including a statement of the estimated
completion date, any significant problems which have occurred and
the proposed resolution of the same, any anticipated cost overruns or
savings and any contemplated modifications to the scope of the project,
including the reasons therefor.
B.
The Committee shall submit a final report to the Board of Selectmen
and Board of Finance upon final completion of the project, which report
shall include the total project cost, the reasons for any delay in
completion and the recommendations of the Committee for
improvements to the construction process in the future which would
result in cost savings or improved efficiency.
C.
§ 13-5 BUILDING COMMITTEE, MUNICIPAL § 13-6
13:3
§ 15-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established a Conservation Commission of the Town of
Brookfield, which shall be known as the "Conservation Commission."
§ 15-2. Membership.
The Conservation Commission shall consist of five members and three
alternates, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance
with the provisions of § C4-12, § C7-4, § C7-5 and § C7-6 of the Town
Charter. The qualifications of said members and alternates shall be as set
forth in § C7-3 of the Town Charter. The terms of office of said members and
alternates shall be as set forth in Exhibit A of the Town Charter, except that
the current members and alternates of the Commission shall serve for the
balance of the terms for which they were appointed.
§ 15-3. Ex officio members.
A member of the Board of Selectmen, appointed pursuant to the provisions
of § C5-2F of the Town Charter, shall serve as an ex officio member of the
Commission.
§ 15-4. Officers, procedures and records.
The procedures of the Commission, including election of officers, shall
be as set forth in § C7-1 of the Town Charter, subject to the additional
requirement that regular meetings of the Commission shall be held not less
than once a month. The Commission may hold such special meetings as it
deems appropriate.
§ 15-5. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
To supervise and control all designated open space, conserved land
and dwellings and other structures upon those properties owned or
controlled by the Town and to make rules and regulations for the
use of said land and dwellings and other structures subject to the
approval of said rules and regulations by the Board of Selectmen. To
designate "historically significant" dwellings and other structures as
such and to maintain such dwellings and other structures in accordance
with The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties. Reference to dwellings and other structures in this
subsection is limited to those dwellings and other structures that are
under the supervision and control of the Conservation Commission.
[Amended 4-4-2012]
A.
To advise and consult with the Board of Selectmen, Planning
Commission and Zoning Commission with reference to the acquisition
B.
§ 13-6 BROOKFIELD CODE § 15-5
13:4
§ 15-6. Admission fees; other fees.
The Commission may impose admission fees and other reasonable fees and
charges for the use of the lands under its control. All such fees and charges
shall be approved by the Board of Selectmen prior to being imposed.
§ 15-7. Rental and use of facilities by private individuals and
organizations. [Amended 4-4-2012]
The Commission may rent or permit the use of the lands, dwellings and
other structures under its control by private individuals and organizations,
provided that said rental or use does not substantially interfere with the use
of said lands, dwellings and other structures by the residents of the Town.
The Commission shall establish rules and regulations for such rental and
use, subject to the approval thereof by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 15-8. Contracts and other agreements. [Amended 4-4-2012]
The Commission, with the prior approval of the Board of Selectmen, may
enter into contracts and other agreements which are appropriate to enable
it to perform the functions and duties delegated to it by the provisions
of this chapter, including contracts for the provision by third parties of
services on lands, dwellings and other structures under its control.
However, the Commission shall not enter into any contract or agreement
which shall obligate the Town to the expenditure of funds in excess of the
amount appropriated therefor.
§ 15-9. Assistance of other Town agencies.
With the prior approval of the First Selectman, the Commission may request
assistance in the performance of its duties from any other Town board,
commission, department or agency. Such assistance shall be provided in
of open space land and conserved land areas and to make
recommendations to said Board and Commissions with reference to the
impact, if any, which the development of land which is adjacent to open
space or conserved land areas would have on said properties.
To advise and make recommendations to the Planning Commission,
Zoning Commission and Inland Wetlands Commission regarding
proposed land development and proposed changes in land use.
C.
To expend, for the purposes set forth in this chapter, funds appropriated
to it in the annual budget or any supplemental appropriation as well
as to raise funds and apply for grants in connection with the purchase
and/or maintenance of all open spaces and the dwellings and other
structures therein. [Amended 4-4-2012]
D.
To educate the public concerning conservation of land and the historic
and agricultural heritage of Brookfield. [Added 4-4-2012]
E.
§ 15-5 BUILDING COMMITTEE, MUNICIPAL § 15-9
13:5
a timely and competent manner by such other board, commission,
department or agency.
§ 15-10. Jurisdictional disputes.
In the event that any dispute arises between the Commission and any other
Town agency, board, commission or department regarding their authority
and control over any specific land, building or facility owned or controlled
by the Town, said dispute shall be resolved by the Board of Selectmen,
whose decision shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute.
Chapter 26
HISTORIC DISTRICT
§ 26-1. District established; boundaries.
To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare
of the public through the preservation and protection of buildings,
places and districts of historical interest by the maintenance of such
landmarks in the history of architecture of the Town, state or nation
and through the development of appropriate settings of such buildings,
places and districts, there is hereby established an historic district
in the Town of Brookfield to be known as "Brookfield Center Historic
District No. 1."
A.
Historic District No. 1 is situated: [Amended 6-10-19801]
In the center of Town and is located on both sides of a portion of
Route 25 beginning at the intersection of Route 133 and traveling
south for approximately 0.4 mile to include property owned by
Bradley on the westerly side and Ceysens on the easterly side.
(1)
Also on both sides of Route 25 beginning at the intersection of
Route 133 and traveling north for approximately 0.4 mile to include
property owned by Gregory on the westerly side and Baker on the
easterly side.
(2)
Also on both sides of Long Meadow Hill Road beginning at the
intersection of Route 25 and traveling north for approximately 0.4
mile to include property owned by Douglas on the westerly side and
the trustees of the Fund for Ministers on the easterly side.
(3)
Also on both sides of Winding Road beginning at the intersection of
Route 25 and traveling east for approximately 0.2 mile to include
property owned by B. Rippy on the northerly side and C. Rippy on
the southerly side.
(4)
B.
1. Editor's Note: The ordinance adopted 6-10-1980 also repealed Sections II and IV of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
§ 15-9 BROOKFIELD CODE § 26-1
26:6
§ 26-2. Powers and duties of Historic District Commission.
The Historic District Commission shall have such powers and shall perform
such functions and shall be subject to such limitations as shall from time to
time be provided by the General Statutes of Connecticut.
Chapter 31
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 31-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby found and declared that there is a shortage of safe and sanitary
dwelling accommodations in the Town of Brookfield available to families of
low and moderate income at rentals they can afford, and therefore there is
a need for a Housing Authority in the Town of Brookfield.
§ 31-2. Creation of authority.
There is hereby created and activated a public body corporate and politic
to be known as the "Housing Authority of the Town of Brookfield." Said
Authority is created and activated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 128
of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
§ 31-3. Rights, powers and duties.
Said Housing Authority of the Town of Brookfield shall have and possess all
of the rights, powers and duties set forth in Chapter 128 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and shall be subject to the
limitations and regulations contained in said chapter.
§ 31-4. Membership.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint five resident electors of the Town
of Brookfield as Commissioners of said Authority. The appointment,
qualifications and tenure of said Commissioners shall be set forth in Section
Also on both sides of School Street beginning at the intersection of
Route 25 and traveling east for approximately 0.1 mile to include
property owned by Phillips on the northerly side and Narwold on
the southerly side.
(5)
C. All the property owners hereinbefore set forth being now or formerly.
All of the foregoing area included in the Historic District 1 No. is shown
on a map delineating the area involved, which map is incorporated
herein by reference and is to be kept on file by the Historic District
Commission.
D.
Both sides of all of said streets are included to a depth of 200 feet from
the highway and street lines.
E.
§ 26-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 31-4
31:7
8-41 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.
The Board of Selectmen shall designate which of the Commissioners shall
be the first Chairman of said Housing Authority.
Chapter 32
HOUSING PARTNERSHIP TASK FORCE
§ 32-1. Establishment.
The Brookfield Housing Partnership is hereby established and enacted
pursuant to the authority contained in and for the purposes set forth in
Public Act 88-305 of the State of Connecticut.
§ 32-2. Membership.
The Brookfield Housing Partnership Task Force shall consist of the First
Selectmen and 10 additional members appointed by the First Selectman
with the advice and consent of the Board of Selectmen. Said 10 additional
members shall be chosen as follows:
§ 32-3. Terms of office.
One member from among the members and alternates comprising the
Brookfield Planning Commission.
A.
One member from among the members and alternates comprising the
Brookfield Zoning Commission.
B.
One member from among the members and alternates comprising the
Brookfield Inland Wetlands Commission.
C.
One member from among the members and alternates comprising the
Brookfield Housing Authority.
D.
Two members representing the local business community, who shall be
electors of the Town of Brookfield.
E.
One member who represents public interest groups and one member
who represents local planning, land use and housing professionals.
Both of said members shall be electors of the Town of Brookfield.
F.
Two members of the public, who shall be electors of the Town of
Brookfield.
G.
The First Selectman shall serve as a member of the Housing
Partnership during his term of office as First Selectman.
A.
All other members shall be appointed for terms of office as follows:
Initially, five members shall be appointed for terms expiring on the
first Monday in February 1990, and five members shall be appointed
B.
§ 31-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 32-3
32:8
§ 32-4. Powers and duties.
§ 32-5. Employees and consultants.
for terms expiring on the first Monday in February 1992. Thereafter,
appointments shall be for terms of four years.
The term of office of any member who represents a Land Use
Commission or the Housing Authority shall expire immediately if said
member ceases to be a member of said Commission or Authority.
C.
The Brookfield Housing Partnership shall possess and exercise the
following powers and duties:
To apply to the Housing Commissioner of the State of Connecticut
for an initial designation under the Connecticut Housing
Partnership Program and to provide said Commissioner with such
evidence and information as is necessary to achieve said
designation.
(1)
To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the
Town of Brookfield.
(2)
To investigate the availability of any state, municipal or other land
within this Town which is suitable for the development of affordable
housing.
(3)
To review the Brookfield Zoning Regulations2 and determine
whether those regulations restrict the development of affordable
housing in the Town and to identify and recommend to the Zoning
Commission any changes which should be made to said regulations
to minimize or eliminate such restrictions.
(4)
To establish a long-range plan to meet identified housing needs in
the Town and to establish priorities for the implementation of the
plan. Said plan shall be consistent with regional housing needs.
(5)
To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal
or proposals to achieve such priorities in accordance with the longrange
plan.
(6)
To engage in any activity, development or project which is designed
to create additional affordable housing in the Town.
(7)
A.
Any such activity, development or project must be approved by the
Board of Selectmen before it is undertaken by the Brookfield Housing
Partnership.
B.
Any employees of the Brookfield Housing Partnership shall be hired and
dismissed in accordance with the provisions of § C5-3 of the Charter of
the Town of Brookfield.3
A.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Zoning.
§ 32-3 HOUSING PARTNERSHIP TASK FORCE § 32-5
32:9
§ 32-6. Appropriations and expenditures.
All appropriations and expenditures of the Brookfield Housing Partnership
shall be subject to and shall be made in strict compliance with the
applicable provision of the Charter of the Town of Brookfield.
Chapter 51
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 74.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 51-1. Combined Commission abolished.
The designation of the Brookfield Zoning Commission as the "Brookfield
Zoning and Planning Commission," made by ordinance adopted on
December 17, 1962, effective January 4, 1963, shall be and the same hereby
is reversed, and the terms of office of the present members of said combined
Planning and Zoning Commission shall terminate upon the effective date
of this chapter, all in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-4b of
the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and there
hereafter shall be a separate Brookfield Zoning Commission and a separate
Brookfield Planning Commission.
§ 51-2. Composition of Zoning Commission. [Amended 6-10-1980]
The Brookfield Zoning Commission shall consist of five members who shall
be electors of the Town not holding any other elected or appointed Town
office and who shall be elected biennially on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in the odd years. The term of office for each member
of said Commission shall be four years. In the event of the resignation
or death of any member of said Commission or in the event of any other
vacancy existing of said Commission, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
a successor who shall serve until the next regularly scheduled biennial
election, at which time the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of
the term for which the original member was elected. The representation
of the minority political party on said Commission shall be guaranteed
in accordance with Section 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes,
Revision of 1958, as amended.
All contracts with consultants, state agencies or others must be
approved and authorized by the Board of Selectmen prior to being
executed or implemented by the Housing Partnership.
B.
3. Editor's Note: The Charter is included at the front of this volume.
§ 32-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 51-3
51:10
§ 51-3. Composition of Planning Commission. [Amended 6-10-1980]
The Brookfield Planning Commission shall consist of five members who shall
be electors of the Town not holding any other elected or appointed Town
office and who shall be elected biennially on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in the odd years. The term of office for each member
of said Commission shall be four years. The representation of the minority
political party on said Commission shall be guaranteed in accordance with
Section 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as
amended. Any vacancies in the Commission shall be filled as provided by
law.
Chapter 74
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commssions — See Ch.
51.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 74-1. Membership. [Amended 6-10-1980]
The Brookfield Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five regular
members and three alternate members who shall be electors of the Town
not holding any other elected Town office and who shall be elected
biennially at the regular elections on the first Monday in October in the odd
years. The term of office for each regular member of said Board shall be
six years, except that in the first annual election the terms of office shall
be staggered; two members, two years; two members, four years; and one
member, six years. In the event of the resignation or death of any member
of said Board, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a successor who shall
serve until the next regularly scheduled biennial election, at which time the
vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term for which the original
member was elected. The term of office for each alternate member of said
Board shall be six years, except that in the first annual election the terms
of office shall be staggered; one alternate member, two years; one alternate
member, four years; and one alternate member, six years. In accordance
with Act No. 665 of the Public Acts of 1959,4 the Zoning Board of Appeals
of five regular and three alternate members shall be considered an eightmember
board, thereby limiting the maximum representation of the same
political party to five.
4. Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 9-167a.
§ 51-3 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 74-1
74:11
Chapter 96
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code Board of Appeals — See Ch. 11.
Citation Procedure — See Ch. 84.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 99.
Fees — See Ch. 127.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 74-1 BROOKFIELD CODE § 74-1
74:12
ARTICLE I
Adoption of State Code
[Adopted by Town Meeting 3-12-1965]
§ 96-1. Code adopted.
The Town of Brookfield does hereby adopt as and for the Building Code for
the Town of Brookfield the State Building Code, as amended.
§ 96-1 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 96-1
74:13

ARTICLE II
Permits
[Adopted by Town Meeting 3-12-1965]
§ 96-2. Schedule of fees for building permits established.
The schedule of fees required for building permits issued in accordance
with the terms of the Building Code to be paid before a building permit
is issued shall be as established from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen, based on the valuation of work.5 [Amended 6-10-1980]
A.
Building permits shall be required for all new construction, including
swimming pools and alterations to existing structures.
B.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fees.
§ 96-2 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 96-2
74:15

ARTICLE III
Fees Paid to Demolition Officer
[Adopted by Town Meeting 3-12-1965]
§ 96-3. Schedule of fees for demolition permits established.
[Amended 2-27-1974; 6-10-1980]
The fees to be paid to the Demolition Officer of the Town of Brookfield,
acting by and for the Town of Brookfield, prior to the granting of any permit
to demolish any structure in the Town of Brookfield by said Demolition
Officer shall be as established from time to time by the Board of Selectmen.6
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fees.
§ 96-3 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 96-3
74:17

ARTICLE IV
Restrictions on Building Permits
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 10-4-1989]
§ 96-4. Road requirements for subdivisions.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a house on a lot
in an approved subdivision until the road which provides access to said lot
has had the first course of pavement installed.7
§ 96-4.1. Application for building permits. [Amended 10-3-2011;
6-5-2017]
No application to construct, reconstruct, alter or otherwise modify any
building or other structure within the Town of Brookfield shall be approved
by the Brookfield Building Official and no building permit shall be issued
unless one of the following provisions is satisfied:
The property owner or his agent obtains from the Brookfield Tax
Collector and delivers to the Brookfield Building Official a written
statement that the real property taxes for the property upon which the
building or other structure is located or proposed are not delinquent.
In addition, if the property is served or to be served by the Brookfield
municipal sewerage system, the property owner or his agent shall
also obtain from the Brookfield Water Pollution Control Authority and
deliver to the Brookfield Building Official a written statement that the
applicable sewer use charges, benefit assessment and outlet capacity
charges, if any, for the property upon which the building or other
structure is located or proposed are current to the date of the
application.
A.
The property owner or his agent obtains from the Brookfield Fire
Marshal and delivers to the Brookfield Building Official a written
statement that the building for which the permit is requested has been
damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty loss and that the work
for which the building permit is requested is necessary to repair said
damage or to reconstruct said destroyed building.
B.
7. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 234, Subdivision of Land.
§ 96-4 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 96-4.1
74:19

ARTICLE V
Demolition of Buildings
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 2-3-1992]
§ 96-5. Compliance required.
No person shall demolish any building in the Town of Brookfield except in
strict compliance with the provisions of Sections 29-402 through 29-415
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and in strict compliance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 96-6. Application for demolition permit.
Any person who desires to demolish any building or part thereof within
the Town of Brookfield shall make application to the Building Official
for a demolition permit. Said application shall contain the following
information:
The address of the property upon which the building is situated and
a legal description of the property.
(1)
(2) The name and address of the owner of the property.
The name and address of the person or firm who or which is
undertaking the demolition.
(3)
(4) The reason for the proposed demolition.
A.
Said application shall be accompanied by the following documents:
A certificate of insurance issued in accordance with the
requirements of Section 29-406(a)(1) of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
(1)
A certificate of notice executed by all public utilities having service
connections within the building proposed to be demolished setting
forth that such utilities have severed such connections and service.
(2)
A copy of the certificate of registration issued by the Department
of Public Safety of the State of Connecticut to the person or firm
proposing to demolish said building or part thereof, which
certificate shall have been issued pursuant to the provisions of
Section 29-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended,
or a statement by said person or firm that he or it is exempt
from said registration pursuant to the provisions of Section
29-406(a)(3)(A) or (B) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
(3)
A statement issued by the Tax Assessor of the Town of Brookfield
setting forth the age of the building as determined from the
Assessor's records and setting forth the assessed value of the
building.
(4)
B.
§ 96-5 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 96-6
74:21
§ 96-7. Issuance of permit. [Amended 2-6-2012]
The Building Official shall not issue a demolition permit except upon receipt
of a completed application signed by the property owner and the person
or firm who or which is to undertake said demolition, together with all
required supporting documentation, the required application fee and proof
that all adjoining property owners have been notified of the proposed
demolition. With respect to any building which is more than 50 years of age
and not located within an historic district as defined by C.G.S. § 7-147d(b),
no demolition permit shall be issued until thirty (30) days after the date that
the application is filed with the Building Official and published as herein
provided. The Building Official may waive said thirty-day waiting period
with respect to buildings more than 50 years of age upon finding that
immediate demolition of the building is required in the interest of public
health or public safety. The Building Official shall increase the waiting
period to a total of 90 days, upon receipt of a certification accompanied by a
written narrative and description of the historic significance of the building
signed by the Chair of the Historic District Commission or designee.
§ 96-8. Buildings more than fifty years of age.
In addition to the requirements contained in §§ 96-5, 96-6 and 96-7 of this
article, no building more than 50 years of age shall be demolished and no
demolition permit therefor shall be issued until the following requirements
have been fulfilled:
A list of the names and addresses of all adjoining property owners,
together with a statement by the applicant that, within three days
of the date of the filing of the application, he or it will notify each
adjoining property owner by registered mail or certified mail of the
application for a demolition permit and will send each adjoining
property owner a copy of said application. The identity and the
address of each adjoining property owner shall be as set forth in
the records of the Tax Assessor of the Town of Brookfield.
(5)
(6) A permit application fee.8
The Building Official has caused a legal notice of said application to be
published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of
Brookfield. Said notice shall contain the address of the property, the
names and addresses of the applicants and the date of the application.
Said notice shall be published within 14 days of the date that the
application is filed with the Building Official.
A.
Proof that the applicant has notified all persons, firms and other entities
who or which have on file with the Building Official a written request
that they receive said notice. The form, contents and method of notice
shall be the same as is required for notice to adjoining landowners.
B.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Fees.
§ 96-6 BROOKFIELD CODE § 96-8
74:22
§ 96-9. Request for notice.
Any person, firm or other entity may file a written request with the Building
Official requesting written notification of all applications for permits to
demolish any building which is more than 50 years of age. Said request shall
remain effective for a period of five years from the date that it is filed.
§ 96-10. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, a "building" is defined as any structure having a
roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals
or materials.
§ 96-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more
than $500 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
Thirty days (or 90 days if certification by the Chair of the Historic
District Commission or designee shall been received as set forth
hereinbefore) have elapsed since the date of the filing of the application
and published as herein provided, unless the Building Official has found
that immediate demolition of the building is required in the interest of
public safety or public health. [Amended 2-6-2012]
C.
§ 96-8 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 96-11
74:23

ARTICLE VI
Swimming Pool Fences
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-6-2000]
§ 96-12. (Reserved)9
§ 96-13. Enforcement by Building Official.
The Building Official shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions
of this article in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut Basic
Building Code (BOCA), as amended, and in accordance with the
enforcement by citation procedure established pursuant to Chapter 84 of
the Code of Ordinances, which shall not be mutually exclusive.
§ 96-14. Applicability; building code; retroactivity.
Swimming pool enclosures shall be constructed in accordance with the
technical requirements and specifications of the provisions of this chapter
and the Connecticut State Building Code (BOCA), as amended, and shall
apply to any pool presently in existence and any pool built within the
Town subsequent to the date hereof. It is the specific intent hereof that
this legislation be deemed expressly retroactive in order to accomplish the
intent of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the community.
§ 96-15. Swimming pool defined.
For the purpose of this article, "outdoor swimming pool" means a body of
water in an artificial or natural receptacle or other container, in-ground,
above ground, designed to contain water having a depth of two feet or more,
used publicly or privately by adults or children, or both, whether or not any
charge or fee is imposed for such use and whether or not the user is an
owner, lessee, operator, licensee, concessionaire, invitee or guest.
§ 96-16. Time frame for compliance.
All unenclosed outdoor swimming pools must be properly enclosed not later
than 90 days from the effective date of this article or 60 days from the date
of notification from the Building Official, whichever is earlier.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 96-12, Enclosure of swimming pool required, was repealed by the
Board of Selectmen 2-2-2004.
§ 96-12 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS § 96-16
74:25
Chapter 99
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 96. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
§ 99-1. Establishment of numbering system.
§ 99-2. Determination of numbers.
Numbers shall be determined by the foot frontage:
Map Number 3C24, entitled "Brookfield, Connecticut, Street
Numbering Sequence Map," filed at the office of the Town Clerk, shall
be employed as the basis for establishing number flow of all existing
and future streets.
A.
Route 25 from the Newtown Town line north to its junction with Route 7
and then north on Route 7 to the New Milford Town line shall constitute
the base line for numbering.
B.
Numbering shall be consecutive, with even numbers on the north and
west side and odd numbers on the south and east side of the streets.
In the case of a curvilinear street, the odd and even numbers shall be
determined by the direction of the major portion of the street.
C.
Numbering shall start at the base line and emanate east and west from
this line for all east/west oriented streets. North/south oriented streets
shall be numbered starting at the southernmost portion. An exception
would be when a street ends in a cul-de-sac, in which case the number
shall start at the head of the street or where it initially junctions with
another street.
D.
Corner lots at intersections shall be assigned a number on each street.
Those lots with a structure shall use the number assigned on the street
facing the main entrance.
E.
For commercial and industrial zones, all numbers shall be assigned
on the basis of one number per each 50 feet, except where existing
structures dictate the necessity of numbering to be on a greater or
lesser footage.
A.
For residential zones, all numbers shall be assigned on the basis of
one number per 150 feet, except where existing lot sizes dictate the
necessity of numbering to be on a greater or lesser footage.
B.
§ 96-16 BROOKFIELD CODE § 99-3
99:26
§ 99-3. Shopping centers.
Shopping centers shall be assigned one number for the total complex. This
number shall be determined by the location of the main entrance to the
complex. If this cannot be readily determined, then that number which
corresponds with the approximate center of the structure shall be assigned.
§ 99-4. Professional buildings.
Professional buildings shall be assigned one number per building. This
number shall be determined by location of the main entrance to the building
with respect to the street-numbering sequence.
§ 99-5. Apartment and condominium complexes.
Apartment and condominium complexes shall have their own distinct
identification or street name and shall be numbered consecutively.
§ 99-6. Display of numbers.
§ 99-7. Responsibility for procuring numbers.
Whenever any house, building or structure is erected, in order to preserve
the continuity and uniformity of numbering, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner or agent to procure the correct number or numbers as designated
on the Assessor's maps and/or field cards for the said property and
immediately fasten the said number or numbers so assigned as provided
in § 99-6C of this chapter. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall assign
numbers when none appear on the Assessor's map or on the field cards.
When street numbering has been completed, the owner, occupant or
agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or building
controlled by him the number or numbers assigned.
A.
Such number or numbers shall be placed on existing buildings within
30 days. The cost of the numbers shall be paid for by the property
owner. The numbers used shall not be less than three inches in height
and shall be made of a durable and clearly visible material. Failure to
install the proper number or numbers on existing buildings on or before
the thirty-day limit provided herein will subject violators to a fine of
$25.
B.
The number shall be conspicuously placed above, on or at the side of
the proper door of each building, so that the number can be seen plainly
from the street line. Whenever a building is set more than 75 feet from
the street line, the number shall be placed near the walk, drive way or
common entrance to such building and upon a gate post, fence, post or
other appropriate place so as to be discernible easily from the street
line.
C.
§ 99-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 99-8
99:27
§ 99-8. Enforcement authority.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is the designated authority for the Town of
Brookfield to enforce this chapter.
Chapter 164
OPEN SPACE USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
46.
Beaches — See Ch. 89.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 210.
Waterways — See Ch. 216.
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Open Space Use
Ordinance of Brookfield."
§ 164-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for the
use and control of land dedicated to open space and owned by the Town
of Brookfield in order to promote the safety and protection of the persons
using the property, and of the property.
§ 164-3. Hours of use.
Open space land shall be open from one hour before sunrise until one hour
after sunset. Town officials may close any portion of open space land or the
use of its facilities when it appears that the capacity of any area has been
exhausted or the use of same would endanger the public safety.
§ 164-4. Fishing.
Fishing is permitted on any open space land under the rules and regulations
established by the State of Connecticut Board of Fisheries and Game.
§ 164-5. Hunting and trapping.
Hunting and trapping is not permitted on any open space land without
permission of the Conservation Commission.
§ 164-6. Firearms.
Carrying and/or discharging of firearms is permitted only in areas
designated for such use under adequate supervision.
§ 99-8 BROOKFIELD CODE § 164-7
164:28
§ 164-7. Swimming and wading.
Swimming or wading is permitted only in such areas approved by the Health
Officer of the Town of Brookfield, provided that these areas are properly
supervised with the approval of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 164-8. Dogs and other pets.
Dogs and other pets are permitted on open space land, provided that such
pets are under the control of their owners or keepers at all times.
§ 164-9. Riding of horses and bicycles.
The riding of horses or bicycles is permitted on areas set aside for such
purposes.
§ 164-10. Overnight camping.
Overnight camping is permitted only in areas designated for camp use by
special permission of the Police Department. Sanitary facilities must be
provided by campers in accordance with the procedures of the Boy Scouts
of America.
§ 164-11. Fires.
Fires may be kindled only in designated areas.
§ 164-12. Damage or injury to surroundings prohibited.
No person shall deface, remove, destroy or otherwise injure in any manner
whatsoever any structure, rock, tree, flower, shrub or any other plant life
nor disturb or molest any bird or animal.
§ 164-13. Removal of refuse; littering prohibited.
Refuse must be removed by those who bring it in. No person shall litter the
grounds or waters of open space land.
§ 164-14. Use of motorized vehicles.
Motorized vehicles may not be operated or parked on any open space land
except on roadways and areas designated for such use.
§ 164-15. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter is sufficient cause for eviction, and
any person who violates any provision shall be fined not more than $25 for
each violation.
§ 164-7 OPEN SPACE USE § 164-15
164:29
Chapter 168
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
§ 168-1. Notice of violation.
§ 168-2. Restriction on all-night parking. [Amended 2-5-2018]
No person shall park any vehicle on any public street or highway for a
period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. This section shall not apply to a professional call, vehicles parked in
designated parking spaces in the Town Center District, or to the operators
of police, fire or other emergency vehicles.
§ 168-3. Parking during storms.
Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or rule or regulation of the
Town of Brookfield which relates to parking, a police officer shall attach
to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof stating that
such vehicle has been parked unlawfully and advising such owner or
operator of the amount of the fine or penalty.
A.
Said notice shall advise such owner or operator of his right to mail
or pay said fine to the Town of Brookfield within five days of the date
when such notice is attached to such vehicle, the fine or lines for the
designated violation or violations to be in accordance with the fines or
penalties hereinafter set forth.
B.
Speedy and official removal of snow from the streets and public
highways of the Town is hereby declared to be vital to the public health
and safety.
A.
No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
within the limits of any public highway so as to create a nuisance or
hazard during the time of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain or to
obstruct or interfere with snow removal and/or sanding.
B.
Any motor vehicle left so unattended may be impounded and removed
to a suitable pound, to be determined by the traffic authority.
C.
The Chief of Police, or his duly authorized representative, shall cause a
record to be kept of all cars so impounded, together with the name of
the registered owner thereof, the location from which taken, the name
of the authority directing its removal and the location to which taken.
D.
§ 164-15 BROOKFIELD CODE § 168-3
164:30
§ 168-4. Parking restrictions.
§ 168-5. Violations and penalties.
The owner of such vehicle may reclaim such vehicle upon showing
proper evidence of ownership and upon paying both the fine therefor
and all towing and storage charges.
E.
No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
in any place where, or during any period when, parking is prohibited by
the traffic authority as indicated by appropriate signs and/or markings.
A.
No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
for a longer period of time than permitted by the traffic authority as
indicated by appropriate signs and/or markings.
B.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon, nor shall any motor
vehicle be left parked, standing or stopped on or across, any public
sidewalk, except to cross such sidewalk for ingress and egress from
adjacent areas or to perform necessary sidewalk construction,
maintenance or snow removal.
C.
No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
D.
Unless in a designated parking space, no person shall park any motor
vehicle or permit it to remain stationary within 25 feet of a marked
crosswalk, an intersection or a stop sign.
E.
No person shall park any motor vehicle or permit it to remain stationary
within the limits of any public street or highway in such a manner as
to constitute a traffic hazard or to obstruct the free movement of traffic
thereon; nor shall any person double park any motor vehicle.
F.
The owner of any motor vehicle which has become disabled so that it is
impossible or impractical to remove it under its own power may notify
the Police Department of such fact, and, after notification, it may be
permitted to remain for a reasonable time for the purpose of making
repairs thereto or of obtaining assistance to remove it.
G.
The penalty for the violation of any provision of this chapter, except
illegal parking during a snowstorm, shall be a violation fee of $50,
payable to the Town of Brookfield. [Amended 2-5-1996]
A.
The penalty for violation of the prohibition against parking on public
streets or highways during a snowstorm shall be a violation fee of $75,
payable to the Town of Brookfield. [Amended 2-5-1996]
B.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter and fails to pay
all fines, fees and charges resulting from said violation within five days
from the date of said violation shall be prosecuted and fined not more
than $100 or be imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, and shall
C.
§ 168-3 OPEN SPACE USE § 168-5
164:31
§ 168-6. Special regulations during emergencies.
The Board of Selectmen or Chief of Police is authorized to suspend
permitted parking under parking regulations and to prohibit parking
temporarily in any areas where, in his opinion, it is necessary in order
to facilitate the removal of snow, the construction of public works
improvements or for other good and sufficient purposes, and he shall give
notice of such temporary prohibition by causing to be placed thereat
suitable signs indicating that parking is prohibited, and also, if practicable,
by radio and/or newspaper notices.
§ 168-7. Owner presumed to be responsible.
In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, there shall be a prima facie
presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked
such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred.
Chapter 192
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commissions — See Ch.
51.
Building construction — See Ch. 96.
Driveways — See Ch. 119.
Sewers — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 234.
be subject to the provisions of Sec. 14-111 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
§ 168-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 168-7
164:32
ARTICLE I
Construction
[Adopted by Town Meeting 5-30-1973]
§ 192-1. Submission to Planning Commission required.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to lay out and construct any
proposed new street, highway or public way in the Town of Brookfield shall
first submit a plan of the proposed facility to the Planning Commission for
its approval as prescribed by Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of the
State of Connecticut. This plan shall conform to the standards set forth
in the Subdivision Regulations10 of the Town of Brookfield as to form and
content.
§ 192-2. Submission of road plans to Town Engineer or Board of
Selectmen.
After submission of the subdivision layout to the Planning Commission,
the developer shall submit to the Town Engineer or Board of Selectmen
a detailed plan showing the proposed road profiles and the layout of
any proposed utilities, including storm drainage, water lines, sanitary
sewers and any other underground utilities.
A.
Road plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Connecticut. Each sheet of said plan shall bear
his seal and title box.
B.
Road plans shall be drawn on plan-profile sheets, the size of which shall
not exceed 24 inches in width and 36 inches in length.
C.
The road plans and/or profile shall include the following data:
The scale. Generally the vertical scale should be one inch equals
four feet and the horizontal scale should be one inch equals 40 feet.
(1)
The existing center-line profile based upon actual field
measurements taken at intervals no greater than every 50 feet
along the proposed roadway.
(2)
The center-line profile of the proposed roadway, showing gradients
and vertical curve data.
(3)
The plan portion of the road plan submission shall show the
proposed road layout as submitted to the Planning Commission
with lot lines as they intersect the street lines, as well as lot
numbers.
(4)
The road plan shall also show roadway stationing as it relates to
the accompanying profile with each proposed road starting at zero
plus zero, 10 plus zero, 20 plus zero, etc.
(5)
D.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Subdivision of Land.
§ 192-1 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-2
164:33
§ 192-3. Design criteria.
Roads shall meet the following design criteria:
The plan shall show in detail the location and size of all drainage
lines, including existing pipes which drain onto or off of the
proposed land to be serviced by the roadway. The plan shall also
indicate location of all proposed catch basins, manholes, headwalls
and streams or open ditches which relate to the proposed
construction. The plan shall show invert elevations at inlet points,
catch basins, manholes and discharge points. Proposed storm
drainage shall be shown on the profile with stations and offsets to
the proposed center line of the roadway.
(6)
Proposed underground utilities other than storm drains shall be
shown in the same general detail, including location, size, etc.
(7)
(8) Each proposed roadway shall be shown on a separate sheet.
Where streams discharge onto the parcel to be subdivided, the
petitioner shall submit maps and calculations of area of watershed
and estimated flow information. This date shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer and shall be used in the design of
all conduits which relate to the watercourse in question. Design
criteria shall be as follows:
(a) Major culverts: 50 years.
(b) Smaller culverts: 25 years.
(c) Enclosed systems: 10 years.
(9)
Classification:
(1) Arterial.
(2) Industrial.
(3) Collector.
(4) Residential.
A.
Right-of-way. The minimum width of the right-of-way shall be as follows:
(1) Arterial: 60 feet.
(2) Industrial: 60 feet.
(3) Collector: 50 feet.
(4) Residential: 50 feet.
B.
Pavement width. The minimum width of the paved surface as measured
from face of curb to face of curb shall be as follows:
C.
§ 192-2 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-3
164:34
(1) Arterial: 40 feet.
(2) Industrial: 36 feet.
(3) Collector: 30 feet.
(4) Residential: 26 feet.
Curve radius.
The minimum radius of all horizontal curves at the center line shall
be as follows:
(a) Arterial: 750 feet.
(b) Industrial: 250 feet.
(c) Collector: 250 feet.
(d) Residential: 250 feet.
(1)
Curve radii shall be based on design speeds as set forth by the
State of Connecticut Geometric Design Standards.
(2)
D.
Gradient. The minimum gradient of all streets shall be 0.5%. The
maximum gradient shall be as follows:
(1) Arterial: 6%.
(2) Industrial: 6%.
(3) Collector: 8%.
(4) Residential: 10%.
E.
Cul-de-sac.
Where culs-de-sac are permitted, the following minimum radius for
right-of-way shall be used:
(a) Arterial: not permitted.
(b) Industrial: 60 feet.
(c) Collector: not permitted.
(d) Residential: 50 feet.
(1)
Dead-end streets with culs-de-sac shall not exceed 1,500 feet in
length unless an alternate means of access for emergency vehicles
is provided which is acceptable to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission may waive the requirement for an alternate
means of access for emergency vehicles if the Commission finds
that such alternate means of access is not required for public
safety. [Amended 12-19-1977]
(2)
F.
§ 192-3 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-3
164:35
Where an alternate means of access for emergency vehicles is
required, the Planning Commission shall determine the standards
of construction and impose such conditions as it finds necessary
to insure adequate and proper maintenance of said emergency
accessway. The Planning Commission may require that the
applicant post a permanent maintenance bond in an amount
satisfactory to said Commission to insure adequate and proper
maintenance of said accessway. [Added 12-19-1977]
(3)
The diameter for the paved portion of the cul-de-sac shall be as
follows:
(a) Arterial: not permitted.
(b) Industrial: 100 feet.
(c) Collector: not permitted.
(d) Residential: 80 feet.
(4)
Curbs. Bituminous concrete curbing shall be installed on all roads
where finished center-line grades exceed 5% and are required by the
Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer.
G.
Vertical curves. Every change in grade shall be effected with a vertical
curve of sufficient length to ensure adequate stopping sight distance
and to provide for smooth transition. Using the basic formula of L
equals KA where A equals the algebraic sum of grades, the following K
factor shall be used:
(1) Arterial: K equals 55.
(2) Industrial: K equals 40.
(3) Collector: K equals 40.
(4) Residential: K equals 25.
H.
Cross slope of pavement. The transverse slope of all paved sections
shall be at the minimum rate of 3/8 inch per foot as shown on the
standard detail.
I.
Driveway entrances. Where driveways have been constructed prior
to the petition for acceptance, said driveways shall conform to the
standard detail as to configuration. Driveway entrances shall be paved
with bituminous concrete into the right-of-way line. In all cases the
gutter line of the roadway shall be maintained in a true line and grade.
J.
Street signs. Street signs shall be required at all intersections. To
ensure uniformity the developer shall pay to the municipality a sum to
be determined by the Board of Selectmen per required sign and his
responsibility under this provision shall end upon payment of this sum.
K.
§ 192-3 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-3
164:36
§ 192-4. Construction specifications.
Mailboxes. When homes within a subdivision are occupied prior to
acceptance of the street, it shall be the responsibility of the developer
to erect mailboxes where said street intersects the nearest public
highway. The mailboxes shall be erected as directed by the Postmaster,
and they shall be maintained in good order until the street is accepted
as a public highway. The developer shall remove same when postal
service is supplied to the individual home.
L.
Subgrade.
The subgrade shall be prepared in an approved manner by
excavating or filling, as required. Filling shall be done in layers not
to exceed eight inches in depth, using suitable material; each layer
shall be consolidated by rolling before the next layer is placed.
Stones in earth fill shall be well distributed, and no stone over four
inches in diameter shall be left within 12 inches of the finished
subgrade.
(1)
Wherever soft clay, spongy or other types of unsuitable soil which
will not compact under rolling are encountered, such soil shall
be removed and replaced with gravel or other material, approved
by the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer, which shall be
compacted as specified above.
(2)
Wherever soil is of such nature that it retains an excessive amount
of moisture, or where conditions do not afford ready natural
drainage, subdrains and underdrains shall be provided, in
accordance with the requirements of the Board of Selectmen or
Town Engineer.
(3)
Preparation of the subgrade shall be performed upon completion of
required excavation, filling and the installation of utilities. Where
roadways are in cut, they shall be brought to subgrade elevation
for a width of at least two feet wider than the finished pavement
width, i.e., one foot on either side.
(4)
Where roadways are in embankment, the fill shall extend to
subgrade level, and for a width not less than six feet outside the
curbline, i.e., three feet on each side. The total subgrade area shall
then be thoroughly consolidated by repeated rollings, using a selfpropelled
roller weighing not less than 10 tons. Areas beyond the
above-described lines shall be excavated or filled to the full width of
the right-of-way in a method satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen
or Town Engineer.
(5)
Rough tolerance. Rough subgrade shall be formed and compacted
in accordance with Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer approved
drawings, and work shall be performed within tolerance of two
inches of indicated levels.
(6)
A.
§ 192-3 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-4
164:37
Surface drainage. A complete system of surface drainage, to the
satisfaction of the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer, including
catch basins and manholes, shall be installed, prior to the final
construction of the subgrade. Catch basins and manholes shall comply
with requirements of the standard detail. All pipe shall comply with the
Highway Specifications of the State of Connecticut.
B.
Gravel course.
Upon the prepared subgrade, finished parallel to and 15 inches
below the surface of the finished grade of the street, shall be
spread a layer of the approved run-of-bank gravel to a depth which,
when thoroughly compacted, shall be 10 inches. The largest stone
size permitted in this course is four inches. This course shall be
rolled with a ten-ton roller until thoroughly compacted.
(1)
Inequalities in the surface shall be corrected and rolling continued
as may be necessary for a satisfactory result and to the satisfaction
of the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer.
(2)
C.
Pavement.
Upon the prepared gravel course as herein described (10 inches in
thickness), a two-inch layer of screened gravel shall be placed so
as to effect a fine grade. This gravel shall be carefully spread by
means of a motorized grader and shall be wetted and thoroughly
rolled with a ten-ton roller. When completed, the surface shall be
smooth and true to line and grade parallel to the finished surface.
(1)
The final wearing surface shall consist of bituminous concrete
placed in two courses. The compacted thickness of each course
shall be 1 1/2 inches. Material for this course shall conform to
the requirements of Article M.04.01, Class 1 of the Standard
Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction of
the Connecticut State Highway Department, Form 810, 1969
Revision. This article is entitled "Bituminous Concrete Mixture."
The method of placing shall conform to all the requirements of
Article 4.02.03 of the above-described Standard Specifications.
(2)
D.
Inspection. Before commencing any of the herein described roadway
items, it shall be the responsibility of the builder to notify the Board
of Selectmen or Town Engineer at least 48 hours in advance of his
intent to proceed. No construction shall take place without the specific
authorization, after inspection, of the Board of Selectmen or Town
Engineer.
E.
Scheduling of roadway construction. In all cases the gravel course shall
weather at least one full winter (November 1 through March 31) in
place. The second of the two wearing surfaces shall be placed only at
the discretion of the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer and only
after all patches and repairs have been made to the first course as
directed. In general, this final surface shall not be installed until a
F.
§ 192-4 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-4
164:38
§ 192-5. Storm drainage design criteria.
Storm drainage shall be provided and designed in accordance with the
following standards:
substantial number of homes have been constructed in the subdivision.
In no case shall bituminous concrete be placed after November 1 unless
specific written approval is granted by the Board of Selectmen or Town
Engineer.
Pipe. Sufficient pipe shall be installed within the subdivision to carry
existing watercourses and to drain the proposed roads and/or
easements which may reasonably be expected to be constructed at
some future date on adjoining property which normally drains across
the area of the proposed subdivision or which, in the opinion of the
Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer, would be the most practical
course for such drainage. Cross-lot drainage shall be piped to at least
30 feet behind proposed buildings and/or leaching systems. If in his
judgment there will be no substantial danger from soil erosion or
danger to the public health and safety, the Board of Selectmen or
Town Engineer may permit the discharge of rivers and large streams
in their natural courses and may permit the discharge of stormwater
and established watercourses in open ditches across proposed lots
of one acre or larger. All pipe shall be of such diameter, not less
than 15 inches, as will, in the judgment of the Board of Selectmen or
Town Engineer, be sufficient to properly carry stormwater expected to
enter the pipe from the proposed subdivision and from other properties
when developed which normally drain across the area of the proposed
subdivision. The minimum slope for fifteen-inch pipe shall be 0.75%.
The intent of this subsection is that pipes shall be installed the full
length in all proposed roads to permit the connection of house storm
drains and cellar drains where required by ground conditions.
A.
Manholes. Manholes shall be provided at each change in direction or
grade of the pipe and shall not be spaced more than 300 feet apart.
Manholes shall be constructed as shown on the standard detail. Only
precast concrete units or solid concrete blocks shall be used.
B.
Catch basins.
Catch basins shall be provided in order that surface water will not
travel without interception more than as shown in the following
schedule of grades and distances:
(a) Fifty-hundredths percent to 1.00%: 250 linear feet.
(b) One and zero hundredths percent to 5.00%: 300 linear feet.
(c) Five and zero hundredths percent to 10.00%: 250 linear feet.
(1)
Each basin shall be connected to a manhole or adjacent catch
basin where no manhole exists. Construction shall conform to the
(2)
C.
§ 192-4 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-5
164:39
§ 192-6. Storm drainage construction specifications.
The storm drainage system shall be constructed in accordance with the
following standards and procedures:
standard detail. Only precast concrete units or solid concrete
blocks shall be used.
Underdrains.
In all roadway areas where a high water table is found to exist,
either before commencing or during actual construction of the
roadways, the developer shall be required to install underdrains as
directed by the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer or his duly
authorized agent, to protect the stability of the roadway.
(1)
If required, perforated concrete or metal pipe shall be used,
backfilled with washed gravel or crushed rock 1/2 inch nominal
size to a depth of at least 12 inches over the top of the pipe. The
remainder of the trench shall be backfilled with bankrun gravel as
approved by the Board of Selectmen or Town Engineer.
(2)
Sufficient pitch shall be provided to allow this underground water
to run freely to a point of discharge. The size and type of conduit
shall be as directed by the Engineer.
(3)
D.
Discharge. The discharge of all stormwater shall be into suitable
drainage structures or watercourses. Where the discharge shall be onto
private property within or adjoining the proposed subdivision, property
easements and discharge rights for the Board of Selectmen or Town
Engineer shall be secured by the applicant before approval of the final
map and acceptance of the drainage plan is requested by the developer.
E.
Pipe. All pipe used shall be of reinforced concrete meeting State
Highway Department specifications. In some instances the Engineer
may recommend use of corrugated metal pipe where he feels such pipe
will provide a more satisfactory drainage system.
A.
Joints. The joints of all pipe shall be shoved tight. Pipe laid in sandy,
silty or other soil where, in the judgment of the Engineer, there is
the possibility of silting shall have joints thoroughly sealed with 1:3
portland cement mortar or other approved method.
B.
Catch basins and manholes. Catch basins and manholes shall be
constructed in accordance with the approved plans. Manholes shall be
constructed of solid concrete radial manhole blocks eight inches thick
or of precast concrete units. Catch basins shall be constructed of eightinch
solid concrete blocks or precast concrete units.
C.
Headwall, culverts and bridges. Headwalls, culverts and bridges shall
be constructed where required, in accordance with good engineering
practice and as specified by the Engineer.
D.
§ 192-5 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-6
164:40
§ 192-7. Guard railings.
When, in the opinion of the Engineer, a guard railing is necessary to protect
the traveling public, the subdivider shall install same as directed. The
guard railing shall consist of the two-cable variety and shall conform to the
applicable State Highway Department specification.
§ 192-8. Utilities.
Prior to the placement of the base course, all utilities are to be installed
together with service extensions to each lot within the property line. The
intent of this section is to provide all required underground services to each
lot prior to the placement of base course and finished pavement.
§ 192-9. Submission of as-built drawings.
§ 192-10. Street acceptance procedure.
Open ditches. Open ditches may be permitted at the discretion of the
Engineer. The size of the waterway shall be of sufficient size to convey
all water expected to be discharged and shall be suitably stabilized
against erosion. The side banks shall be moderately sloped, not less
than three horizontal to one vertical and then seeded or otherwise
stabilized paved bottom sections and rip-rap slopes shall be provided
when directed by the Engineer to prevent scour and erosion.
E.
Prior to consideration for acceptance as a public highway, the developer
shall submit as-built drawings, at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet
horizontal, one inch equals four feet vertical. Such drawings shall be on
plan-profile sheets and shall not exceed 36 inches by 24 inches in size.
Drawings shall be prepared by a person registered as a professional
engineer in the State of Connecticut and shall show the following detail:
(1) Concrete monuments delineating the right-of-way.
(2) Edge of paved surfaces as they relate to right-of-way.
(3) A center-line profile of the paved surface.
The location and size of all sanitary and storm sewer conduits and
structures, including invert elevation of same.
(4)
Bearings and distances on all right-of-way boundaries tied into the
monuments described above.
(5)
(6) Drainage easements as shown on the approved subdivision plan.
A.
The original of this plan shall be delivered to the Board of Selectmen or
Town Engineer, and said plan shall be reviewed as to conformance with
these standards before submission to the legislative body for approval.
B.
All petitions for the acceptance of new streets as public highways shall
be presented to the Board of Selectmen during the month of May.
A.
§ 192-6 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-10
164:41
§ 192-11. Naming of streets. [Added 6-26-1975]
The Board of Selectmen shall approve the names of new streets and have
the authority to change the name of any street where confusion exists in
similar sounding names or street-numbering sequences. For the purpose of
this section, streets shall be defined to include any road, highway, avenue,
lane or right-of-way providing access to more than one structure and/or
living unit.
During the month of June, final inspection shall be made, and a written
report shall be delivered to the petitioner setting forth any repairs
which will be necessary to bring the roadway up to standard.
All repairs and/or modifications shall be effected by the developer prior
to September 15, at which time a final determination shall be made as
to the adequacy of the construction. If the Board of Selectmen or Town
Engineer determines that the construction meets the standards as set
forth herein, and provided that all other statutes and requirements are
met, the petition shall be presented to the legislative body for action.
B.
§ 192-10 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-11
164:42
ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-6-1979]
§ 192-12. Permit required; exceptions.
No person other than the Director of the Department of Public Works, Town
employees or agents under his supervision shall dig up or remove any turf,
dirt or stone from, nor make any excavation or opening in or upon, any
portion of any street, highway, park, sidewalk, crosswalk, public place or
right-of-way, except after the acquisition of a permit and subject to the
provisions of this section.
§ 192-13. Permit application and issuance procedure.
In all cases where the work of making any such excavation, opening,
removal, change or repair shall be performed by any person other than
the Director of the Department of Public Works, Town employees or agents
as aforesaid, the person desiring such excavation or change shall make
application to the Director for issuance of a permit, and said Director is
hereby authorized to issue such a permit; provided, however, he shall have
first obtained from such person the location of the intended excavation
or opening, the size thereof, the purpose therefor and the person, firm or
corporation doing the actual excavation work and the name of the person,
firm or corporation for whom the work is being done, together with a signed
acknowledgment by the applicant to save the Town free and harmless from
any injury or claim arising out of the work to be done, and further that he
has knowledge of the existence of this article and intends to comply fully
with its provisions as well as all other ordinances and laws relating to the
work to be done.
§ 192-14. Permit fee; bond required.
The fee for such permit shall be $10 payable to the Town of Brookfield. The
Director of the Department of Public Works may require from the applicant
a bond with suitable surety in an amount of at least double the cost as
estimated by him of making such excavation or opening, which bond shall
be conditioned on the performance of said work in a workmanlike manner
and on the restoration by the applicant of said street, highway, sidewalk,
crosswalk, public place or right-of-way as nearly as can be to its former
condition, and further conditioned that, in the event any part of said work
shall not be done in workmanlike manner or the excavated area shall not be
restored within a reasonable time to the same conditions as it was in prior
to the making of such excavation or opening, the Director of the Department
of Public Works shall, at the expense of the applicant, be authorized to
complete said work and to collect the cost of said work out of said bond
given as aforesaid or out of any cash deposit given in lieu thereof.
§ 192-12 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-15
164:43
§ 192-15. Notification of Police Department.
All persons, after obtaining the permit from the Director of the Department
of Public Works to make an excavation or opening in the streets, highways
or public areas of the Town for any purpose, and before beginning work
for said openings or excavations, shall forward a copy of the issued permit
to the Chief of the Police Department, together with a time schedule and
location of the work to be done, and upon completion of such work, the
Chief shall again be notified.
§ 192-16. Lights, barricades and detour signs.
§ 192-17. Traffic control. [Amended 11-4-2002]
Whenever the normal flow of vehicular traffic is interrupted by construction,
excavation or repair of any nature upon rights-of-way of the Town of
Brookfield, the Chief of Police may order the person responsible for such
work to secure police traffic control to insure the safe and orderly flow
of the traffic and the prompt enforcement of traffic laws. The cost of
such police supervision shall be assumed by the person conducting such
construction, excavation or repair. In exercising his decision of whether or
not to require police personnel for such activities, the Chief of Police shall
take into account the width and condition of the proposed road site and
surrounding roads, the posted speed limit, the time of day during which
activities will occur in relationship to peak volume of traffic, the normal
volume of traffic expected upon said road during said hours, the line of
sight, known traffic patterns including excessive speeds or accidents known
for the site or the vicinity, the scope and length of time of the proposed
construction, excavation or repair activity, and such other factors as may
impact safety at the site as may be appropriate. The Chief of Police or, in
Whenever any excavation shall be made in any of the streets or
sidewalks of the Town, the person in charge thereof shall cause large,
well-lighted lanterns or battery-operated amber flashing warning lights
attached to a barricade to be kept burning around the same during the
night, placed in such a manner that a reasonable person would take
notice of such warning device and be prevented from entering such
excavation.
A.
Whenever road construction, repair or excavation causes vehicular
traffic to be detoured from that road, the person in charge thereof shall
cause to be placed large signs and arrows indicating such detour and
direction for vehicular traffic to follow. Such barricades shall be erected
in a manner that will completely block vehicular traffic from such
construction, repair or excavation, except that the person in charge
may allow a single lane to be opened for the entrance and exit of
construction equipment or other vehicles allowed to pass. Such
barricades shall be equipped with lighting devices as previously defined
in this section. Signs shall be placed at least 150 feet before such
detour, warning of same.
B.
§ 192-15 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-17
164:44
his absence, the next in command, shall render his decision on whether or
not police supervision is required within 72 hours (excluding any portion
of a day the Town Hall is closed for weekend or holidays) of any written
application for a decision on such issue. Absent the rendering of a decision
within such time frame, it shall be assumed that the Chief of Police or his
next in command has determined that police supervision is not necessary
for the site. Any decision of the Chief of Police or his next in command
under this section may be appealed to the Police Commission by any party
aggrieved thereby by filing a written objection within five days of such
decision with the Police Commission in care of the Brookfield Town Clerk.
The Police Commission shall hear such appeal in an open forum and render
a decision thereon within 60 days of filing any appeal. Upon the failure of
the Police Commission to render a decision within 60 days, any appeal by
an applicant shall be deemed to be sustained. Anyone receiving an adverse
decision from the Police Commission may pursue such other appeals or
legal remedies to the Superior Court as may exist under the law.
§ 192-18. Emergency conditions.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility,
without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder,
shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the
dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety
of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility
shall apply for a permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day
during which the office of the Director of Public Works is open for business
and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an
excavation permit hereunder.
§ 192-19. Provisions not applicable to overhead services.
This article shall not be construed to apply to the installation or
replacement by a public utility of overhead services, provided that the limit
of the work area does not disturb nor damage the paved or surfaced streets
or public rights-of-way. Notwithstanding this exemption, no person or firm
so engaged shall park his or its equipment or vehicles in such a manner as
to impede traffic, create any hazardous conditions nor otherwise violate any
provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 192-20. Word usage.
For the purposes of this article, night shall be construed to run from 1/
2 hour before sunset to 1/2 hour after sunrise.
A.
For the purpose of this article, the term person shall mean and include
the singular and plural and shall mean and include any firm,
partnership, corporation or associations.
B.
§ 192-17 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-21
164:45
§ 192-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not
more than $100 for each offense. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
§ 192-21 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-21
164:46
ARTICLE III
Road Acceptance Standards
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 7-5-1988]
§ 192-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a method for acceptance as Town
roads of certain existing roads.
§ 192-23. Criteria for eligibility for acceptance.
To be eligible for consideration for acceptance as a Town road, any existing
road must satisfy all of the following requirements:
§ 192-24. Procedure for acceptance.
Said road must have been in existence and in use as a public road
continuously for a period of time commencing not later than May
30, 1973, and continuing without interruption from said date to the
present.
A.
Said road must provide a means of access to at least five existing
homes.
B.
Said road must be paved to a minimum width of 20 feet for its entire
length.
C.
If said road is a dead end, it must have a paved cul-de-sac at the dead
end of sufficient size to permit a full-sized Town Highway Department
truck with plow attached to reverse direction without backing up.
D.
The right-of-way for said road must be a minimum of 30 feet in width
for the entire length of the road.
E.
Road drainage must be provided which is found to be adequate by the
Board of Selectmen upon the recommendation of the Director of Public
Works.
F.
Said road must be in such condition that no work other than normal
maintenance and repairs is required.
G.
A petition signed by not less than 75% of the owners of the existing
homes abutting said road and also signed by the owner of the road
right-of-way must be filed with the Board of Selectmen. Said petition
must be accompanied by a Class A-2 survey prepared by a surveyor
licensed by the State of Connecticut. Said survey must be on a scale of
one inch equals 40 feet and must show the location of the road right-ofway
and the paved portion thereof, all drainage structures and required
drainage easements and the names of the owners of the road rightof-
way and all adjacent property owners. Said survey shall also show
all proposed repairs and modifications to the road and the drainage
structures. Said petition must also be accompanied by a fully executed
A.
§ 192-22 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-24
164:47
§ 192-25. Final action by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall not accept any road as a Town road under the
provisions of this article unless the Board affirmatively finds, based on the
evidence presented to it, that all of the following requirements have been
met:
warranty deed conveying title of the roadway to the Town, a certificate
of title from a Connecticut attorney disclosing no encumbrances and
all necessary drainage easements. All of said documents shall be in a
form acceptable to the Town Attorney and shall be held in escrow by
him until final action on the petition by the Board of Selectmen. If the
road is accepted as a Town road, the documents shall be recorded with
the Town Clerk. If the road is not accepted, the documents shall be
returned to the petitioners.
The Board of Selectmen shall refer the petition to the Planning
Commission for the report required by the provisions of Section 8-24 of
the Connecticut General Statutes and shall also refer the petition to the
Director of Public Works for investigation and a report concerning the
physical condition of the road, the adequacy of the existing drainage
system and any repairs or modifications which are required or
advisable.
B.
If, after receipt of the reports of the Planning Commission and Director
of Public Works, the Board of Selectmen determine that repairs or
modifications are required to the existing drainage system and/or road,
then the Board shall table further action on the petition until said
repairs or modifications are completed. If said repairs or modifications
are not completed in a satisfactory manner within one year from the
date that the petition was tabled, then the Board of Selectmen shall
deny the petition.
C.
After the Board of Selectmen have been notified by the petitioners that
all required repairs and modifications have been completed, the Board
shall refer the petition to the Planning Commission and to the Director
of Public Works for a supplemental report concerning the adequacy of
said repairs and modifications.
D.
After all required repairs and modifications have been completed and
after all required reports have been received from the Planning
Commission and the Director of Public Works, the Board of Selectmen
shall hold a public hearing to hear testimony from the public
concerning the advisability of accepting the road as a Town road.
E.
After the public hearing has been held, the Board of Selectmen shall
take final action on the petition. The Board of Selectmen may accept
the road as a Town road, refuse to accept the road as a Town road
or schedule a Special Town Meeting for the purpose of accepting or
refusing to accept the road as a Town road.
F.
§ 192-24 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-25
164:48
§ 192-26. Acceptance of Special Town Meeting.
No road shall be accepted as a Town road by a Special Town Meeting,
pursuant to the provisions of this article, unless the Board of Selectmen
have found that all of the requirements contained in § 192-25 hereof have
been satisfied except the requirement set forth in § 192-25G.
The road has been in existence and continually in use by the public from
May 30, 1973, or earlier to the present.
A.
The road provides the sole means of access to at least five existing
homes.
B.
The road right-of-way is a minimum of 30 feet in width for its entire
length, and the road is paved to a minimum of 20 feet in width for its
entire length.
C.
The road drainage is adequate and does not require any modification or
repair.
D.
If the road is a dead-end road, that the requirements of § 192-23D of
this article have been satisfied.
E.
F. The road is in safe condition for travel by the public.
The Planning Commission has recommended that the road be accepted
as a Town road.
G.
Acceptance of the road as a Town road is in the best interest of the
Town and its residents and in the best interest of the public safety and
convenience.
H.
I. The road does not require any repairs or modifications.
§ 192-25 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-26
164:49

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal and Maintenance
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-2-2016 11]
§ 192-27. Definitions.
The following words shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be
construed and understood as follows:
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street, usually lying on either side thereof,
between the curb and the adjacent property line, intended for the use and
passage of pedestrians.
STREET — Includes avenues, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, bridges and
the approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares in the Town, and
shall also mean all that part thereof from property line to property line of
the premises abutting thereon.
§ 192-28. Removal of snow by abutting owners.
Any snow or sleet upon any sidewalk in the Town, or any ice upon such
sidewalks, shall be cleared or caused to be cleared by the owner of the land,
building or premises adjoining or fronting upon such sidewalk or connected
therewith.
§ 192-29. Time limit for removal of snow and ice.
The clearance of snow, sleet or ice, as provided for in § 192-28, shall be
completed within 24 hours following the cessation of the fall of snow, sleet
or rain.
§ 192-30. Unremovable portion to be made safe.
If snow, sleet or ice cannot be wholly cleared, as provided in § 192-28, the
owner shall clear so much thereof as is reasonably possible and provide
a passageway for the safe passage of pedestrians, and sprinkle sufficient
sand, salt or other proper substance in such quantity over the passageway
and keep the same in a safe condition for public travel at all times.
§ 192-31. Clearing of sidewalks by Town; collection of costs.
In addition to any other penalty provided by law, if any owner or
occupant fails to comply with the provisions of §§ 192-28, 192-29 and
192-30, the Public Works Department and its employees may clear
snow and ice from such sidewalks. The expense of such clearing shall
be a lien upon the premises adjoining and abutting on such sidewalks,
and the Board of Selectmen may cause a certificate of lien therefor to
be recorded in the Town Clerk's office.
A.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IV, Snow and Ice Removal,
adopted 2-4-2008 by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 192-27 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-31
164:51
§ 192-32. Penalty for failure to clear sidewalks.
Any person who violates or refuses or neglects to comply with the provisions
of §§ 192-28 through 192-30 shall be issued a citation by the Brookfield
Police Department and fined $100 for each violation, and each day of failure
to comply with such provisions shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 192-33. Maintenance of sidewalks by abutting owners required.
Any person owning or occupying any lands in the Town abutting or fronting
a sidewalk shall keep such sidewalk, at all times, in safe condition and
repair for the use of the public and free from obstruction and defects.
§ 192-34. Repair of sidewalks by Town; collection of costs.
§ 192-35. Removal of snow, ice and other materials from private
property.
The expenses of clearing snow and ice by the Public Works Department
as provided in Subsection A of this section and the cost of the lien
therefor may be entered in the next succeeding rate bill for taxes
against the owner of the premises with the tax assessed upon such
premises, and if the expense and the cost of the lien is paid with such
taxes, the lien shall be released; and if not so paid, the lien may be
foreclosed in the manner hereinbefore provided.
B.
If any sidewalk obstruction or defect exists, the Board of Selectmen
shall notify the owner, agent or occupant of the abutting premises to
remove such obstruction or defect and, if the same is not corrected
within 30 days after such notice, the Town may perform the same.
A.
The expense of such removal or correction by the Town shall be a
lien upon such abutting property in favor of the Town, which may be
continued if a certificate of lien is filed with the Town Clerk, and the
same may be collected by the Town by any proper form of legal or
equitable action, including foreclosure, in the same manner as for the
collection of real estate taxes.
B.
This section shall be construed to include, but is not limited to, any
private owner or lawful possessor of property who demands, orders,
directs, instructs, requests or allows any agent(s), employees(s), or
independent contractor(s) to remove snow, ice, or debris from private
property in such a manner that they are found to have violated
Subsection B of this section.
A.
No person shall, by any manner or method, place or cause to be placed
any snow, ice, or debris from any privately owned property onto or
into any street, road, public way or sidewalk of the Town. [Formerly
§ 192-27.]
B.
§ 192-31 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-36
164:52
§ 192-36. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this article or refuses to or neglects to comply with
the same shall be issued a citation by the Brookfield Police Department and
fined the sum of $100 for each offense. In case of a continuing violation,
each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
[Formerly § 192-28.]
§ 192-37. Liability for snow and ice on public sidewalks.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 7-163a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, notwithstanding the provision of § 13a-149 or any other
general statute or special act, the Town of Brookfield shall not be liable
for any personal injury or property damage caused by the presence
of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the Town of Brookfield is
the owner of and exercises control over land abutting such sidewalk,
provided the Town shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to
such sidewalks.
A.
The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a
public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the
presence of ice and snow on such sidewalk abutting his property as the
municipality had prior to the effective date of this article and shall be
liable for any personal injury or property damage where a breach of
said duty is the proximate cause of said injury.
B.
No action to recover damages for personal injury or property damage
caused by the presence of ice and snow on a public sidewalk against
a person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a
public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date
when the injury or damage is first sustained.
C.
§ 192-36 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-37
164:53

ARTICLE V
Assessment of Benefits for Sidewalk Improvements
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-2-2016]
§ 192-38. Assessments authorized.
At any time after the Town of Brookfield, by Town Meeting, zoning authority
approval, or by the Board of Selectmen, resolves to or approves the layout
or construction of sidewalks, curbs, other improvements and associated
amenities (hereinafter "improvements") in the Town Center District as
shown on the Town of Brookfield Zoning Map, the Board of Selectmen may
levy benefit assessments upon the lands and buildings in the municipality
which, in its judgment, are especially benefited by the improvements, and
upon the owners of such land and buildings, according to such resolution as
the Board of Selectmen may adopt, subject to any right of appeal allowed
by law and subject to any exemptions mandated by law.
§ 192-39. Determination of cost of improvements.
The Board of Selectmen shall ascertain the cost of the improvements and,
in ascertaining the cost, shall take into account all costs of construction,
including, but not limited to, the cost of construction, land acquisition, cost
connected with financing the project, all engineering and legal expenses
related to the project and any other costs or expenses needed to complete
the improvements.
§ 192-40. Criteria for determination of assessment.
Upon determining the amount to be collected pursuant to the assessment,
which amount may be a fraction of, but shall not exceed 50% of, the cost of
the improvements as determined in § 192-39, the Board of Selectmen shall
assess the benefits upon the properties the Board of Selectmen determines
are benefited by the improvements in proportion to the square footage/area
of the improvements fronting or bounding the properties to be assessed.
The Board of Selectmen may make reasonable allowances whenever, for any
reason, the particular situation of any property requires an allowance (e.g.,
a corner lot).
§ 192-41. Use of Tax Assessor maps for measurements.
For the purposes of any measurements required under these ordinances,
the maps of the Tax Assessor of the Town of Brookfield shall be deemed
applicable and accurate unless shown to be otherwise by a Class A-2 survey
certified by a registered Connecticut land surveyor.
§ 192-42. Authority of Board of Selectmen to provide for
installment payments.
The Board of Selectmen may, by resolution, provide for an installment
method of payment of any assessment levied hereunder, including the
§ 192-38 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-42
164:55
number and duration of payments and the interest rate to be charged.
The interest rate shall not exceed the rate of interest the municipality is
obligated to pay to finance the project or the prime rate of interest plus 1%
if the project is not financed.
§ 192-43. Benefit assessment enactment procedure.
§ 192-44. Delinquent assessments.
The Board of Selectmen shall fix in the Assessment of Benefits
Resolution the due date of assessments made and the manner in which
the assessment shall be paid, whether in full or by installment, pursuant
to § 192-42.
A.
No assessment shall be made until after a public hearing has been held
before the Board of Selectmen at which the owners of all property to
be assessed shall have had an opportunity to be heard concerning the
proposed assessment. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such
hearing shall be published at least seven days before the date thereof
in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town, and a notice
signed by the Town Clerk shall be mailed to each owner of record of any
property to be assessed at such owner's address as shown in the latest
completed Grand List. A copy of the proposed Assessment of Benefits
Resolution shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk and available
for inspection by the public at least seven days prior to the date of the
public hearing.
B.
When the Board of Selectmen has finally determined the amount of
the assessment to be levied, the final resolution shall state the street
address of the properties to be assessed, the names and addresses
of the affected property owners, and the specific assessment amount
assessed against each individual property. The final resolution of the
Board of Selectmen shall be filed in the offices of the Tax Assessor,
Tax Collector and the Town Clerk, and the Town Clerk shall cause the
resolution to be published in a newspaper having a general circulation
in the Town within 14 days after it is filed with the Town Clerk.
C.
Any assessment of benefits or any installment thereof not paid within
30 days after the due date shall be delinquent and shall be subject to
interest from such due date at the set interest rate. Such interest and
costs shall be collectible as part of such assessment.
A.
Any unpaid assessment and any interest due thereon shall constitute
a lien upon the real estate against which the assessment was levied
from the date of such assessment payment due date. Each such lien
may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by
the General Statutes for continuing, recording and releasing real estate
tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens
and encumbrances except taxes and may be foreclosed in the same
manner as for real estate tax liens. The Tax Collector of the municipality
shall collect such assessments, interest and costs in accordance with all
B.
§ 192-42 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-44
164:56
provisions of the General Statutes for the collection of real estate taxes,
and the Town may recover any such assessment, interest and costs in
a civil action against any person liable therefor or by foreclosure in
accordance with the General Statutes pertaining to the foreclosure of
real estate tax liens.
§ 192-44 OPEN SPACE USE § 192-44
164:57
Chapter 234
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Chapter 242
ZONING
Chapter 246
LISTING OF SPECIAL ACTS PERTAINING TO THE TOWN
§ 192-44 BROOKFIELD CODE § 192-44
246:58