Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted BOS 10-8-1980]
§ 1-1. General penalty established; appeals. [Amended BOS
4-9-1997]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail
to comply with any ordinance of the Town of Cromwell. Any person
violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any mandatory
requirements of any ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction which shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $100, unless such ordinance
shall specifically recite a different punishment.
B. Except where some other appeals procedure is specifically provided,
any municipal citation issued pursuant to any ordinance of the Town
of Cromwell, other than a license denial or revocation order, may be
appealed to a hearing officer as provided in this section. Hearings
concerning such municipal citation shall be in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c, as the same may be amended
from time to time. The Town Manager shall appoint not more than
two persons to serve as hearing officers. No such hearing officer shall
be a police officer or employee or person who issues citations. The
compensation of the hearing officers shall be set by the Town Council. In
addition to the requirements of Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c,
all hearings under this article shall conform to the requirements for
fundamental fairness, rules of evidence and other procedures required
by law for administrative hearings involving the levying of penalties.
This section shall not apply to State of Connecticut citations issued by
Town enforcement officers, which shall be under the jurisdiction of the
Superior Court, Geographical Area No. 9, Middletown. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
§ 1-2. Continuing violations.
Any person violating a provision of any ordinance of the Town of Cromwell
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which any violation of any provision of such ordinance is
committed, continued or permitted by such person.
§ 1-3. Additional remedies.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the Town of
Cromwell from pursuing any legal, civil or equitable remedies available to
it to prevent the violation of any provision of any ordinance or to seek
recovery of damages for the violation of said ordinance.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-10-1982]
§ 1-4. Adoption.
The compilation of the Charter, Town ordinances and rules and regulations
of the Town codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections
in the form attached hereto and made a part hereof is hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as and to be called the "Code of the Town of
Cromwell, Connecticut."
§ 1-5. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
A. All ordinances of the Town of Cromwell heretofore enacted and in force
and effect on the date of adoption of this ordinance and not contained
in the Code of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut, or which have been
heretofore enacted and are inconsistent with any provisions of any
ordinance contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective
date of this adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or altering any special
act pertinent to the Town of Cromwell or any rule or regulation
promulgated by any agency of the Town of Cromwell, including the
Zoning and Land Subdivision of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 1-6. Matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-5 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, regulations,
rights and obligations, which are expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance or regulation adopted subsequent to January 1, 1981.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Cromwell prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
C. Any obligation or liability by reason of any offense or act committed
or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the Town of Cromwell, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town.
E. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Cromwell.
F. Any ordinance of the Town of Cromwell providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing of
grade, permitting of encroachment, changing of name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Town of Cromwell, or any
portion thereof.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
G. Any ordinance or resolution of the Town of Cromwell appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Town of Cromwell or other instruments or evidence of the Town's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final subdivision
plats.
K. Any ordinance omitted from the Code by mistake or error.
§ 1-7. When Code effective.
All provisions contained in the compilation provided for herein and known
as the "Code of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut," shall be in full force
and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-8. Nomenclature, technical and other minor changes. [Amended
TC 6-16-2014]
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Town of Cromwell
for adoption as part of the Code of the Town of Cromwell, certain
grammatical changes, changes in nomenclature and/or technical or
minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It was the
intention of the Board of Selectmen and is the intention of the Town
Council of the Town of Cromwell that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut, as if the ordinances
so changed had been previously amended to read as such.
B. In printing and publishing the Code of the Town of Cromwell,
Connecticut, certain changes in the order of things, titling and indexing
and certain changes in the number of provisions, certain grammatical
changes, changes in spelling, punctuation, etc., were made for the
purposes of organization, style and consistency to make the Code more
usable. Such changes are in no way intended to change the meaning of
any legislation in any way nor to supersede the powers of the authority
that promulgated such legislation should such authority be other than
the Board of Selectmen, at that time, and currently the Town Council.
§ 1-9. Certified copy on file.
A copy of the Code of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut, in loose-leaf form,
has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Cromwell and
shall remain there for use and examination by the public during all business
hours until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk of the Town of
Cromwell by impressing thereon the Seal of said Town, and such certified
copy, as from time to time amended and recertified as hereinafter provided,
shall remain on file in the office of the Town Clerk, to be made available
during business hours to persons desiring to examine the same.
§ 1-6 CROMWELL CODE § 1-10
1:6
§ 1-10. Amendments and additions.
A. Any and all amendments or supplements to the legislation in the Code
of the Town of Cromwell, or repeal thereof in whole or in part, adopted
pursuant to applicable state law subsequent to the aforesaid date of
January 1, 1981, shall, upon the adoption of said change, become a
part of the Code of the Town of Cromwell under the numbering system
established by the Code, notwithstanding that such legislation may be
adopted with another numbering system. In addition, any legislation of
the Town, whether adopted prior to or after the effective date of this
ordinance, that the Town Council determines is appropriate for inclusion
in the Code established by this ordinance may be included in the Code
under the number system established by the Code, notwithstanding that
such legislation was adopted without reference to the Code under a
different numbering system. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
B. All changes in the Code as aforesaid shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code, so that reference to the Code of the Town of Cromwell,
Connecticut, shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Any such additions, amendments, supplements or
repeals as adopted shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk or such other person authorized and
directed by the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date, in loose-leaf form, a copy of
the book containing the Code of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut. Said
up-to-date copy of the Code shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk of
the Town of Cromwell and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public and shall be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during business hours. All changes in said Code shall be included in
the Code by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed
as supplements to said Code, at which time such supplements shall, upon
certification by the Town Clerk, be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication and distribution. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to have printed and distributed
copies of the Code of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut, together with
amendments and supplements thereto, from time to time. Said Town
Manager shall provide the Town Clerk with sufficient copies of the Code
and supplements and amendments thereto so as to enable the Town Clerk
to comply with Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148a, as amended.
§ 1-13. Abridgment of powers.
Nothing contained herein shall abridge the legal authority of any board,
commission or agency of the Town of Cromwell to make, publish, adopt,
repeal, change or amend its rules, regulations or bylaws in accordance with
law.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-14. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-15. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-16. Altering or tampering with Code.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Town of Cromwell, or to
alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the Town of Cromwell to be misrepresented thereby. A violation of
this section shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not to exceed
$100.
§ 1-17. When ordinance effective.
This ordinance shall be effective immediately as provided by law.
§ 1-18. Inclusion in Code.
This ordinance shall, upon adoption, be included in the Code as Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Adoption of Code, §§ 1-4 through 1-18.
§ 1-14 CROMWELL CODE § 1-18
1:8
Chapter 12
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appointed boards and commissions — See
Charter § 4.17.
Redevelopment Agency — See Ch. 48.
§ 12-1. Commission created.
The Town of Cromwell hereby creates an Economic Development
Commission for the promotion and development of the economic resources
of the Town of Cromwell, and said Commission is hereby designated and
entitled "Cromwell Economic Development Commission."
§ 12-2. Powers and duties.
Said Commission shall be vested with all the powers, purposes and
objectives set forth in Section 7-136 of the Connecticut General Statutes
and amendments thereto and shall undertake the duties relative to such
appointment.
§ 12-3. Membership; terms; compensation. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
Said Commission shall consist of five electors of the Town of Cromwell, who
shall be appointed by the Town Council. Of the five members first appointed,
one shall serve for a period of one year; one for a period of two years;
one for a period of three years; one for a period of four years; and one
for a period of five years. Thereafter, such appointed members shall serve
for a period of five years. Terms shall expire on March 31 in each year. A
member may be reappointed after serving his term of office. The members
of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services as
such but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
§ 12-4. Election of Chairman; appointment of Clerk.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among its own members at the
first meeting and annually thereafter. The Commission shall appoint a Clerk,
who need not be a member of the Commission, and such other employees
as it may deem necessary and shall prescribe and define their duties. The
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:9
Clerk shall keep a complete record of the proceedings of the Commission
and shall file the same with the Town Clerk. All such records shall be open
for public inspection at reasonable hours.
§ 12-5. Filling of vacancy. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Whenever a vacancy occurs, the Town Council shall appoint a successor
to hold office for the unexpired portion of the term. A Commissioner shall
continue in office until his successor is appointed.
§ 12-6. Removal of members. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
A Commissioner may be removed for inefficiency or neglect of duty or
misconduct in office by the Town Council after a hearing conforming to
recognized standards of due process of law. In the event of the removal of
any Commissioner, a record of the proceedings, together with the charges
and findings thereon, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk of
Cromwell.
§ 12-7. Financial records; budget. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The Commission shall maintain proper accounting and financial records
and shall make an annual report to the Town Council. The Commission
shall prepare a budget of the estimated revenues and expenditures for the
ensuing fiscal year.
Chapter 15
ELECTIONS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Charter Art. VI.
§ 12-4 CROMWELL CODE § 12-7
1:10
ARTICLE I
Designation of Polling Places
[Adopted BOS 9-9-1980; amended in its entirety TC 6-16-2014]
§ 15-1. Establishment procedure.
The Town Council shall, by resolution, indicate and establish the place for
holding elections in the Town of Cromwell at least 31 days prior to such
election or referendum. Once established, an additional resolution need not
be made unless the location is changed.1
1. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Hours for Referenda, adopted 9-2-1969, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed BOS 11-10-1998.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1
1:11
Chapter 19
FINANCE, BOARD OF
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Finance — See Charter §§ 5.02 and
5.08.
§ 19-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is hereby adopted pursuant to the authority contained in
Section 7-340a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 19-2. Appointment of alternates; qualifications.
A. The Town Council shall appoint three alternate members to the Board
of Finance subject to the minority representation provisions of Section
9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
B. Alternate members shall be electors and taxpayers of the Town of
Cromwell.
§ 19-3. Powers and duties of alternates.
A. Alternate members of the Board of Finance appointed hereunder shall
serve in the event of absence or disqualification of a regular member of
the Board of Finance. When seated and serving as provided below, such
alternate members shall have all the powers and duties set forth in the
Connecticut General Statutes and the Town of Cromwell Charter.
B. In the event that a regular member of the Board of Finance is absent
or is disqualified, such absent or disqualified member shall designate
an alternate appointed hereunder to act. In the event that an absent or
disqualified regular member shall fail or refuse to designate an alternate
to act, the majority of the regular members of the Board of Finance
not absent and not disqualified may designate an alternate appointed
hereunder, subject to the provisions of Section 9-167a of the Connecticut
General Statutes, to act for such absent or disqualified regular member.
§ 19-4. Terms of alternate members.
A. The initial terms of alternate members appointed hereunder shall be
from the date of their appointment to the next election at which
members of the Board of Finance are elected.
B. Following said initial term, alternate members shall be appointed for
terms of two years.
§ 15-1 CROMWELL CODE § 19-4
1:12
Chapter 25
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Agency — See Charter § 4.17.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 230.
§ 25-1. Membership.
The Conservation Commission appointed in accordance with Section C805
of the Charter of the Town of Cromwell2 is hereby authorized to act to
protect the wetlands and watercourses within the Town of Cromwell and
shall be known as the "Conservation Commission and Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency."
§ 25-2. Powers and responsibilities.
The Conservation Commission and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Agency shall have all the powers and responsibilities authorized under
Chapter 440 of the Connecticut General Statutes as they now exist or as
they may be amended hereafter.
§ 25-3. Promulgation of regulations.
A. The Conservation Commission and Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Agency is authorized to promulgate such regulations, in conformity with
regulations promulgated by the Commission of Environmental
Protection of the State of Connecticut,3 as are necessary to protect the
wetlands and watercourses of the Town of Cromwell, and define the
boundaries thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
B. All regulations in effect at the time of enactment of this chapter shall
remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Chapter 36
(RESERVED)
Chapter 40
2. Editor's Note: See now Charter § 4.17(a)5.
3. Editor's Note: See regulations promulgated by the Connecticut Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection.
§ 19-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-3
1:13
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation and Youth Services
Commission — See Charter §§ 4.10 and
4.17(a)1.
Animals — See Ch. 82.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Loitering — See Ch. 160.
Memorial greens — See Ch. 163.
§ 40-1. Jurisdiction and control of Commission. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
A. The Recreation and Youth Services Commission (fka Park and Recreation
Commission) of the Town of Cromwell, as established by Section C804 of
the Charter of the Town of Cromwell,4 shall have jurisdiction and control
over the following parks and recreation areas in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter:
(1) Grove Road Park, as described at Volume 71, Page 144, of the
Cromwell Land Records.
(2) Evergreen Road Park, as described at Volume 80, Page 315, of the
Cromwell Land Records.
(3) Community Field, as described at Volume 30, Page 325, of the
Cromwell Land Records.
B. Additional park and recreation areas belonging to the Town of Cromwell
may be subjected to the jurisdiction and control of the Recreation and
Youth Services Commission by resolution of the Town Council.
§ 40-2. Promulgation of rules, regulations and policies.
A. The Recreation and Youth Services Commission shall have the
responsibility for adopting and enforcing rules, regulations and
recreational policies respecting the use of the park and recreation areas
designated under § 40-1 hereof and the use of leased park and recreation
areas. Said rules and regulations shall include but not be limited to the
following areas: [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
(1) Hours when park and recreational areas are open.
(2) Injury to buildings, improvements, shrubs or wildlife.
(3) Hunting and fishing.
(4) Use of alcoholic beverages.
(5) Dogs and other pets.
(6) Horseback riding, bicycle riding or use of any motorized vehicle.
4. Editor's Note: See now Charter § 4.17(a)1, which establishes the Recreation and Youth
Services Commission.
§ 25-3 CROMWELL CODE § 40-2
1:14
(7) Notices and signs.
(8) Holding meetings.
(9) Commercial use of areas.
(10) Disposal of refuse and dumping and littering.
(11) Gambling.
(12) Disorderly conduct and security.
(13) Fires.
(14) Games.
(15) Traffic and parking.
(16) Usage of areas and scheduling.
(17) Maintenance.
(18) Planting and removal of grass, trees, flowers, shrubs and other
plants.
(19) Duties and responsibilities of the Director of Recreation.
B. Rules, regulations and recreation policies adopted by the Recreation
and Youth Services Commission shall provide for supervision and for
appropriate penalties for violations thereof. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
C. Rules, regulations and recreation policies for parks and recreation areas
shall be adopted by the Park and Recreation Commission in accordance
with § 40-3 of this chapter.
§ 40-3. Adoption procedure. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
A. The Recreation and Youth Services Commission shall give public notice
prior to the adoption of any rules, regulations and recreational policies
pertaining to parks and recreation areas. A notice of its intent to adopt
rules, regulations and recreational policies shall be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Cromwell at least
seven days prior to adoption of rules, regulations and recreational
policies, and a similar notice shall be posted in the office of the Town
Clerk. Copies of the proposed rules, regulations and recreational policies
shall be available for inspection in the office of the Town Clerk at
least seven days prior to the meeting of the Commission at which the
proposed rules and regulations are to be acted upon.
B. After said public notice the Recreation and Youth Services Commission
may adopt the proposed rules, regulations and recreational policies;
provided, however, that they shall take into consideration any comments
presented by the public with respect thereto.
C. Said rules, regulations and recreational policies, upon adoption by the
Recreation and Youth Services Commission, shall then be referred to the
Town Council for approval and confirmation and shall become effective
only after such approval and confirmation have been granted.
D. Upon approval and confirmation by the Town Council, copies of the
rules, regulations and recreational policies shall be distributed as
follows:
(1) Posted in the Town Clerk's office with copies available for the public.
(2) Posted on bulletin boards at park and recreation areas.
(3) Forwarded to the principal of each school for dissemination to the
students.
§ 40-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-3
1:15
E. The Recreation and Youth Services Commission may adopt emergency
rules and regulations by action at a regular or special meeting without
compliance with the notice provisions of Subsection A hereof. In such
event, the adopted rules and regulations shall become effective only
after approval and confirmation by the Town Manager of the Town of
Cromwell and shall be effective only for a period of 31 days, unless
adopted in accordance with this section.
§ 40-4. Responsibilities of Director of Recreation. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
A. The rules, regulations and recreational policies adopted pursuant to
this chapter shall be administered and implemented by the Director of
Recreation, appointed pursuant to Section 4.10 of the Charter.
B. The Director of Recreation shall be responsible to the Town Manager
for developing and administering the recreation program for the Town
of Cromwell and shall submit proposed programs to the Recreation and
Youth Services Commission for approval in accordance with the rules,
regulations and recreational policies adopted under this chapter.
§ 40-5. Planning and acquisition of new parcels. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
A. The Recreation and Youth Services Commission shall have the
responsibility for planning development of park and recreation areas
subject to its control and jurisdiction; however, the submission of any
application for funding or the entry into contracts shall be subject to the
approval of the Town Council and/or Town Manager.
B. The Recreation and Youth Services Commission shall be charged with
the responsibility for investigating new parcels of property to be
acquired and/or leased by the Town of Cromwell for park and recreation
areas. Recommendations for such acquisitions shall be made to the Town
Council.
Chapter 48
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Economic Development Commission — See
Ch. 12.
§ 40-3 CROMWELL CODE § 48-1
1:16
§ 48-1. Agency established.
There is hereby established in the Town of Cromwell, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 130 of the General Statutes, 1958 Revision,
as amended, a Redevelopment Agency to be known as the "Cromwell
Redevelopment Agency."
§ 48-2. Membership. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The Agency shall consist of seven members appointed by the Town
Manager, all said members to be electors resident in the Town of Cromwell.
§ 48-3. Terms of members.
A. The members first appointed shall be for the following terms:
(1) One member for a term of one year.
(2) One member for a term of two years.
(3) One member for a term of three years.
(4) Two members for a term of four years.
(5) Two members for a term of five years.
B. Thereafter members shall be appointed annually in the same manner as
above to serve for five years, except that each member shall serve until
his successor is appointed and has qualified. Any vacancy shall be filled
by appointment of the Town Manager. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 48-4. Majority vote required for action.
Action by said Agency shall be taken only on the majority vote of all the
members.
§ 48-5. Officers; employment of other persons; compensation.
The Agency shall select from among its members a Chairman, a Vice
Chairman and such other officers as it deems necessary and may employ
a secretary and such other officers, agents, technical consultants, legal
counsel and employees as are required for the Agency to carry out its
duties under the law. Members shall serve without compensation but may
be reimbursed for necessary expenses.
Chapter 51
REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 48-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-5
1:17
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authority to participate in regional
agencies — See Charter § 4.17(e).
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 236.
§ 51-1. Election to join. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The Town of Cromwell hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 127 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and elects
to join the Regional Planning Agency, now or henceforth existing under
authority of said chapter, in the Lower Connecticut River Valley Planning
Region, as defined by the Connecticut Development Commission pursuant
to the provisions of said chapter.
§ 51-2. Appointment of Town representatives.
A. The Town of Cromwell shall have two representatives on the Agency,
of which one shall be appointed by the Town's Planning and Zoning
Commission. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
B. The Town Council shall appoint to the Agency one elector of the Town
of Cromwell for an initial term of one year, and the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall appoint one elector to the Agency for an initial term of
two years. Thereafter, all representatives shall be appointed for two-year
terms. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
C. Appointees shall serve for the term of their office and until their
successors shall have been appointed. Appointees may be reappointed.
Terms of office shall commence when the appointment is made.
§ 51-3. Filling of vacancies; failure of members to attend meetings.
[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Vacancies created by resignation or inability to serve shall be filled by the
Town Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any representative
who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the Regional
Planning Agency and any intervening duly called special meetings thereof
shall be considered to have resigned from said body, except that the
requirements of this section may be waived by the Town Council for good
cause.
Chapter 52
CONNECTICUT RIVER VALLEY COUNCIL OF ELECTED
OFFICIALS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 48-5 CROMWELL CODE § 51-3
1:18
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authority to participate in regional
agencies — See Charter § 4.17(e).
§ 52-1. Election to join.
The Board of Selectmen, pursuant to § 4-124e of the Connecticut General
Statutes, hereby elect to join a regional organization known as the
Connecticut River Valley Council of Elected Officials, with those powers and
for those purposes set forth in §§ 4-124c through 4-124h of the Connecticut
General Statutes as the same may be amended from time to time.
§ 52-2. Representation. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The representative to the Connecticut River Valley Council of Elected
Officials shall be the Mayor of the Town of Cromwell.
Chapter 54
RETIREMENT PLAN
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 51-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-2
1:19

ARTICLE I
Title; Effective Date
§ 54-1. Title.
This retirement plan shall be known as the "Town of Cromwell Retirement
Plan."
§ 54-2. Effective date. [Amended STM 12-14-1972; BOS 2-1-1977;
BOS 2-8-1989; BOS 6-13-1990]
The effective date of this chapter, as amended, is June 30, 1990. The
original plan was effective as of September 1, 1965, and was amended as of
November 1, 1972; June 30, 1982; January 1, 1989; and June 30, 1990.
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-2
1:21

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 54-3. Terms defined.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTUARY — A member of the Society of Actuaries or an organization
employing such a member, appointed and compensated by the Town to
perform the duties of the "actuary" hereinafter provided.
ANNIVERSARY DATE — September 1, 1965, and September 1 of each
year thereafter up to and including September 1, 1972. On and after July
1, 1973, "anniversary date" shall mean July 1 of each year.[Amended
STM 12-14-1972]
AVERAGE FINAL COMPENSATION — The average annual compensation
of a participant during his three consecutive highest-paid years of
service prior to and including his last full month of employment.[Added
STM 12-14-1972; amended BOS 2-8-1989]
BENEFICIARY — Any person who may be entitled to receive any death
benefit which may be payable as provided in § 54-15 hereof.5
COMPENSATION — The total annual salary or wages earned by a
participant from the Town for a particular year.[Amended STM
12-14-1972]
CONTINGENT ANNUITANT — The person, if any, whom a participant
shall have designated to receive annuity payments following the death of
such participant, as provided in Article V, § 54-14, hereof.
CREDITED SERVICE — The latest period of continuous employment
of a participant by the Town subsequent to the date the employee
agrees to contribute in accordance with § 54-23, up to and including
such participant's actual retirement date, discharge or termination of
employment if such occurs prior to his actual retirement date, assuming
for employees who become participants on and after January 1, 1989,
such employee agrees to contribute within one month after completing
his probationary period. Otherwise, credited service will commence
when an employee agrees to contribute. Participants in the plan on
January 1, 1989, will be given an additional six months' credited service.
Absences from employment of less than five months in any calendar
year and periods of authorized leave of absence for an employee or
participant (except as otherwise provided in the case of Town officials in
§ 54-29) shall be included in computing a participant's credited service.
For the purpose of computations involving credited service, fractional
parts of a year shall include all completed months of employment. In
addition to the above, a participant's credited service will include any
service from the latest period of continuous employment (including
certain federal programs) for which the participant makes the additional
contributions to buy back service in accordance with § 54-23.[Amended
BOS 2-10-1982; BOS 2-8-1989; BOS 6-13-1990]
§ 54-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:23
EMPLOYEE — Any person employed by the Town, including elected or
appointed officials, whose customary employment is for not less than 20
hours in any one week nor less than five months in any calendar year,
provided that such term shall not include any persons who have been,
are or shall be eligible for membership in the state teachers' retirement
system, or municipal employees retirement system.[Amended TC
6-16-2014]
ENTRY DATE — The first day of the month in which an employee
becomes a participant in the plan. The earliest entry date shall be
that month in which an employee completes his probationary
period.6[Amended BOS 2-8-1989]
LEAVE OF ABSENCE — A period of leave as provided for in Article IX
hereof.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — For a participant who retires on and
after January 1, 1989, the first day of the month coinciding with or
next succeeding his 62nd birthday or the completion of five years of
participation in the plan, whichever occurs later.[Amended BOS
2-8-1989]
PARTICIPANT — An employee who is eligible under the terms of Article
IV of this plan. It shall not include in its meaning a retired participant or
a terminated participant.7
PLAN — The retirement plan set forth in and by this chapter and all
subsequent amendments thereto.
PLAN YEAR — The year beginning on July 1 of each year, commencing
July 1, 1973.[Amended STM 12-14-1972]
RETIRED PARTICIPANT — A person who has been a participant and who
is receiving retirement benefits under Article V hereof.
RETIREMENT BOARD — The Retirement Board established to
administer this plan, as provided for in Article III hereof.
RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coinciding with or next
succeeding the date of actual retirement of a participant from service
with the Town, which date shall not be earlier than his 55th birthday.
TERMINATED PARTICIPANT — A person who has been a participant but
who is no longer an employee and whose status as an employee has been
terminated other than by death, retirement or leave of absence.
TOWN — The Town of Cromwell.
TOWN COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Cromwell.[Added
TC 6-16-2014]
TRUSTEE — The person or entity appointed as trustee by action of the
Retirement Board.[Amended BOS 11-13-2002]
5. Editor's Note: The former definition of "Board of Selectmen," which immediately followed,
was repealed TC 6-16-2014. See now the definition of "Town Council."
§ 54-3 CROMWELL CODE § 54-3
1:24
TRUST FUND — The fund held by the trustee for the purpose of
providing benefits pursuant to this plan.
TRUST or TRUST AGREEMENT — The declaration of trust or trust
agreement establishing the trust fund, together with any and all
amendments or supplements thereto, and also the trust created by such
declaration or agreement.[Amended BOS 11-13-2002]
B. The singular form of any word shall include the plural and the masculine
gender shall include the feminine wherever necessary for the proper
interpretation of this plan.
6. Editor's Note: The definition of "future service compensation," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed STM 12-14-1972.
7. Editor's Note: The definition of "past service compensation," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed STM 12-14-1972.
§ 54-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:25

ARTICLE III
Retirement Board
§ 54-4. Board established; membership. [Amended BOS 2-10-1982;
TC 6-16-2014]
This retirement plan shall be administered by a Retirement Board of five
members consisting of the following officials of the Town of Cromwell:
Mayor, Town Manager, Town Finance Director/Town Treasurer; the
Business Manager from the Board of Education; and the Executive Director
of the Cromwell Fire District.
§ 54-5. Action by Board.
Any act which this plan authorizes or requires the Board to do may be done
by a majority of the members of the Board at the time acting hereunder;
and the action of such majority of the members of the Board, expressed
from time to time by a vote at a meeting or in writing without a meeting,
shall constitute the action of the Board and shall have the same effect for all
purposes as is assented to by all of the members of the Board at the time in
office.
§ 54-6. Appointment of secretary and other representatives;
designation of person to act. [Amended BOS 11-13-2002]
The Board may appoint a secretary, who may or may not be a member of the
Board, and such other agents or representatives as it may deem advisable,
who need not be members of the Board but may or may not be participants
under this plan, to keep the records of the Board and to assist it in doing
any other acts or things to be done or performed by the Board. The Board
may certify to the trustee and one or more investment managers, if any, by
majority vote or action, as provided for in § 54-5 of this article, the name
of one member of the Board authorized to act for it in its relationship with
the trustee and any such investment manager. The trustee and any such
investment manager shall be and hereby are authorized to act in pursuance
of the written instructions of any member of the Board so designated and
shall be and hereby are completely released from any liability resulting from
or in connection with any action taken pursuant to instructions so received.
§ 54-7. Interpretation and administration of plan.
The Board may make rules and regulations for the administration of the
plan which are not inconsistent with its terms and provisions. The Board
may construe the plan, and its constructions thereof and action thereon in
good faith shall be final and conclusive. It may correct any defect or supply
any omission or reconcile any inconsistency in such manner and to such
extent as it shall deem expedient to carry the same into effect, and it shall
be the sole and final judge of such expediency. The Board shall supervise
and control the operation of the plan in accordance with the terms hereof
and shall have all powers necessary to accomplish that purpose. The Board
§ 54-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-7
1:27
may employ such actuarial, legal, clerical, consulting and other services as
it deems necessary for the proper operation of the plan, and the cost of such
services shall be paid by the Town.
§ 54-8. Direction that benefits be paid.
In connection with the exercise of its powers, the Board, upon written
certification by the actuary, shall direct the trustee, in writing, as to any
benefits to be paid from the trust fund, and the trustee shall be fully
protected in acting upon such written directions.
§ 54-9. Compensation and expenses of members.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation for services as
such, but all normal and reasonable expenses of the Board shall be paid by
the Town.
§ 54-10. Annual report. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The Board shall submit annually to the Board of Finance a schedule of the
estimated expenses necessary for the administration of this plan and its
estimate of the liability of the Town to contribute to the trust fund in order
to maintain the retirement plan in an actuarially sound condition. The Board
shall annually report to the Town Council of the Town the financial condition
of the retirement plan, setting forth such facts and recommendations as
may be of value to the participants in the plan and to the Town of Cromwell.
§ 54-7 CROMWELL CODE § 54-10
1:28
ARTICLE IV
Employees Entitled to Participate
§ 54-11. Conditions of eligibility.
A. Every employee of the Town, on January 1, 1989, shall be eligible to
become a participant hereunder on the first day of the month following
the date on which he shall have completed his probationary period.
[Amended BOS 2-8-1989]
B. Date of eligibility. [Amended BOS 2-10-1982]
(1) Every person who shall become an employee of the Town subsequent
to September 1, 1965, and before December 31, 1979, shall be
eligible to become a participant hereunder on the first day of the
month following the date on which he shall have been employed
continuously by the Town as an employee for 24 months and shall
have reached his 25th birthday, provided that he shall not have
attained his 53rd birthday.
(2) Every person who shall become an employee of the Town subsequent
to June 30, 1982, and all employees who are not yet participants,
shall be eligible to become a participant on the first day of the
month following the date on which he shall have been continuously
employed by the Town as an employee for six months, provided that
such employee agrees to contribute.
(3) Every person who shall become an employee of the Town subsequent
to January 1, 1989, and all employees who are not yet participants
shall be eligible to become a participant on the first day following the
completion of his probationary period, provided that such employee
agrees to contribute. [Added BOS 2-8-1989]
C. The Board shall notify each eligible employee of the Town of his
eligibility. Any such eligible employee desiring to become a participant
hereunder shall file with the Board his election to become a participant
hereunder on a form as provided in Subsection D hereof prior to the date
on which he first becomes eligible to become a participant; provided,
however, that in special cases the Board may extend the time within
which such election must be filed. Failure to file such election within
the prescribed time shall constitute a waiver by such employee of all
benefits he would otherwise have received by becoming a participant
hereunder on the date on which he first became eligible. Any employee
who does not elect to become a participant hereunder on the date
when he first becomes entitled to participate hereunder may elect to
become a participant on any subsequent anniversary date, provided that
he shall then meet all of the requirements of Subsection B, but such
participant shall not be entitled to any credited service for employment
with the Town prior to participation in the plan. Anything contained
in this subsection to the contrary notwithstanding, with respect to the
first anniversary date of the plan, eligible employees may be notified
of their eligibility and file election forms after the September 1, 1965,
anniversary date under such rules as the Board shall establish.
D. The election form shall contain such information as the Board shall
require and shall authorize the deduction of any such participant's
§ 54-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-11
1:29
contributions which may be required hereunder from such participant's
pay in such manner as the Board shall require.
§ 54-12. Interruptions in employment.
If a participant's status as an employee of the Town is terminated or
interrupted for more than five months in any twelve-month period, except
in the case of a leave of absence, and thereafter he resumes his status as
an employee, he shall be deemed to be a new employee from the date of
such reemployment or resumption, and his period of employment shall be
counted from such date.
§ 54-11 CROMWELL CODE § 54-12
1:30
ARTICLE V
Benefits
§ 54-13. Benefit formula. [Amended STM 12-14-1972; BOS
2-1-1977; BOS 2-10-1982]
Each participant at retirement on his normal, early or deferred retirement
date on or after June 30, 1982, shall be entitled to an annual retirement
benefit commencing on his normal, early or deferred retirement date,
payable in monthly installments for life thereafter, equal to 1.5% of his
average final compensation multiplied by his years of credited service.
§ 54-14. Contingent annuitant option.
Instead of the normal monthly retirement benefit provided under § 54-13, a
participant may elect a contingent annuitant option providing for actuarially
reduced monthly retirement benefits payable to him during his lifetime after
retirement and for the continuance of such payments or a part of them
specified by the participant to a contingent annuitant for his life after the
death of the retired participant. Such election may be made by a participant
at any time at least one year prior to his retirement date or within one year
prior to his retirement date upon furnishing evidence of the participant's
good health satisfactory to the Board. A participant who has elected this
option may not at any time within one year prior to his retirement date
revoke or modify such option, except upon furnishing evidence of good
health of the contingent annuitant satisfactory to the Board; provided,
however, that the death of the contingent annuitant at any time prior to
the participant's retirement date shall automatically revoke such election,
and further provided that if the contingent annuitant is the spouse of
the participant, a divorce granted to either spouse at any time prior to
the participant's retirement date shall automatically revoke such election.
If a participant who has elected this option dies before his retirement
date, no benefits under this option shall be payable to the contingent
annuitant. If the participant dies after his retirement date, the contingent
annuitant shall receive for life, commencing on the first day of the calendar
month coinciding with or next following the retired participant's death, the
benefits specified by the retired participant for the contingent annuitant.
If the contingent annuitant dies before the participant's retirement date,
the monthly retirement benefit normally provided under this plan will be
payable to the retired participant as if this option had not been elected. If
the contingent annuitant dies after the participant's retirement date, the
amount of the payments which the retired participant is then receiving or is
entitled to receive will continue unchanged and will cease upon the retired
participant's death.
§ 54-15. Ten-year certain option.
Each participant shall have the option, to be exercised by a written direction
to the Board, to elect to have actuarially reduced monthly retirement
benefits payable for 10 years certain and for his life thereafter. Such
§ 54-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-15
1:31
election may be made by a participant at any time at least one year prior
to his retirement date or within one year prior to his retirement date
upon furnishing evidence of good health satisfactory to the Board. Upon
the death of a retired participant after his retirement date but before 120
monthly payments have been made to him, if he shall have effectively
elected such a ten-year option, then the balance of such 120 monthly
payments shall be made to such beneficiary as he shall have most recently
designated in a written instrument signed by him in the presence of one
subscribing witness and filed with the Board, either before or after his
retirement. If no such designation is on file with the Board at the time of
death or is defective for any reason or if such beneficiary shall predecease
the retired participant, then the estate of such retired participant shall
receive the commuted value of such benefit payable in a lump sum. If the
beneficiary, having survived the retired participant, dies before all of said
120 payments have been made, then the commuted value of the balance
of said payments shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary's estate. If
the participant dies before his retirement date, no benefits shall be payable
under this option.
§ 54-16. Early retirement option.
Each participant who shall have reached his 55th birthday and shall have at
least 15 years of credited service shall have the option, to be exercised by
a written notice to the Board and with the consent of the Board, to retire
at any time thereafter prior to his normal retirement date. The amount of
retirement benefits payable to such retired participant shall be computed
as provided in § 54-13 hereof, except that the date of such early retirement
shall be used in determining his credited service, and the amount thus
obtained will be reduced, such reduction to be determined by the actuary
in accordance with accepted actuarial practices, if such retirement benefit
is to commence prior to such participant's normal retirement date. The
contingent annuitant and the ten-year certain options, provided for in
§§ 55-14 and 54-15 hereof, may be elected by a participant who elects to
retire early under this section, in which case the term "retirement date"
shall be deemed to mean early retirement date wherever applicable in
§§ 54-14 and 54-15.
§ 54-17. Social security option.
If the commencement of retirement benefits under the Federal Social
Security Act does not coincide with the early retirement date selected by
a participant under § 54-16, a participant retiring in accordance with the
provisions of § 54-16, before social security payments begin, shall have the
further option, to be exercised by a written request to the Board and with
the consent of the Board, to receive an actuarially equivalent retirement
income providing larger monthly payments in lieu of the retirement income
otherwise payable under § 54-16 upon early retirement, until the date upon
which his retirement benefits under the Federal Social Security Act shall
commence, at which time his monthly payments hereunder shall be reduced
by the approximate amount of the social security retirement benefit, which
§ 54-15 CROMWELL CODE § 54-17
1:32
the participant will receive, so that, insofar as practical, a level total
retirement income will be available for the participant. Election of such
social security option by a participant shall automatically revoke any
contingent annuitant option or ten-year certain option which may have been
elected by such participant.
§ 54-18. Deferred retirement. [Amended BOS 2-8-1989]
Any participant may continue in the employ of the Town beyond his normal
retirement date and receive credited service while he continues as an
employee. The Town shall continue to make contributions on behalf of any
participant who defers his retirement under the provisions of this section,
and such participant shall continue his contributions as provided in § 54-23
of Article VIII. Such participant's retirement benefits will commence on his
retirement date, and his retirement benefit shall be computed as provided
in § 54-13 hereof, except that his deferred date of retirement shall be used
in determining his credited service.
§ 54-19. Benefits limited to assets of trust fund.
The benefits provided for herein shall be only such as can be provided by
the assets of the trust fund. In the event of the termination of this plan, as
provided for in Article X or otherwise, there shall be no liability or obligation
on the part of the Town to make any further contributions to the trustee for
the purposes of this plan or otherwise.
§ 54-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-19
1:33

ARTICLE VI
Benefits Upon Death of Participant
§ 54-20. No direct death benefit payable.
Except as provided for in § 54-21 hereof regarding return of contributions
and in the contingent annuitant and ten-year certain options in Article V
hereof, no death benefits shall be payable hereunder upon the death of a
participant or retired participant.
§ 54-21. Return of contributions. [Amended BOS 2-1-1977]
Upon the death of a participant prior to his retirement and the
commencement of retirement benefits or upon the death of a terminated
participant who shall have left his contributions in the trust fund as
provided in § 54-22 hereof, there shall be paid from the trust fund to his
beneficiary designated, as provided in § 54-15 hereof, an amount equal to
his contributions to the trust fund, plus interest thereon computed at the
annual rate of 3% prior to July 1, 1976, and at the annual rate of 5%
thereafter, compounded annually to the date of his death. Upon the death
of a retired participant who has not elected the contingent annuitant or
ten-year certain options before there shall have been paid to the retired
participant the amount of his contributions to the trust fund, plus interest
thereon computed at the annual rate of 3% prior to July 1, 1976, and at the
annual rate of 5% thereafter, compounded annually to his actual retirement
date, then the amount of such contributions, plus such compound interest,
less the amount of pension benefits paid to such retired participant prior to
his death, shall be paid to the retired participant's beneficiary designated,
as provided in § 54-15 hereof.
§ 54-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-21
1:35

ARTICLE VII
Termination of Employment
§ 54-22. Payments required. [Amended BOS 2-1-1977]
A. If any participant shall cease to be an employee of the Town, except upon
death or as a retired participant or except as provided in Article IX hereof
for leave of absence, then he shall be entitled to a return of all of his
own contributions to the trust fund, plus interest thereon computed at the
annual rate of 3% prior to July 1, 1976, and at the annual rate of 5%
thereafter, compounded annually to date of termination; provided, however,
that any participant who shall elect to leave his contributions in the trust
fund shall be entitled at his normal retirement date, if he shall then be
living and if such contributions are left in the trust fund, to the following
percentage of the amount of retirement benefit as computed under the
provisions of § 54-13 hereof, such percentage to depend upon the number
of his full years of credited service under the plan following his entry date,
except that the date of such termination shall be used in determining his
credited service:
Years of Credited Service Under
the Plan
Percent of Accrued Benefit
Vested
Fewer than 10 0%
10 or more 100%
B. Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, in no event
shall the vested benefit to which the terminated participant is entitled be
of lesser value than the amount of his own contributions, including interest
as hereinabove provided, at the date of his termination of employment as
determined by the actuary in accordance with accepted actuarial practice,
and in no event shall the vested percentage indicated above be less than
the percentage that would have been applicable if the participant had
terminated employment on June 30, 1976. Any such terminated participant
may elect, by written notice filed with the Board at least 60 days prior to
an anniversary date, to withdraw, as of the next succeeding anniversary
date, his own contributions to the trust fund, plus interest thereon, to such
anniversary date computed as hereinabove provided. If any such terminated
participant shall so elect to withdraw his own contributions, then he shall
have no further rights whatsoever in and to any benefits under this plan.
§ 54-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-22
1:37

ARTICLE VIII
Contributions
§ 54-23. Contributions by participants. [Amended BOS 2-10-1982;
BOS 2-8-1989; BOS 6-13-1990]
A. Regular contributions. Effective January 1, 1989, each participant shall
contribute during each year of his credited service following his entry
date, except as provided in § 54-18 of Article V, an amount equal to 2 1/
2% of his compensation, as defined in Article II hereof. The Town shall
deduct such participant's contribution hereunder from such participant's
pay, and the combined contributions of the participants shall be made
directly by the Town to the trustee. In addition, participants on June
30, 1982, but hired prior to June 30, 1982, may purchase the number
of years of credited service which such participant would have been
eligible to receive had the definition of credited service and the
conditions of eligibility read as adopted February 10, 1982. Such
purchase must be made in equal monthly installments within a period
equal to that being purchased following the date of notification by the
Town of the amount required for the purchase. Such amount shall be
2% of the compensation which such participant received during the year
or years to be purchased plus an interest charge of 5% compounded
from the year being purchased to the purchase date. This purchase
option shall not apply to any person who has previously elected not to
participate in such plan.
B. Buy-back contributions.
(1) Participants who are actively employed by the Town on June 30,
1990, are eligible to make additional contributions for purposes of
receiving credited service for service, prior to their most recent
date of participation, which has not otherwise been credited in
accordance with § 54-3.
(2) Such eligible participants will contribute 2 1/2% of compensation as
defined below for each year of service as defined above that they
elect to buy back.
(3) Compensation will be base salary for fiscal year 1989-1990 or actual
salary, if employed for a portion of such year, except for participants
who will receive buy-back time for full-time service. For such
participants, compensation will be the base salary while holding the
full-time position.
(4) The additional contributions as outlined in this subsection must be
made by participants electing to contribute such additional
contributions no later than December 31, 1990. Otherwise, no
additional credited service will be granted.
(5) Employees electing to make additional contributions under the
provisions of this subsection will be not be eligible to receive
retirement benefits under the provisions of this subsection unless
retirement benefits commence no earlier than April 1, 1991.
§ 54-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-24
1:39
§ 54-24. Contributions by Town.
The Town plans and intends to contribute to the trust fund over a period of
time, in addition to the amounts contributed by participants, such amounts
as may be determined by the actuary, according to such mortality, interest
and other assumptions as may be approved by the Board from time to
time, to be required to provide the benefits set forth in this plan for the
participants.
§ 54-25. Discontinuance or change of contributions by Town.
The Town, however, reserves the right to reduce, suspend or discontinue
its contributions under the plan for any reason at any time, provided that,
anything in this plan to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall be impossible
at any time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities in respect to all
participants, retired participants, contingent annuitants and beneficiaries
under the plan for any part of the trust fund to revert to the Town or to
be used for or diverted to any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of
participants, retired participants, contingent annuitants and beneficiaries.
§ 54-24 CROMWELL CODE § 54-25
1:40
ARTICLE IX
Leaves of Absence
§ 54-26. Leaves authorized; cancellation.
Any participant who enters the military service of the United States shall
be given a leave of absence, and any participant may at any time, at the
direction of the Board, be given a leave of absence for any other reason.
Any such leave of absence must be given in advance and, except in cases
involving military service, such leave of absence may be canceled at any
time, in the discretion of the Board.
§ 54-27. Applicability on participation.
The provisions of the plan relating to termination of employment will not
apply to any participant absent on leave of absence granted in accordance
with § 54-26 of this article, but the following rules shall apply to such
participant:
A. As long as such participant continues on leave of absence, as provided
in § 54-26 of this article, the Town contributions otherwise required to
provide the benefits for such participant set forth in this plan shall be
suspended.
B. If such participant returns to active employment with the Town within
90 days following the end of such leave of absence, he shall continue
as a participant hereunder as though he had continued in the active
employment of the Town during such leave of absence. The Town
contributions on behalf of such participant shall be resumed with such
adjustments as the actuary shall determine to be necessary to provide
the benefits set forth in this plan for such participant at his retirement.
C. If such participant does not return to active employment with the Town
within 90 days following the end of such leave of absence, the
employment of such participant shall be deemed to have been
terminated as of the commencement of such leave of absence, and he
shall be entitled to benefits provided under Article VII hereof as of such
date.
§ 54-28. Effect on eligibility and service.
During a period of such leave of absence, an employee on such leave of
absence shall be deemed to be in continuous employment of the Town for
the purposes of the eligibility requirements of Article IV hereof and for the
purpose of credited service, as defined in Article II hereof, provided that
such employee returns to active employment with the Town within 90 days
following the end of his leave of absence.
§ 54-29. Officials not reelected or reappointed.
Any employee who is an elected or appointed official of the Town and whose
employment is terminated because he is not reelected or reappointed to
an official position in the Town shall be given a leave of absence. Anything
§ 54-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-29
1:41
contained in this plan to the contrary notwithstanding, such employee
shall not be entitled to credited service during the period of such leave of
absence nor shall the period of such leave of absence be included for the
purpose of determining the percentage of his vested benefit under § 54-22,
but he shall be deemed to be in the continuous employment of the Town
for the purpose of the eligibility requirements of Article IV hereof. Such
participant may elect to terminate his leave of absence and be treated as
a terminated participant under § 54-22 hereof by notice, in writing, to the
Board.
§ 54-29 CROMWELL CODE § 54-29
1:42
ARTICLE X
Discontinuance of Plan
§ 54-30. Right to terminate.
Although the Town hopes to continue the plan and the contributions to the
trust indefinitely, the Town may, by action at a Town Meeting, terminate
the plan and all further contributions thereunder for any reason and at any
time. If the Town temporarily discontinues its contributions or suspends
them in whole or in part and if such temporary discontinuance becomes
a permanent discontinuance, such permanent discontinuance shall be
deemed to constitute termination of the plan as of the date the contributions
were first discontinued.
§ 54-31. Allocation of assets upon termination. [Amended BOS
2-1-1977]
In the event of termination of the plan, the Board shall first allocate an
amount of the trust fund to each participant, retired participant, contingent
annuitant or the beneficiary of a deceased participant equal to the amount
of the contributions to the trust fund made by such participant, retired
participant or deceased participant, plus interest thereon compounded
annually, less all amounts received from the trust fund by such participant,
retired participant, contingent annuitant or beneficiary. Such amounts so
allocated shall be paid to the respective participant, retired participant,
contingent annuitant or beneficiary, unless a written election is made by
such person to have the amount to which he is so entitled held in trust
and added to the amount, if any, which shall be set aside for his benefit
under the terms of the following sentence. The remaining net assets in
the trust fund, after deduction of all termination expenses, shall then be
allocated by the Board in an equitable manner among the participants,
retired participants, terminated participants, contingent annuitants and
beneficiaries of deceased participants in the following order of precedence,
and such allocation shall be final:
Order of
Precedence Classification at Date of Termination
Class I Participants who have passed their normal
retirement date and whose retirement benefits have
been deferred under the terms of § 54-18 hereof,
retired participants, contingent annuitants and
beneficiaries of deceased participants
Class II Participants age 55 or more who have at least 15
years of credited service and terminated participants
who have elected to leave their contributions in the
trust fund, as provided in § 54-22 hereof
Class III All other participants
§ 54-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-32
1:43
§ 54-32. Disposition of assets after allocation.
Such allocation shall be accomplished through either continuance of the
trust fund or a new trust fund or purchase of insurance or annuity contracts
as the Board shall determine.
§ 54-33. Restrictions imposed to meet federal regulations.
A. The following restrictions imposed by the provisions of this section are
included solely to meet the requirements of the Treasury Department
Mimeograph No. 5717, 1944 C.B. 321. In the event that it should be
determined by federal statute or by ruling of the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue that the provisions of this section are no longer
necessary to qualify this plan under the Internal Revenue Code, this
section shall be ineffective without the necessity of further amendment.
(1) Anything contained in this plan to the contrary notwithstanding,
during the first 10 years after the effective date of this agreement,
the benefits provided by the Town's contributions to the trust for
the 25 highest paid employees of the Town as of the time of
establishment of the trust, including any such high-paid employees
who are not participants at such time but may later become
participants but excluding any employees whose annual benefit
provided by the Town will not exceed $1,500, will be subject to the
following conditions:
(a) If the plan is terminated or the full current costs thereof have not
been met at any time within 10 years after its establishment, the
funds or benefits which any of such 25 employees may receive
from Town contributions (including any unrestricted benefits,
as hereinafter defined, but exclusive of any supplemental
retirement income payments he has already received up to that
time) shall not exceed his unrestricted benefits at that time.
(b) If any such employee leaves the employ of the Town or withdraws
from participation in the plan when the full current costs have
not been met, the funds or benefits which he may receive from
Town contributions (including any funds or benefits he has
already received) shall not, at any time within the first 10 years
after establishment of the plan, exceed his unrestricted benefits
at that time.
B. These conditions shall not restrict the full payment of any death or
survivor's benefits on behalf of a participant who dies while the plan is
in full effect and its full current costs have been met.
C. The foregoing conditions do not restrict the current payment of full
retirement income benefits called for by the plan for a retired participant
while the plan is in full effect and its full current costs have been met.
D. "Unrestricted benefits" mean, at any time, benefits of the form called
for by this plan, including any withdrawal values available to a living
employee and any death or survivor's benefits payable on behalf of a
participant who dies after retirement, which have been provided by
contributions of the Town not exceeding the larger of the following
amounts:
(1) Twenty thousand dollars; or
§ 54-32 CROMWELL CODE § 54-33
1:44
(2) An amount equal to 20% of the first $50,000 of the employee's
average regular annual compensation multiplied by the number of
years since establishment of this plan.
E. "Supplemental retirement income payments" mean any current
payments to a retired participant sufficient, together with his
unrestricted benefits, to bring the total current payments to him up to
the full retirement income benefits provided under the trust.
F. If and when the contributions by the Town are sufficient at a later date
to meet the full current costs of the plan, the excess of the retirement
income payments otherwise payable over the actual retirement income
payments made during the period that such full current costs have not
been met shall be paid in a lump sum to the retired participant or, if
such participant has died in the meantime, to the beneficiaries of such
participant.
§ 54-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-33
1:45

ARTICLE XI
Trustee
§ 54-34. Designation. [Amended BOS 11-13-2002]
All contributions by the Town and the participants shall be committed in
trust to a trustee appointed by the Board and pursuant to a trust agreement
approved by the Board. The trustee shall have such power, rights and duties
as may be specified in the trust agreement. The Board may from time to
time appoint and remove, pursuant to an agreement approved by the Board,
one or more investment managers who shall have such authority to direct
investments to be made by the trustee, with respect to all or part of the
assets of the trust fund, as may be specified in the agreement appointing
the investment manager. The Board shall promptly notify the trustee of
such appointment and of the terms, conditions, and any limitations of the
investment manager's power to direct investments.
§ 54-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-34
1:47

ARTICLE XII
General Provisions
§ 54-35. Trust to be for benefit of employees exclusively.
This plan and the trust provided for hereunder are created for the exclusive
benefit of employees of the Town. Under no circumstances, except as
provided for in Article XIII hereof, either in the event of the termination or
amendment of the plan or otherwise, shall the trust fund or any part of the
corpus, income or avails thereof be used for or diverted to purposes other
than the exclusive benefit of participants, retired participants, terminated
participants, contingent annuitants and beneficiaries, except after
satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan, in which case any remaining
assets shall be paid over to the Town, provided that the trustee's reasonable
fees and expenses for operating and/or terminating the trust after
termination of the plan shall be paid from the trust fund.
§ 54-36. Amendments to plan.
The Town shall have the right, by action at a Town Meeting, to amend
the plan in whole or in part at any time and from time to time, provided
that no such amendment shall divert any part of the trust fund (remaining
after the payment of all costs and expenses properly chargeable thereto)
to purposes other than the exclusive benefit of the employees at any time
prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to employees under the
plan and trust. Any such amendment may be retroactive in its operation.
No amendment shall be made which would affect the trustee without the
trustee's written consent thereto. Anything contained herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Board shall have the power to amend this plan without
further action by the Town to the extent that any amendments may be
required by the Internal Revenue Service as a condition to the qualification
of this plan under the Internal Revenue Code.
§ 54-37. Plan does not create any contract of employment.
This plan shall not be construed as creating any contract of employment
between the Town and any employee, and the Town shall have the right
in all respects to deal with its employees, their hiring, discharge,
compensation and conditions of employment as though this plan did not
exist. No employee shall have any right to question the action of the Town
in terminating its contributions to the trust or in terminating the plan in its
entirety.
§ 54-38. Benefits not subject to encumbrances.
The trust fund is established for the purpose of providing for the support of
persons who are to receive benefits under the plan. No benefit payable at
any time under the plan shall be subject in any manner to alienation, sale,
transfer, assignment, pledge, attachment, garnishment or encumbrance of
any kind. Any attempt to alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge or otherwise
§ 54-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-38
1:49
encumber any such benefits, whether presently or thereafter payable, shall
be void.
§ 54-39. Reliance on documents deemed to be legitimate.
The Town, the Board and the trustee shall be discharged from all liability in
acting upon any notice, request, consent, letter, telegram or other paper or
document believed by them to be genuine and to have been signed or sent
by the proper person.
§ 54-40. Payments to persons deemed to be incapable of receipt.
If the Board shall determine that any person entitled to benefits of any form
under the plan is legally, physically or mentally incapable of receiving and
receipting for the payment of such benefits, then the Board may direct the
trustee to make such payments or any part thereof to such other person,
persons or institutions as the Board believes are then maintaining or have
custody of such recipient, until claim for such payment is made by his or
her duly appointed conservator or other legal representative. Such payment
shall constitute a complete discharge of the liability of the trustee to the
extent thereof.
§ 54-41. Minimum payments.
If any payments due hereunder shall amount to less than $20 a month, the
Board may direct that such payments be made less frequently in such a
manner that each payment will amount to at least $20.
§ 54-42. Titles and headings not part of plan.
The titles of the various articles and sections of this chapter are inserted
herein solely for convenience of reference, do not constitute a part of the
plan and shall be disregarded in construing, interpreting or applying any or
all of the provisions hereof.
§ 54-38 CROMWELL CODE § 54-42
1:50
ARTICLE XIII
Revocability
§ 54-43. Revocation upon failure to meet federal requirement.
This plan and the trust created in connection with the plan are based upon
the condition precedent that they shall be approved and qualified by the
International Revenue Service as meeting the requirements of the Federal
Internal Revenue Code and regulations issued thereunder with respect to
employees' trusts, so that the Town's contributions will not be currently
taxable to the participants as income. Accordingly, anything hereinabove
contained to the contrary notwithstanding, if a final ruling shall be received,
in writing, from the Internal Revenue Service that this plan and the trust
do not qualify under the terms of Sections 401 and 501 of the Internal
Revenue Code, there shall be no vesting in any participant of any assets of
the trust fund held by the trustee, and the trustee, upon receipt of written
notice from the Board, together with a copy of such a ruling, shall transfer
and pay over to the Town all of the net assets in the trust fund remaining
after deduction of proper expenses of termination, and the trust fund shall
thereupon terminate. For the purposes of this article, "final ruling" shall
mean either the initial letter ruling from the District Director, in response
to the Town's original application for a ruling, or, if such letter ruling is
unfavorable and a written appeal is taken or protest filed with 60 days of
the date of such letter ruling, it shall mean the ruling received in response
to such appeal or protest.
§ 54-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-43
1:51

ARTICLE XIV
Post-Employment Benefits
[Added BOS 4-11-2012]
§ 54-44. Other post-employment benefits.
The Town hereby adopts the Other Post-Employment Benefits Declaration of
Trust, effective May 17, 2012, for the benefit of the officers and employees,
and their beneficiaries, of the Town and the Board of Education. A copy of
the entire trust document is available for public inspection at the Office of
the Town Clerk, 41 West Street, Cromwell, Connecticut 06416.
§ 54-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-44
1:53
Chapter 57
SENIOR SERVICES COMMISSION
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 57-1. Creation.
There is hereby created a Senior Services Commission ("Commission") to
act in the best interest of the senior population of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 57-2. Membership.
A. The Commission shall consist of 11 voting members with a minimum age
of 55 and otherwise eligible for appointment pursuant to Section C802
of the Town Charter.8 The Commission shall be organized in accordance
with § 57-5 of this chapter. Except as defined in § 57-3 of this chapter,
terms shall last two years. Commissioners may be reappointed by the
Town Council after serving a term of office, pursuant to § 57-4 of this
chapter. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
B. A quorum shall consist of no less than five voting members.
§ 57-3. Appointment of initial members.
Upon the effective date of this chapter, the Senior Services Advisory Board
("SSAB") shall be dissolved. The 11 members of the dissolved SSAB shall
become the initial members of the new Commission. Terms will be
staggered so that all terms do not expire in the same year. Based upon the
alphabetical order of the initial membership, the first six members shall
have their terms expire on April 30, 2010, while the other five members
shall have their terms expire on April 30, 2011. Thereafter, all terms shall
expire after two years.
§ 57-4. Filling of vacancies. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Whenever a vacancy occurs, the Town Council shall appoint a successor to
hold office, consistent with Section C803 of the Town Charter.9 If a vacancy
occurs midterm, the successor shall hold office for the unexpired portion
of the term, at which time he may be reappointed. Whenever a term has
expired, the Town Council shall reappoint a Commissioner or appoint a
successor to hold office in his place. A Commissioner shall continue in office
until he is not reappointed or until a successor is appointed in his place.
8. Editor's Note: See now Charter § 4.17(b).
9. Editor's Note: See now Charter § 4.17(d).
§ 54-44 CROMWELL CODE § 57-4
1:54
Commissioners may be removed pursuant to Section C802A of the Town
Charter.10
§ 57-5. Organization.
A. The annual election of officers shall be held in the month of June. A
majority of Commissioners present and voting will elect a Chairman and
Vice-Chairman for terms of one year. In addition, the Commission will
appoint and may remove a nonvoting Secretary to serve as Commission
Clerk.
B. In addition to the voting members appointed to the Commission by
the Town Council and the nonvoting Secretary appointed by the
Commission, the Senior Center Director, Municipal Agent to the Elderly,
Friends of the Senior Center Chairman, the Director of Public Health,
and the Town Manager or his designee shall hold nonvoting positions on
the Commission ex officio. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
C. Subcommittees may be created by the Chairman as deemed necessary
to fulfill the obligations and responsibilities of the Board.
D. At the December meeting, the Commission shall vote upon a schedule of
regular meetings for the upcoming year and file the schedule with the
Town Clerk's office. A minimum of four regular meetings shall be held
per calendar year.
§ 57-6. Compensation.
Other than the nonvoting Secretary as defined in § 57-5 of this chapter,
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, though
their necessary and actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
official duties shall be paid by the Town within the limits of any funds
budgeted or otherwise appropriated for that purpose. The Secretary will
receive compensation consistent with the compensation for clerks of other
Town boards and commissions, within the limits of any funds budgeted or
otherwise appropriated for that purpose.
§ 57-7. Reporting.
The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
properly file meeting agendas and minutes with the Town Clerk's office.
Annually, working with the Senior Center Director, the Commission shall
assist in the preparation of an annual report for inclusion in the Town's
annual report.
§ 57-8. General duties and responsibilities. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
Working with the Senior Center Director and designated staff, the
Commission will strive to provide opportunities, new experiences, and
advocacy to all older adults in the Cromwell community, promoting dignity,
personal growth, health, friendship, independence, and improved quality
10.Editor's Note: See now Charter § 4.17(c).
§ 57-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-8
1:55
of life. The Commission will advise the Senior Center Director, the Town
Manager, and the Town Council on relevant community needs and Senior
Center operations, including the preparation of the Senior Services
budgets, specific issues related to the governing structure, and any
feedback concerning participant satisfaction. The specific duties of
Commission officers shall be established in the formal rules of order and
must be consistent with the provisions contained within this chapter.
§ 57-9. Promulgation of rules of order.
The Commission shall be governed by the bylaws maintained by its
membership, with a copy of the document filed at the Town Clerk's office.
Initially, the SSAB bylaws approved by the Board of Selectman on
September 12, 2007, will serve as the official rules of order. The
Commission may change the bylaws with a two-thirds majority of those
members present and voting, provided that the majority consists of no less
than five members and that no rules of order conflict with the provisions
contained in this chapter.
Chapter 60
SEWER COMMISSION
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
§ 60-1. Commission created; designated as Water Pollution Control
Authority.
The Town of Cromwell hereby creates a Sewer Commission and designates
said Commission as the Water Pollution Control Authority,11 which may
exercise all the powers set forth in Chapter 103 of the General Statutes
of Connecticut, and amendments thereto, in meeting its purposes and
objectives, subject to the provisions of and in conformance with this chapter
and the Town Charter.
11.Editor's Note: See Charter § 4.17(a)3, which establishes a five-member Water Pollution
Control Authority.
§ 57-8 CROMWELL CODE § 60-2
1:56
§ 60-2. Membership.
Said Commission shall consist of five electors of the Town of Cromwell
who shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall serve without
compensation. Said five members shall serve for terms of five years, except
that the members of the Commission first appointed shall be appointed for
such terms that the term of one member shall expire at the end of each year
for the next five years. Terms shall expire on June 30 in each year. Whenever
a vacancy occurs, the Town Council shall appoint a successor to hold office
for the unexpired portion of the term. A Commissioner shall continue in
office until his successor is appointed.
§ 60-3. Election of officers; appointment of Clerk.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among its own members at
the first meeting and annually thereafter at the first meeting held after the
first day of July in each year. The Commission shall be assigned a Clerk by
the Director of the Department of Public Works, subject to Town Manager
approval. The Clerk shall keep a complete record of the proceedings of the
Commission and shall file the same with the Town Clerk.
§ 60-4. Commission meetings and records.
The Commission shall be subject to the Connecticut Freedom of Information
Act12 and shall keep its records and hold its meetings in accordance
therewith. Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the
Chairman or any two members upon providing 24 hours' advance public
notice thereof.
§ 60-5. Utilizing Town employees.
Consistent with the Commission's budgeted appropriations and at the
Commission's request, the Director of the Department of Public Works
has the discretion to assign one or more Town employees to assist the
Commission. All employees so assigned shall be employees of the Town,
approved by the Town Manager and shall take their direction and
supervision from the Director of Public Works or his or her designee. As
described in § 60-7, the Commission shall pay the Town a fee reflecting the
costs associated with utilizing Town employees for this purpose.
§ 60-6. Purchasing of goods and services and land acquisitions.
A. The Commission shall follow all rules, policies and procedures of the
Town for purchasing and/or acquiring any and all goods and services.
B. All proposals of the Commission to purchase, sell, transfer and/or
condemn real property must be submitted to and approved by the Town
Council in advance. The Town Council may, in its discretion, require a
public meeting before approving of any such land acquisition.
12.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-200 et seq.
§ 60-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-7
1:57
§ 60-7. Reimbursement for Town services and personnel costs.
The Commission shall properly appropriate and reimburse the Town from
the Sewer Usage Fund for all Town costs attributable to Sewer Commission
operations and Town employees who may be assigned to assist the
Commission as described in § 60-5 above, with such costs determined and
allocated by the Director of Finance with the approval of the Town Manager.
§ 60-8. Financial records and reports.
The Commission shall maintain proper accounting and financial records
and shall provide an annual fiscal report to the Town Council on or before
September 1 of each year for inclusion in the Town's annual financial report.
The Commission shall also prepare a budget of estimated revenues and
expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year which shall be subject to review
and comment by the Director of Finance and to approval by Special Town
Meeting in accordance with the Town Charter.
§ 60-9. Removal of members.
A Commissioner may be removed by the Town Council for cause, including
but not limited to inefficiency, neglect of duty, misconduct in office or
violating the terms of this chapter. A Commissioner shall be removed only
after opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel before the Town
Council, at least 10 days prior to which he shall have been given a copy of
the charges against him. In the event of the removal of any Commissioner, a
record of the proceedings, together with the charges and findings thereon,
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Town of Cromwell.
Chapter 63
CENTRAL CONNECTICUT SOLID WASTE AUTHORITY
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authority to join regional agencies — See
Charter § 4.17(e).
Recycling — See Ch. 147.
Transfer station — See Ch. 206.
§ 63-1. Statement of purpose.
Pursuant to § 7-273aa of the Connecticut General Statutes Annotated,
which provides that any two or more Connecticut municipalities may, by
§ 60-7 CROMWELL CODE § 63-1
1:58
concurrent ordinances of their legislative bodies, create a regional solid
waste authority under the provisions of §§ 7-273aa to 7-273oo, inclusive
(Chapter 103b), to jointly manage solid waste and recycling services on
behalf of its members, the purpose of this chapter is to create such a
regional authority to be known as the "Central Connecticut Solid Waste
Authority (CCSWA)." Upon adoption of this chapter by two or more
municipalities, the CCSWA shall be created.
§ 63-2. Creation, powers and duties.
The CCSWA is hereby created as a regional authority under the provisions
of Chapter 103b and shall have all the rights, powers, duties and obligations
of a regional authority pursuant to Chapter 103b and Chapters 446d and
446e of the Connecticut General Statutes Annotated.
§ 63-3. Designation as municipal solid waste authority.
The Town of Cromwell (the "municipality") hereby designates the CCSWA as
its regional solid waste authority, including its regional resource recovery
authority, and adopts the provisions of Chapter 103b in connection with this
election to become a member of the CCSWA; provided, however, that this
designation and membership election shall not constitute a commitment of
the municipality's solid waste or recycling streams, and provided further
that the municipality agrees that it shall take no action, now or in the
future, contrary to its currently existing legal obligations and commitments,
including, without limitation, making any pledge of its municipal solid waste
or recycling streams to a disposal or recycling option chosen through the
CCSWA which has an effective date commencing prior to the expiration date
of any currently existing waste stream commitment to another disposal or
recycling arrangement. By adopting this chapter, the municipality shall not
be obligated now or in the future to make any such commitment of its solid
waste or recycling streams, or to commit any funding toward the CCSWA,
without further express authorization by its legislative body.
§ 63-4. Purpose.
The purpose of the CCSWA shall be to solicit and jointly manage solid waste
and recycling services on behalf of its members.
§ 63-5. Principal address.
The principal address of the CCSWA shall be 241 Main Street, Hartford,
Connecticut 06106, c/o the Capitol Region Council of Governments.
§ 63-6. Members.
The members of the CCSWA shall be the municipalities, including this
municipality, which adopt this chapter. Each member municipality shall be
assigned to one of four subregions of the CCSWA:
A. The Northwest Sub-Region;
B. The Naugatuck Valley Sub-Region;
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-6
1:59
C. The Greater Capitol Sub-Region; or
D. The Shoreline Sub-Region.
§ 63-7. Voting system for meetings of full membership.
The number of votes to be cast by each municipal member of the CCSWA
at any meeting of the Authority's full membership shall be determined
in accordance with the following five-tiered voting system based on the
individual population of each municipal member compared to the total
population of all CCSWA municipal members (all such population figures to
be derived from the most recent annual data published by the Connecticut
Department of Public Health):
A. Each municipal member whose individual population is less than 1% of
the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have one
vote;
B. Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or
greater than 1% but less than 2% of the total population of all CCSWA
municipal members shall have two votes;
C. Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or
greater than 2% but less than 5% of the total population of all CCSWA
municipal members shall have three votes;
D. Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or
greater than 5% but less than 10% of the total population of all CCSWA
municipal members shall have four votes; and
E. Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or
greater than 10% of the total population of all CCSWA municipal
members shall have five votes.
§ 63-8. Municipal member representative.
Each municipal member shall appoint one representative to the CCSWA,
which shall be the current chief elected official of the municipality or that
official's designee, and that representative shall exercise the voting powers
established for that municipal member as set forth in this chapter. As long
as the method of appointment and removal and the term of office of each
municipal member representative shall be consistent with the first sentence
of this section, the details of such appointment, removal and term of office
shall be as determined by the appointing municipality; provided, however,
that not more than half of the terms of all such municipal representatives
shall expire within any one fiscal year.
§ 63-9. Annual meeting and bylaws.
There shall be at least one annual meeting of all municipal members of
the CCSWA, to elect the members of the Executive Committee and enact
such other business as shall be deemed advisable at such meeting, all as
provided in the bylaws of the CCSWA to be adopted after its formation.
It shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of all CCSWA municipal
members to enact the authority bylaws or adopt any amendments thereto,
§ 63-6 CROMWELL CODE § 63-9
1:60
such vote to take place at a duly called meeting of the full membership of
the CCSWA, with proxy voting to be permitted at such meeting.
§ 63-10. Compensation of members and member representatives.
The members and member representatives of the CCSWA shall receive no
monetary compensation solely for their service as members and member
representatives of the CCSWA; provided, however, that the ability of the
CCSWA, if it chooses to do so in its sole discretion, to pay host community
compensation to municipal members which agree to host facilities owned or
used by the CCSWA within their municipal borders shall not be affected by
this prohibition.
§ 63-11. Executive Committee.
The full membership of the CCSWA shall elect an Executive Committee to
manage the operations of the CCSWA; provided, however, that the specific
division of responsibilities for such management between the Executive
Committee, the full membership of the CCSWA and any other body or officer
of the CCSWA shall be consistent with the bylaws of the CCSWA to be
adopted after its formation. No member of the CCSWA shall have more
than one representative on the Executive Committee, and each member
of the Executive Committee shall have one vote, without regard to the
voting system established by § 63-7 of this chapter for meetings of the
Authority's full membership. The members of such Executive Committee
shall constitute an odd number, shall include at least one representative of
each of the five voting tiers established pursuant to § 63-7 of this chapter for
meetings of the Authority's full membership, and shall also be determined
by considerations of geographical representation based on the four
subregions established under § 63-6 of this chapter, all such matters and the
terms of office and appointment of such Executive Committee members and
other matters pertaining thereto to be specifically determined in a manner
consistent with the bylaws of the CCSWA to be adopted after its formation.
§ 63-12. Legislative authority.
This chapter is hereby adopted pursuant to and in compliance with all laws
governing the municipality's adoption of ordinances.
§ 63-13. Effective date. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Following its adoption by the Board of Selectmen, this chapter shall become
effective on February 17, 2012.
§ 63-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-13
1:61
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 71
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 236.
§ 71-1. Findings and purpose. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The Town Council of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut, finds:
A. There are or may in the future be adult-oriented establishments located
in the Town of Cromwell which require special supervision from the
Town's public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the
health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments as well
as the health, safety and welfare of the Town's citizens.
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and
towns in the United States indicate that:
(1) Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adultoriented
establishments, especially those which provide closed
booths, cubicles, studies and rooms for the private viewing of socalled
adult motion pictures and/or videotapes and/or live
entertainment.
(2) Persons under the age of 18 may be attracted to adult-oriented
establishments and seek to enter or loiter about them without the
knowledge or permission of their parents or guardians.
(3) Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by
patrons, clients or customers of such adult-oriented establishments
for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts.
(4) Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such
establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients
or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles
and rooms.
(5) Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the
entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms
which are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are
in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and
rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes or others,
thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the commission
§ 63-13 CROMWELL CODE § 71-1
1:62
of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on
the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms,
which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of
other persons who may come into contact with such deposits.
(6) The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented
establishments tends to discourage such sexual acts and prostitution
and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of the patrons,
clients and customers of such establishments.
(7) The nature of adult-oriented establishments and the traffic which
they generate and the potential and the propensity for such
establishments to attract persons interested in explicit sexual
activities or erotic art forms and the potential for outdoor assembly
of such persons around the premises of such establishments are
such as to make them incompatible with nearby uses of land where
concentrations of children or youth tend to congregate.
C. The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments,
including without limitations those specifically cited in Subsection A
hereof, is and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and
safety of the citizens of Cromwell.
D. The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the
Town powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation
and measures to regulate and supervise adult-oriented establishments
as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
E. It is not the intent of the Town Council, in enacting this chapter, to
deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States
and/or State Constitutions nor is it the intent of the Town Council to
impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents or any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes,
books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the Town
Council does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to
obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the
United States and/or State Constitutions nor does it intend to restrict or
deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors
of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit
such materials. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 71-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context:
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any amusement machine that
is regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities and specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation
by patrons therein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having any portion of its stock
and trade in books, films, videocassettes or magazines and other periodicals
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-2
1:63
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined below, provided that this definition shall not
apply to any establishment in which such materials constitute less than 10%
of the value of the inventory of said establishment and in which the display
of such materials does not permit the viewing of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas within the establishment.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion
pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, removal of articles
of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling or any other
personal services offered to customers, which has as a significant or
substantial portion of such performance or any actual or simulated
performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, without limitation, adult
bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture
theaters and commercial establishments containing one or more adult
amusement machines. "Adult-oriented establishment" further means any
premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted
and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the
premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or any
premises wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member
of the public, a patron or a member when such adult entertainment is
held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect.
An adult-oriented establishment further includes, without limitation, any
adult entertainment studio or any premises that are physically arranged and
used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment
studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio,
modeling studio or any other term of like import.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any machine which, upon the payment
of a charge or upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be
operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronically
operated.13
§ 71-2 CROMWELL CODE § 71-2
1:64
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is
charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is
provided as an employee or an independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — An officer of the Cromwell Police Department and/or an
employee of the Town of Cromwell designated by the Town Manager with
approval by the Town Council, who shall hereby be authorized to inspect
premises regulated under this chapter and to take the required actions
authorized by this chapter in case of violations being found on such
premises and to require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on
said premises.[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person or any proprietor, shareholder, general partner or
limited partner who holds any share or partnership interest of any business
which is operating, conducting, owning or maintaining an adult-oriented
establishment.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Is not intended to include any medical publications
or films or bona fide educational publication or films, nor does it include
any art or photography publications which denote at least 25% of the
lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects
or art or photograph, nor does this definition apply to any news periodical
which reports or describes current events and which, from time to time,
publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons in connection with the
dissemination of the news, nor does this definition apply to publications
or films which describe and report different cultures and which, from time
to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or seminude
persons when describing cultures in which nudity or seminudity is
indigenous to the population.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks and female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
13.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Board of Selectmen," which immediately followed,
was repealed TC 6-16-2014. See now the definition of "Town Council."
§ 71-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-2
1:65
TOWN COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Cromwell,
Connecticut.[Added TC 6-16-2014]
§ 71-3. Operating restrictions.
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow
or permit any minor or intoxicated person to loiter in any part of such
establishment, including parking lots immediately adjacent to such
establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment.
B. Every adult-oriented establishment shall display a sign outside each
entrance bearing the words "Adult-oriented establishment — persons
under 18 not admitted," in letters two inches high.
C. No adult-oriented establishment shall be conducted in such a manner
that permits the observation of any material depicting specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from the outside of the building
that houses the adult-oriented establishment.
D. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town in
conformance with all applicable zoning, building and health regulations
on or after July 23, 1995, shall be well-lighted at all times and be
physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion
of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is
provided shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises.
Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked
or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths,
cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult-oriented establishments for
whatever purpose, but especially for the purpose of providing for the
secluded viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of
adult-oriented entertainment.
E. On or after July 23, 1995, the operator of each adult-oriented
establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room
or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion
pictures or other types of live adult entertainment shall be well-lighted
and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view
in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its
agents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at
all times that any patron is present in the premises.
F. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the
operator committed the act or caused the omission.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breasts.
C.
§ 71-2 CROMWELL CODE § 71-3
1:66
G. An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while
on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether
the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
H. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by a Cromwell inspector or such other person(s) as
the Town Council may designate. Information regarding employees,
including name, date of birth and social security number, must be
maintained as part of the record and must be available for inspection by
Town officials. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 71-4. Minimum distances from youth facilities.
Any public entrance or exit to an adult-oriented establishment shall be
located no less than 500 feet from any of the following uses if any such
uses are existing at the time when the adult-oriented establishment is
established: any public or private school serving grade 12 or lower; any daycare
center, nursery school or similar use; any public park or playground;
any playground associated with a church or other community building;
any residential zone. Measurements of distances shall be from any public
entrance or exit into or out of that building housing an adult-oriented
establishment or, if only a portion of the building is so used, any public
entrance or exit into or out of any portion of the building housing such
adult-oriented establishment to any part of a parcel of land containing
the land uses set forth in the first sentence of this section or any parcel
being residentially zoned. The separating distance required by this section
shall be determined as of the date that any adult-oriented establishment
commences to operate in accordance with this chapter and any applicable
provision(s) of the Cromwell Zoning Regulations, Building Code, Health
Code14 and other applicable state and local laws, and such adult-oriented
establishment shall not be deemed to violate this section if thereafter one of
the enumerated uses is established within the distance set forth herein.
§ 71-5. Minimum distances from other adult-oriented
establishments.
No adult-oriented establishments shall be permitted in a building or portion
of a building in which any public entrance or exit is less than 1,000 feet from
any public entrance or exit of a building or portion of a building used for
an existing adult-oriented establishment. Measurements of distances shall
be from any public entrance or exit into or out of that building housing an
adult-oriented establishment or, if only a portion of the building is so used,
any public entrance or exit into or out of any portion of the building housing
such adult-oriented establishment to any such public entrance or exit for
any existing adult-oriented establishment.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Zoning, Ch. 99, Building Construction, and Ch. 146, Health
Standards, respectively.
§ 71-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-6
1:67
§ 71-6. Exemptions for preexisting uses.
The provisions of the preceding §§ 71-4 and 71-5 shall not be deemed to
prohibit any use lawfully preexisting the enactment of this chapter. Any
preexisting use which shall be discontinued for a period of 30 days shall
thereafter conform of §§ 71-4 and 71-5.
§ 71-7. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this
chapter shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $100 for each such
violation.
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and
any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered
a separate offense for each hour of violation.
Chapter 73
ALARM SYSTEMS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 73-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
the installation, use and maintenance of burglary, hold-up and/or fire alarm
systems within the Town which result in the dispatch and/or response
of Town emergency vehicles and/or personnel and to encourage the
installation and use of reliable alarm systems.
§ 73-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any person, firm or corporation in the business of
selling, installing and/or servicing alarm systems.
ALARM SYSTEMS —
An assembly of equipment and/or device(s) that is designed to detect
unlawful intrusion, a criminal act of attempted robbery and/or robbery
and/or fire and, when so activated, calls for police or fire response by:
Transmitting a signal to a Town communication center or police or
fire headquarters;
(1)
A.
§ 71-6 CROMWELL CODE § 73-2
1:68
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, corporation or organization of any
kind on whose premises, whether owned or leased, an alarm system is
maintained within the Town.
AUTOMATIC DIAL ALARM — A telephone device or attachment that
mechanically or electronically connects a telephone line to a Town
communication center or Police or Fire Department headquarters and
reproduces a prerecorded voice message to report a criminal act, fire or
other emergency, calling for Police or Fire Department response.
COMMUNICATION CENTER — A location in the Town used to receive,
investigate and/or dispatch requests for emergency services, such as Town
police or fire headquarters.
DIRECT WIRE CONNECTION — The connection of any alarm system from
any specific location via direct leased telephone wires to a communication
center maintained by the Town.
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an alarm system to which the Police or
Fire Department responds and which is not caused by a criminal act, fire or
other emergency, except an activation caused by:
SUBSCRIBER — Any alarm user whose alarm system is connected directly
to the Town communications center.
§ 73-3. Registration required; fees. [Amended BOS 5-9-1997; BOS
5-10-2006]
A. Each alarm user shall register his/her alarm system or systems with the
Chief of Police prior to use, provided that alarm systems in use as of the
effective date of this chapter may be registered no later than 60 days
from such date.
B. Registration of alarm systems shall be accomplished within 30 days of
installation by filling out a form provided by the Chief of Police, which
shall contain such information as he may require, including the names
of at least two other persons (key holders) to be contacted in case of
emergency.
Transmitting a signal to a person who relays information to a Town
communication center or police or fire headquarters; or
(2)
Producing an audible sound signal to which the Police or Fire
Department is expected to respond.
(3)
Alarms on motor vehicles which are not transmitted to the
communication center or Police or Fire Departments, nor activate
alarm systems that are so transmitted, are specifically excluded.
B.
A. Malfunction of telephone company equipment.
B. An act of God (i.e., storm).
Persons beyond control of alarm user who transmit alarm with criminal,
malicious or mischievous intent.
C.
§ 73-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-3
1:69
C. The fee for registration of an alarm system shall be $25. All registrations
shall expire one year after date of issuance. The fee for reregistration
shall be $10 for each successive one-year period.
D. It shall be the responsibility of each alarm user to notify the Chief of
Police, in writing, of changes in registration information.
§ 73-4. Direct connection to communication center.
A. Upon the favorable recommendation of the Police Chief, alarms from
business premises and financial institutions may be terminated in the
Town communication center.
B. The alarm subscriber approved for a direct connection to the Town
communication center or the alarm business contracting for servicing
the subscriber's alarm system shall be responsible for obtaining the
leased telephone line between the subscriber's premises and the alarmreceiving
equipment at the Town communication center and for
furnishing the appropriate interface equipment, if required, in order
to provide an input signal which is compatible with the receiving
equipment used in the Town communication center.
C. The number of subscribers shall be limited by the capacity of the Town
communication center to monitor adequately as determined by the Chief
of Police.
§ 73-5. Automatic dial alarms.
No automatic dial alarm may be installed on any alarm system after the
effective date of this chapter. Any automatic dial alarm in use as of such
date may remain in use for no more than one year or until the sale of the
premises, whichever occurs first.
§ 73-6. Maintenance.
Each alarm user, at his expense, is required to maintain all components
of his alarm system in good working order at all times to ensure that the
sensory mechanism used in connection with such device be adjusted to
suppress false alarms.
§ 73-7. Testing.
No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the
Town communication center shall be tested or demonstrated without first
obtaining permission from the Police Chief or Fire Chief. Permission is not
required to test or demonstrate alarm systems not transmitting emergency
messages directly to the communication center unless the messages are to
be relayed to the communication center.
§ 73-8. Notice of disruption of service.
When an alarm business service to its alarm users is disrupted for any
reason by the alarm business or the alarm business becomes aware of
such disruption, it shall promptly notify its alarm users by telephone that
§ 73-3 CROMWELL CODE § 73-8
1:70
protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has
written instructions from its alarm users not to make such notification by
telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such
instruction.
§ 73-9. Enforcement.
A. Enforcement and administration of this chapter shall be the function of
the Chief of Police, except that the Fire Chief shall have jurisdiction over
fire alarm systems, and shall be accomplished as is provided in either or
both of the following two sections.
B. The Town shall set the following standards for alarm performance:
(1) A maximum of three false alarms from any one protected property
per calendar year shall be acceptable.
(2) After the third false alarm, the alarm user shall be notified in writing.
Such notification shall require that his alarm system be inspected
by the alarm business, and the alarm user shall review alarm
procedures with all employees. Also, written notification shall be
made to the Police Chief or Fire Chief, as appropriate, indicating that
the alarm problem has been corrected.
(3) Upon receipt of the fourth false alarm, the Town shall charge a
penalty of $25 for the fourth and fifth false alarm and $50 for each
false alarm thereafter in any calendar year.
C. If a subscriber and/or alarm business fails to comply with any
requirement of this chapter, the Chief of Police may terminate, in
writing, the privilege of having equipment and indicators in the Town
communications center and may require removal of the same within
three days from the receipt of said written notice, exclusive of Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, at the expense of such alarm user and/or alarm
business. Failure to remove said equipment shall result in the Town's
removal of said equipment at the expense of the person(s) so notified.
§ 73-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who performs or causes the performance of any of the following
acts shall be subject to a fine of up to $100 and/or arrest for each such act:
A. Intentional activation of a false alarm.
B. Failure to register an alarm system or give notice of changes in
registration information as required by this chapter.
C. Use of an automatic tape dialer in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
D. An unauthorized direct wire connection to a communication center in
violation of §§ 73-4 and 73-9C of this chapter.
§ 73-11. Appeals.
A. There shall be in the Town an alarm appeal hearing officer, who shall
have the powers and duties granted under this section.
B. The alarm appeal hearing officer shall be the Town Manager or his
designee. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 73-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-11
1:71
C. An appeal from four or more false alarms in any one calendar year by
an alarm user or from the removal of direct wire connection by any
subscriber may be made in writing to the Chief of the proper protective
service. The hearing officer shall mail notice of the time and place of
said appeal hearing to the alarm user at least 15 days before the hearing
date. The decision of the alarm appeal hearing officer shall be final.
§ 73-12. Disclaimer of liability.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Town and its
departments, officers, agents and employees shall be under no obligation
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any
alarm system or of the alarm-monitoring facilities at any Town
communication center. No liability whatsoever is assumed for the failure of
such alarm systems or monitoring facilities or for the failure to respond to
alarms or for any other omission in connection with such alarm systems.
Each alarm user shall be deemed to hold and save harmless the Town and
its departments, officers, agents and employees from liability in connection
with the alarm user's alarm system.
Chapter 76
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food establishments — See Ch. 137.
§ 73-11 CROMWELL CODE § 73-12
1:72
ARTICLE I
Sale Authorized
[Adopted STM 10-7-1935]
§ 76-1. Granting of permit authorized.
A permit shall be granted to sell alcoholic liquor in Cromwell, in accordance
with Chapter 151 of the Public Acts of 1935.15
15.Editor's Note: See the Liquor Control Act, C.G.S. § 30-1 et seq.
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-1
1:73

ARTICLE II
Sale on Sunday
[Adopted STM 7-15-1935; amended in its entirety 5-12-1999]
§ 76-2. Sale authorized; hours.
The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be allowed in the Town of Cromwell on
Sundays in accordance with C.G.S. § 30-91, Hours and days of closing.
§ 76-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-2
1:75

ARTICLE III
Consumption in Public Areas and Motor Vehicles
[Adopted STM 9-8-1982]
§ 76-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — The same meaning as in the Connecticut Liquor
Control Act, Section 30-1 et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes,
Revision of 1958, as amended.
PARKED VEHICLE — The same meaning as in Section 14-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
PARKING AREA — Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or
without charge as defined by Section 14-219a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.16
POSSESSION WITH INTENT TO CONSUME — Having in one's possession
or control alcoholic liquor in a glass, open bottle, open can or other open
container so as to permit consumption.
PUBLIC HIGHWAYS — All public highways within and under the control of
the Town of Cromwell and shall also include the sidewalks.
§ 76-4. Prohibited acts. [Amended 1-14-2004]
Except as permitted in § 76-5 hereof, no person shall consume or possess
with intent to consume any alcoholic liquor within the limits of any public
highways, sidewalks, parking areas, public parks or public property, as they
exist within the Town of Cromwell. For purposes of this section, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, the possession with intent to
consume alcoholic liquor in motor vehicles parked on said premises shall
also be deemed a violation thereof.
§ 76-5. Permit for special events; fee. [Amended 1-14-2004; BOS
5-10-2006]
Persons may possess alcoholic liquor with the intent to consume and may
consume alcoholic liquor during any function, festival or celebration
without violating this article, provided that the Chief of Police or his/her
designee has first issued a permit. A permit authorizing the consumption of
alcoholic liquor shall be issued by the Chief of Police or his/her designee,
provided that the applicant demonstrates that there will be proper
supervision at any such function. There shall be no fee for such permit
for residents of the Town of Cromwell, and the fee for such permit for
nonresidents shall be $50.
16.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 14-219a was repealed by P.A. 84-429, § 78. See now C.G.S.§ 14-212.
§ 76-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-6
1:77
§ 76-6. Minors and social hosts. [Added 3-14-200117]
A. Possession. No person under the age of 21 shall be in possession of
containers of alcoholic liquors, whether open or closed, within the Town
of Cromwell, except when accompanied by or in the presence of his or
her parent, legal guardian or spouse, who has attained the age of 21
years.
B. Hosting events. No person shall host an event which allows the
consumption or dispensing of alcoholic liquor to or by a minor or minors,
except as provided in Subsection A above. This prohibition shall apply to
events on both public and private property.
§ 76-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not more
than $99 for each offense.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 76-6, Violations and penalties, as
§ 76-7.
§ 76-6 CROMWELL CODE § 76-7
1:78
ARTICLE IV
Renewal of Liquor Permits
[Adopted TC 4-29-2015]
§ 76-8. Notice of application to renew liquor permit required.
A. Pursuant to Public Act No. 14-48, each person who files with the
Department of Consumer Protection an application pursuant to Section
30-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes for renewal of a liquor permit
that allows on-premises serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages
within the Town of Cromwell shall simultaneously give written notice of
each such liquor permit renewal application to the Chief of Police of the
Town of Cromwell or his or her designee.
B. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have 15 days from
receipt of a notice of renewal application to provide comments to the
Commissioner of Consumer Protection regarding such liquor permit
renewal.
§ 76-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person failing to provide notice in accordance with the provisions of
this article shall be fined not more than $99 for each offense.
§ 76-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-9
1:79
Chapter 79
(RESERVED)
Chapter 82
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health standards — See Ch. 146. Sanitation — See Ch. 189.
§ 76-9 CROMWELL CODE § 76-9
1:80
ARTICLE I
Control of Animals
[Adopted TC 3-16-201618]
§ 82-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any dog or livestock.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the
immediate control of the owner or keeper, either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
CAT — Any domesticated member of the feline species, whether male,
female, neutered male, or spayed female.
DOG — Any member of the canine species, whether male, female, neutered
male, or spayed female.
KEEP — Possessing, controlling, exercising or allowing to run at large.
LIVESTOCK — Any farm animal kept for any commercial or noncommercial
purpose, including but not limited to, horses, cattle, goats, sheep, chickens
and llamas.
OWNER — Any person possessing, keeping, harboring or having custody of
a dog, cat or livestock.
VACCINATION — Any antirabies vaccination using a type of vaccination
approved by the state.
VETERINARIAN — Any veterinarian licensed by the state.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal that attacks, bites or has a known
propensity to attack human beings or other animals.
§ 82-2. Running at large prohibited; exceptions.
No owner of any animal shall allow such animal to roam at large within
the Town, provided that nothing in this article shall be construed to limit
or prohibit the use of hunting dogs during the open hunting or training
season or any animal while performing or being exhibited in a bench show
or exhibition or any guide dog for the blind or within the confines of the
designated Town of Cromwell fenced-in dog park.
§ 82-3. Removal of feces required; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, or walking or in
control of any dog to permit such animal to defecate upon any private
property not owned by the owner or keeper, or any public property,
18.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Control of Animals, adopted
BOS 5-10-2006, as amended.
§ 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:81
unless such person shall remove all feces so deposited by such animal
before leaving the immediate area.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any owner or keeper
if such person is physically unable, by reason of age, infirmity or other
disability, to remove said feces.
§ 82-4. License tag and registration required; exceptions.
A. License tags required. Each dog kept by the owner in the Town shall be
licensed and registered if the dog is six months of age or over, on or
before June 30 annually or when the dog reaches six months of age. Dog
licenses shall be issued by the Town Clerk upon payment of a license
fee as established by the Connecticut General Statutes. The owner shall
state at the time application is made for such license, and upon printed
forms provided for such purpose, the name and address, and the name,
breed, color and sex of each dog owned and kept by the owner. The
owner shall submit to the Town Clerk a rabies certificate signed by a
veterinarian, or copy thereof, evidencing that the dog is current for its
rabies vaccination pursuant to § 82-5.
B. Exceptions. The provisions shall not apply to dogs whose owners are
nonresidents, conditioned upon possession of a valid tag from any
jurisdiction; nor to dogs brought into the Town for the purpose of
participation in any dog show; nor to Seeing Eye dogs properly trained
to assist a blind person when such dogs are actually being used by blind
persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place.
§ 82-5. Rabies vaccine required for dogs and cats.
A. Any owner of a dog or cat three months of age or over shall have such
dog or cat vaccinated against rabies. Any animal vaccinated prior to
one year of age or receiving a primary rabies vaccine at any age shall
be considered protected for only one year and shall be given a booster
vaccine one year after initial vaccination and shall be vaccinated at
least every three years thereafter. Those animals revaccinated after one
year of age shall be given a booster vaccine at least every three years
thereafter.
B. Proof of such vaccination shall be a certificate issued by a veterinarian
and provided to the Animal Control Officer upon request.
§ 82-6. Annoyance by animal on highway.
No owner shall allow an animal to go out on any highway, road or street and
obstruct, growl, snap, bite or otherwise annoy any person or domesticated
animal lawfully using such highway, or chase or interfere with any motor
vehicle so using such highway, road or street.
§ 82-7. Nuisance dogs.
No owner shall own or harbor a dog or dogs which are a nuisance by reason
of vicious disposition or excessive barking or other disturbance.
§ 82-3 CROMWELL CODE § 82-8
1:82
§ 82-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$75. If such fine is not paid within seven days, a penalty in an amount equal
to the fine shall immediately become due and payable in addition to the
original fine.
§ 82-9. Impoundment.
If an animal is found at large in violation of this article, it shall be
impounded by the Animal Control Officer.
§ 82-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-9
1:83
Chapter 88
BAZAARS AND RAFFLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 92.
§ 88-1. Statutory provisions adopted.
The Town of Cromwell hereby adopts the provisions of Public Act 409, 1955
Session of the General Assembly, an Act Concerning Bazaars and Raffles.19
Chapter 92
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bazaars and raffles — See Ch. 88.
§ 92-1. Games approved.
The playing of bingo in the Town of Cromwell is hereby approved for the
term of September 15, 1963, to September 15, 1964, and thereafter, in
accordance with Section 7-169 of the General Statutes.
Chapter 95
BLACKOUTS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 110.
19.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. §§ 7-170 through 7-186, inclusive.
§ 82-9 CROMWELL CODE § 95-1
1:84
§ 95-1. Compliance with orders required.
In order to further national defense and safeguard and protect life and
property within the Town of Cromwell in case of enemy air raids or attacks
or threatened air raids or attacks or for the purpose of trial blackouts or
other trials or tests to prepare to meet such air raids or attacks, all persons
within the Town are required to comply with the rules, regulations and
orders pertaining thereto promulgated by the Army, Navy or State Defense
Council or by any person or organization acting by lawful authority of them
or any of them; provided, however, that warnings of the beginning and
termination of the period of any such eventuality shall be given throughout
the Town by audible signals.
§ 95-2. Enforcement.
All police and firemen and all members of the auxiliary police and fire forces
of the Town are hereby authorized and directed to enforce blackout plans
and defense measures and said rules, regulations and orders pertaining
thereto during such periods and summarily to compel compliance
therewith. In cases of immediate threat of enemy action, they may abate
conditions dangerous to the public safety.
§ 95-3. Promulgation of local rules and regulations. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
The Town Council is authorized to establish, promulgate and enforce such
local rules, regulations and orders with respect to such periods not
inconsistent with the rules, regulations and orders referred to in § 95-1
hereof, as it shall deem necessary or appropriate to effect the spirit and
intent of this chapter.
§ 95-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or, during any
period of blackout and defense, any of said rules, regulations and orders
pertaining thereto or who shall fail or refuse during any such period to
comply with any instructions lawfully given by any police or air raid
wardens or fireman or any member of the auxiliary police or fire forces of
the Town or who shall obstruct or interfere with any such officer in the
performance of his duties shall be fined not exceeding $25 or be imprisoned
for not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 95-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:85
Chapter 97
BUILDINGS, BLIGHTED
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 1, Art.
I.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Health standards — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch 162.
Sanitation — See Ch. 189.
§ 97-1. Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to define, prohibit and abate blighted
property and public nuisances; to protect, preserve, and promote the public
health, safety and welfare; and to preserve and protect property values.
§ 97-2. Scope of Provisions
This chapter shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of all residential,
nonresidential, and undeveloped premises now in existence or hereafter
constructed, maintained, or modified but shall exclude: agricultural lands
as defined in Section 22-3(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes; land
dedicated as public or semi-public open space or preserved in its natural
state through conservation easements; or areas designated as inland
wetlands and watercourses.
§ 97-3. Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter.
ABANDONED — The occupants have vacated the premises and do not
intend to return, which intention may be evidenced by the removal by
the occupants or their agent of substantially all of their possessions and
personal effects from the premises and either nonpayment of rent for more
than two months in the case of a rental property; or an express statement
by the occupants that they do not intend to occupy the premises after a
specified date.
§ 95-4 CROMWELL CODE § 97-3
1:86
BLIGHT ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Means the Town Manager or his/
her designee and/or the Building Code enforcement and/or Health and
Compliance officials(s)or his/her designee(s).
BLIGHTED PROPERTY — A property whereon any of the following
conditions and/or structures exists, including occupied, vacant or
abandoned properties or structures:
Existing conditions pose a serious threat to public health or safety, and/
or impede public officials from making inspections, as determined by
the Building Official, Health Official and Compliance Officer(s), Fire
Marshal, Director of Human Services, and/or the Police, and/or their
designees, including but not limited to premises that are:
(1) Being used to conduct illegal activities;
A fire hazard, as determined by the Fire Marshal or as documented
in the Fire Department records; and
(2)
Creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with the use
and enjoyment of other premises within the surrounding area as
documented by neighborhood complaints, police reports, building
official reports, etc.
(3)
A.
Any structure which is in a state of dilapidation or decay; or is open
to the elements; or unable to provide shelter, or serve the purpose
for which it was constructed due to damage, dilapidation, or decay, as
evidenced by the existence of one or more of the following conditions:
(1) Missing windows or doors.
(2) Collapsing or missing walls, roof, or floor.
Exterior walls which contain holes, breaks, loose or rotting
materials, or which are not properly surface-coated to prevent
deterioration.
(3)
(4) Foundation walls which contain open cracks and breaks.
Overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies,
marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, and
exhaust ducts, which contain rust or other decay.
(5)
Chimneys and similar appurtenances which are in a state of
disrepair.
(6)
(7) Insect screens which contain tears and ragged edges.
(8) Vermin infestation.
Garbage, trash, or abandoned vehicles on the premises (unless the
premises is a junkyard licensed by the State of Connecticut).
(9)
Any vacant building or structure with overgrown grass or weeds at
least one foot in height.
(10)
B.
§ 97-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-3
1:87
DEBRIS — Material which is incapable of immediately performing the
function for which it was designed, including, but not limited to: abandoned,
discarded, or unused objects; junk comprised of equipment such as
automobiles, boats, and recreation vehicles which are unregistered and
missing parts, not complete in appearance and in an obvious state of
disrepair; parts of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans, boxes, scrap
metal, tires, batteries, containers, and garbage which are in the public view.
DECAY — A state of visible decomposition or rot.
DILAPIDATED — Decayed beyond repair.
HEALTH OFFICIAL — Such individual as is designated by the Town
Manager to administer the State Health Code and to enforce Town health
ordinances.
HEARING OFFICIAL — An individual(s) appointed by the Town Manager to
conduct hearings as authorized by of the Town Code.
(11)Graffiti.
Premises occupied by a structure intended for human occupancy, in
which grass, weeds, or similar vegetation (excluding flowers, fruits, and
vegetables, and areas maintained in their original naturally wooded
state, or a natural field state) is allowed to reach and remain at a height
of 12 inches or greater for a period of 10 days, or longer;
C.
Dead, decayed, diseased or damaged trees, or parts thereof,
constituting a hazard or danger to adjacent premises or the occupants
thereof or to public property or persons lawfully therein;
D.
Two or more unregistered motor vehicles in the public view, pursuant
to Section 14-150a of the Connecticut General Statutes;
E.
Residentially zoned property with any combination of 10 or more pieces
of mechanical equipment stored on the premises and in the public view;
F.
Residential or commercially zoned property that has any of the
following conditions:
Premises containing accumulated debris, not including compost
piles or piles of grass and/or brush which are not visible from a
public right-of-way and do not otherwise constitute a public health
or safety hazard; or
(1)
Landscaping on any premises, including, but not limited to, trees,
shrubs, hedges, grass, and plants which physically hinder or
interfere with the lawful use of abutting premises or block or
interfere with the use of any public sidewalk and/or private street
or right-of-way or any road sign; and
(2)
G.
Property that has graffiti which includes words, letters, murals or other
artwork that is in the public view and was not approved by the property
owner or which otherwise violates state statutes and/or Town zoning
regulations and/or ordinances.
H.
§ 97-3 CROMWELL CODE § 97-3
1:88
LEGAL OCCUPANT — A person with the legal right to inhabit a building or
portion thereof by virtue of ownership, lease or an owner's written consent.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT — Any apparatus designed to operate by an
internal combustion engine, or designed to be towed by any apparatus
propelled by an internal combustion engine.
NATURAL FIELD STATE — Areas where grass, weeds, and brush exist in
their natural, unlandscaped state.
NATURALLY WOODED STATE — Areas where trees and brush exist in their
natural, unlandscaped state.
PERSON — Any man, woman, corporation, or other legal entity capable of
owning real property.
PREMISES — A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of
land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or
nondwelling structure and includes any such building, accessory structure
or other structure thereon, or any part thereof. The term "premises," where
the context requires, shall be deemed to include any buildings, dwellings,
parcels of land or other structures contained within the scope of this
chapter.
PUBLIC VIEW — Visible from any public right-of-way.
STRUCTURE — Any building, dwelling, fence, swimming pool, or similarly
constructed object.
VACANT — A building or portion thereof that is not actually inhabited by a
legal occupant for a period of 60 days or longer.
§ 97-4. Public nuisance.
It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the Town of
Cromwell to maintain such premises or any public right-of-way abutting said
premises as a blighted property.
§ 97-5. Minimum standards.
A. The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than are provided in this chapter.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance,
regulation or other code of the Town or state, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety and property values of the people shall prevail.
C. This chapter shall not affect violations of any other ordinances, code or
regulation existing prior to the effective date of this code, and any such
violations may be governed and continue to be punishable under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
§ 97-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-6
1:89
§ 97-6. Responsibility for compliance.
The owner, lessee, or occupant of premises subject to this chapter, including
the agents thereof, shall be jointly and severally obligated to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. Whenever the person, as herein defined, is
a corporation or other legal entity, the officers thereof shall be jointly and
severally responsible with that corporation or other legal entity.
§ 97-7. Enforcement.
A. It shall be prohibited for a property to be a blighted property or a
public nuisance. Complaints may be submitted to the Blight Enforcement
Officer by members of the public, but such complaints must be in writing
and signed.
B. Whenever the Blight Enforcement Officer determines that there has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter, except as to § 97-3,
definition of "blighted property," Subsection E, such officer shall give
notice of such violation to the person responsible therefore, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Set forth the violations of this chapter;
(3) Specify a final date for the correction of any violation;
(4) Be served upon the owner or the owner's agent, or the legal
occupant as the case may require, provided such notice shall be
deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon
such legal occupant, if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the dwelling affected by this notice; or if it is sent
certified mail, return receipt requested; or if such person is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required under
the laws of this State;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action to be taken to effect permanent
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
(6) State that the penalties and other enforcement provisions of this
chapter will become effective on the final date set for the correction
of any violation without further notice; and
(7) State that the liability may be contested before the Hearing Officer
by delivering written notice of appeal to the Town Manager within
10 days.
(8) The notice shall specify that the owner has 30 days to correct the
violation by removing the vehicle or registering it; and
(9) Notice of the alleged violation shall be published in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in the Town of Cromwell.
C. Whenever the Blight Enforcement Officer determines that there has
been a violation of § 97-3, definition of "blighted property," Subsection E,
pertaining to unregistered motor vehicles, such officer shall give notice
of such violation to the person responsible therefor, which notice shall
be in compliance with § 97-7B, except that:
(1) The notice shall specify that the owner has 30 days to correct the
violation by removing the vehicle or registering it; and
(2) Notice of the alleged violation shall be published in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in the Town of Cromwell.
§ 97-6 CROMWELL CODE § 97-7
1:90
D. Any person notified in accordance with this section who fails to correct
any violation by the date specified in said notice shall be in violation of
this chapter and subject to its penalties and enforcement procedures.
Any person in violation § 97-3, definition of "blighted property,"
Subsection E, 30 days after the notice of violation in accordance with
§ 97-7B above shall be subject to the removal and disposition of the
unregistered motor vehicle. The Blight Enforcement Officer shall not
enter such property to remove and/or dispose of an unregistered motor
vehicle without the prior written consent of the owner or an appropriate
court order.
E. Whenever a noticed violation is not corrected by the date specified in
said notice, in addition to all other legal remedies authorized by law and
this chapter, the Blight Enforcement Officer and his or her designees are
further authorized to enter vacant or abandoned premises during normal
business hours for the purpose of remediating the blight condition(s).
The Blight Enforcement Officer shall not enter property that includes
a dwelling house or structure without the prior written consent of the
owner or an appropriate court order.
§ 97-8. Appeals.
A. Any person receiving a notice in accordance with § 97-7 above may
appeal said notice of violation(s) by filing a written notice of appeal with
the office of the Town Manager within 10 days of the date of said notice.
B. The hearing and appeal process shall be governed in accordance with
Section 7-152c of the General Statutes.
§ 97-9. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. Penalties.
(1) Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate
municipal offense.
(2) Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) Each separate offense under this chapter may be punishable by a fine
of $100 per day for each violation, payable to the Town of Cromwell.
In determining the amount of the fine, special consideration may
be given to those who require it in order to correct a violation of
this chapter. Specifically, additional time may be given to correct
a violation where the violator establishes good cause. As used in
this section, "good cause" includes, but is not limited to, an elderly
individual who is unable to personally correct a violation due to
his age, a disabled individual who is unable to personally correct
a violation due to his disability, or a low-income individual who is
unable to correct a violation due to cost. In determining whether
good cause exists, it will be considered whether occupants of the
premises are able to assist in correcting the violation in a timely
fashion and whether the severity of the violation is such that
additional time is not warranted.
B. Enforcement.
(1) The Blight Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue a citation or
summons for a violation of this chapter.
§ 97-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-9
1:91
(2) In addition thereto, the Blight Enforcement Officer is authorized to
initiate legal proceedings in the Superior Court for the immediate
correction of the violation(s), collection of any penalties, and the
recovery of all costs including costs of remedial action(s) authorized
by § 97-7 or the Court, and the reasonable attorney's fees and costs
incurred by the Town of Cromwell to enforce this chapter.
(3) All fines, Court costs, costs of remedial action, and attorney's fees, as
ordered by the Court, shall constitute a lien on the subject premises,
provided the owner of said premises has been notified of the
violations as herein provided and was made a party to the
enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 99
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
§ 99-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
The Town of Cromwell hereby adopts as its Building Code the Connecticut
State Building Code as it now exists and as it may hereafter be amended by
the State Building Inspector and the Codes and Standards Committee.
§ 99-2. Fees.
A. Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an
estimated permit value at the time of application. Permit valuations shall
include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which
the permit is being issued. If, in the opinion of the Building Official,
the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be
denied unless the applicant can show detailed estimates that meet the
approval of the Building Official. Final building permit valuation shall be
set by the Building Official.
B. Plan review. The Building Official shall determine whether a plan review
fee is required and the appropriate fee according to the following
schedule. All required plan review fees shall be paid to the Town of
Cromwell prior to the acceptance of a permit application and/or
construction documents. The Building Official shall determine if any
§ 97-9 CROMWELL CODE § 99-2
1:92
project should be sent to an outside agency for plan review, and such
agency shall be approved by the Building Official. All costs for outside
review shall be paid by the applicant.
(1) Schedule of fees for plan review:
(a) Residential construction: detached one- and two-family dwellings
and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses} not more than
three stories above grade plane with a separate means of egress
and their accessory structures, including all mechanicals,
additions, alterations: $50 per dwelling.
(b) Plan review for all construction other than residential
construction: $200.
(2) Resubmitted plans and/or construction documents: $50 per
residential dwelling; $200 for all other construction. The Building
Official shall determine whether resubmitted plans and/or
construction documents are subject to this fee or fraction thereof.
The fee is to be paid prior to the resubmission.
C. Permit fees: A permit shall not be valid until the following fees have been
paid.
(1) Standard fee for all permits: $20 for the first $1,000 in estimated
construction costs or fraction thereof.
(2) Standard fee for all permits after the first $1,000 in estimated
construction costs is $15 per $1,000 or fraction thereof.
D. Final certificates: The following certificates shall not be issued until all
fees as set forth herein have been paid to the Town of Cromwell. The
Building Official shall determine whether the following certificate fees
are applicable.
(1) Certificate of approval: $20.
(2) Certificate of occupancy: $20.
E. Related fees. The payment of the fees set forth herein for the
construction, alteration, removal or demolition work done in connection
with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall
not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of
other fees that are prescribed by law. Fees, including but not limited to
those related to all permits and reinspections, shall be paid prior to the
issuance of any certificate of approval or certificate of occupancy. The
Building Official shall determine whether any related fee is applicable.
(1) Additional permits: per § 99-2C.
(2) Reinspection fee: $30 per inspection.
F. Waiver of fees for municipal projects.
(1) The Chief Building Official or his designee shall waive any of the
building permit fees set forth in § 99-2B, C, D and E for any permits
issued to the Town of Cromwell or the Cromwell Board of Education.
(2) The State of Connecticut education fee cannot be waived and must
be paid by the municipality or the Cromwell Board of Education.
(3) The waiver of fees does not apply to the Cromwell Fire District or to
the Mattabassett Regional Sewer District.
§ 99-3. Building permit application procedure.
§ 99-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-3
1:93
A. Application to the office of the Building Official for the permits set
forth in.§ 99-3 hereof shall be on a form prescribed by the office of the
Building Official and in accordance with procedures established by that
office.
B. All permits issued are subject to any conditions imposed in the
application and may be subject to revocation for violations thereof.
C. Premises on which taxes are delinquent. No application for a building
permit or a certificate of occupancy shall be approved for premises on
which taxes are delinquent, except in accordance with Chapter 213 of
the Cromwell Town Code. For purposes of this section, delinquent taxes
are defined in Chapter 213, § 213-2.
§ 99-4. Refunds of fees.
A. Application for a refund of any fee paid hereunder shall be made, in
writing, to the office of the Building Official, specifying the reason for
the refund. After review of such application, the office of the Building
Official shall make a recommendation, in writing, to the Town Manager
for action thereon.
B. Refunds will be considered on an individual basis by the Town Manager
with respect to permits if the application for refund is made within six
months of the date of original issuance. No refund application shall be
considered after six months from the original permit issuance date.
C. Fees for those final certificates as set forth in § 99-2D hereof shall not be
refundable.
D. In the case of a revocation of a permit or abandonment or discontinuance
of a building project, the value of the work actually completed shall be
computed by the office of the Building Official, and any excess fee shall
be returned to the permit holder, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The maximum refund shall be 70% of the fee paid.
(2) All penalties imposed against the permit holder under the Building
Code shall first be deducted from any approved refund.
E. The Town Manager shall approve, modify or deny the refund request.
§ 99-5. Penalties for offenses; appeals.
A. All violations of the provisions of this chapter and/or the Connecticut
State Building Code, as incorporated herein, shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. Any person who shall continue any work in or about a building or
structure after having been served by the Building Official's office with a
stop order, except such work as he is directed to perform by the Building
Official's office to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject
to an additional fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each
offense. Every day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
C. The appeal provisions of Chapter 1, Article I, of the Town Code shall
not apply to violations of this chapter or the State Building Code
incorporated herein. Refer to the Connecticut State Building Code,
Means of Appeal.
§ 99-3 CROMWELL CODE § 99-5
1:94
Chapter 103
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
§ 103-1. Purpose.
In order to promote the public health, safety and welfare, particularly
to facilitate the delivery of fire protection, police, ambulance and postal
services to its townspeople, the Town of Cromwell adopts the following
chapter to govern posting of number signs on buildings within the Town.
§ 103-2. Color; height of numbers.
A. Color.
(1) All numbers shall be of a color that contrasts with the background to
which they are affixed.
(2) Owners are encouraged to use numbers made from reflective
materials.
B. Height and type.
(1) Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches high and a maximum
of 12 inches high if affixed to the following: buildings, fences, posts,
mailboxes serving a primary building on a lot located on the same
side of the street as the building, and mailboxes serving a primary
building on a rear lot and located within five feet of the right-of-way
to the rear lot.
(2) Numbers shall be no higher than 1 1/2 inches if affixed to a mailbox
across the street from the building which it serves or if affixed to one
of a group of mailboxes that serves a condominium or other cluster
of buildings on a lot.
(3) Numbers shall be block type, numerical form, not script, i.e., "8" not
"eight."
§ 103-3. Location of numbers.
A. Buildings visible from street line. Owners of buildings that require street
numbers and which are visible from the street line shall affix numbers
either to the top or the side of the largest building entrance visible from
the street line. The bottom of the numbers shall be at least five feet
above the doorstep or the entrance to which the numbers are affixed.
§ 99-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-3
1:95
B. Other buildings. Owners of buildings that require barriers shall affix
additional numbers to fences, posts or mailboxes along the street line.
Numbers affixed to objects along the street line shall be a minimum
of approximately three feet above the ground so that they will not be
covered by fallen or piled snow during the winter months. Buildings
which are not visible from the street or are set back 250 feet or more
may be additionally marked along the street line.
C. Mailboxes. Numbers shall be affixed to both sides of mailboxes; where
boxes are grouped together, numbers shall be affixed to the front and
any visible side.
§ 103-4. Buildings requiring street numbers.
A. Residential. Each single-family dwelling or condominium dwelling unit
will require one set of numbers. Duplexes will require separate sets
of numbers for each dwelling unit. Multifamily dwellings will receive
one set of numbers for each building with a separate letter added to
the numbers for each unit in the building. Single-family dwellings with
an accessory apartment will be required to add the letter "A" to the
apartment only.
B. Nonresidential. The primary building on each nonresidential property
shall require a street number. The decision of the Police Chief shall be
final on which building within a nonresidential property is the primary
building. Other buildings which are not outbuildings or accessory
buildings may require that a separate letter or number be added to the
numbers for each other building.
C. Outbuildings. Outbuildings or accessory buildings will not require street
numbers and will be considered accessory to the numbered building on
the property.
§ 103-5. Private drives and courts.
All such private roads shall be posted in a manner so that the names are
clearly visible and identifiable.
§ 103-6. Time for compliance.
A. Each person who owns a building that is occupied or that has received
a certificate of occupancy at the time this chapter becomes effective and
which requires a set of street numbers must post the street numbers
within 60 days from the date the Town of Cromwell notifies him/her of
the numbers for the buildings.
B. Each person who owns a building that requires street numbers and is
built or receives a certificate of occupancy after the effective date of this
chapter must post the street number before receiving the certificate of
occupancy for the building.
§ 103-7. Violations and penalties.
A. The Town shall issue a warning notice to any building owner who fails
to post street numbers on his/her building within the time allowed in
§ 103-6 of this chapter. The warning notice shall be issued from the
§ 103-3 CROMWELL CODE § 103-7
1:96
official designated by the Town Manager and shall be sent certified or
registered mail to the building owner at his/her last known address.
The warning notice shall allow the building owner an additional 10 days
from the date of the warning notice to post the numbers. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
B. Any building owner who fails to post street numbers within the time
allowed on the warning notice shall be subject to a fine of $5 a day for
each day afterwards during which he/she fails to post the numbers, up to
a maximum of $100 or any larger amount that the Connecticut General
Statutes permits the Town to fine for violation of this chapter.20
Chapter 110
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Director of Civil Preparedness — See Charter
§ 4.08.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 76.
Blackouts — See Ch. 95.
Loitering — See Ch. 160.
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIVIL EMERGENCY —
A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute such force by three or more persons acting together without
authority of law.
A.
Any natural disaster or man-made calamity, including but not limited
to flood, hurricane, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion, within
the corporate limits of the Town of Cromwell resulting in or threatening
the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an
extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
B.
20.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which immediately followed this subsection and
provided for enforcement by citation and hearing, was repealed BOS 4-9-1997.
§ 103-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-1
1:97
CURFEW — A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the Town of
Cromwell during the hours in which a curfew has been imposed, excepting
persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil
emergency.21
SUCCESSOR TO THE TOWN MANAGER — The person he designates, but
if he fails to or is unable to do so, the Mayor and, in alphabetical order
by surname, the remaining members of the Town Council.[Amended TC
6-16-2014]
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager then holding office or his
successor.[Added TC 6-16-2014]
§ 110-2. Authority to declare and take action. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
When in the judgment of the Town Manager a civil emergency, as defined
herein, is deemed to exist, he shall forthwith proclaim it in writing, publish
the existence of same in any manner he deems appropriate and take such
other action consistent with this chapter and with the Emergency
Operations Plan of the Town of Cromwell, then in effect, as in his opinion
may be required.
§ 110-3. Command and control of Town facilities. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
A. After the proclamation by the Town Manager of a civil emergency in
the Town of Cromwell, he shall assume direct and complete control
and command of all Town of Cromwell departments, agencies, offices,
functions, facilities and personnel, including public school facilities and
personnel.
B. After the proclamation by the Town Manager of a civil emergency in
the Town of Cromwell and upon the request of the Town Manager, the
Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of the Cromwell Fire District
or his representative may ask the Superintendent of the Cromwell Water
Division and the Cromwell Fire Chief to cooperate fully with the Town
Manager for the duration of the civil emergency.
C. The Town Manager shall bring all available local resources to bear on
the civil emergency in an effort to protect and preserve human life and
property of the Town to the greatest extent possible.
§ 110-4. Imposition of curfew. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Town Manager, he may order
a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the Town or to the
Town as a whole as he deems advisable and applicable during such hours of
21.Editor's Note: The former definition of "First Selectman," which immediately followed, was
repealed TC 6-16-2014. See now the definition of "Town Manager."
§ 110-1 CROMWELL CODE § 110-4
1:98
the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety
and welfare.
§ 110-5. Authorized orders. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
After proclamation of a civil emergency, the Town Manager may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
A. Order the closing of all retail liquor stores.
B. Order the closing of all public establishments, or portions thereof,
wherein the consumption of any intoxicating beverage is permitted.
C. Order the closing of all private clubs, or portions thereof, wherein the
consumption of any intoxicating beverages is permitted.
D. Order the discontinuance of the sale of any intoxicating beverage or
legally controlled drug, unless prescribed by a physician and dispensed
by a licensed pharmacist.
E. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline
or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other
than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle, except when
authorized, in writing, by the Town Manager.
F. Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid
flammable or combustible products.
G. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving
away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
H. Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away
of firearms and/or ammunition.
I. Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
§ 110-6. Emergency powers. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
During the period of a declared state of emergency, the Town Manager shall
have the power to invoke any or all of the following provisions:
A. Alcoholic beverages. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages
in a public street or place which is publicly owned or in any motor
vehicle driven or parked thereon which is within a duly designated
restricted area.
B. Weapons. No person shall carry or possess any rock, bottle, club, brick
or weapon, who uses or intends to use the same unlawfully against the
person or property of another.
C. Incendiary missiles. No person shall make, carry, possess or use any
type of Molotov cocktail, gasoline- or petroleum-based fire bomb or other
incendiary missile.
D. Restricted areas. No person shall enter any area designated by the
Town Manager as a restricted area unless in the performance of official
duties or with written permission from the Town Manager or his duly
designated representative.
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:99
§ 110-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than five
years, or both.
Chapter 112
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
§ 112-1. Definition of condominium.
The definition of "condominium" shall be the same as that used in Chapter
825 of the Connecticut General Statutes.22
§ 112-2. Approval of conversion required.
For the purpose of orderly supervision of this change in use, the conversion
of any property to condominiums shall require that the property be
resubmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission as a change in use.
This change shall be considered to occur despite the previous zoning
classification.
Chapter 120
DISHONORED CHECKS
§ 120-1. Fees.
If any payment to the Town of Cromwell, for any purpose whatsoever, is
made by check, which check is dishonored by the bank upon which it is
drawn due to the presence of insufficient funds in such account, as defined
in C.G.S. § 53a-118(a)(14), as may be amended from time to time, a fee
of $25 shall be charged in addition to the amount of the original payment
due to the Town. If the dishonor of such check renders the payment made
thereby to the Town untimely or delinquent pursuant to any other provision
contained in this Code, or any other law, regulation or agreement, the fee
imposed hereby shall be imposed in addition to any other penalties specified
elsewhere.
22.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 47-68a.
§ 110-7 CROMWELL CODE § 120-1
1:100
Chapter 125
EXCAVATIONS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
§ 125-1. Permit requirements.
No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavation, ditch, digging
or otherwise alter, open or remove the surface of any street or highway in
the Town of Cromwell until a permit has been obtained from the Director
of Public Works or his authorized agent. Application for a permit shall
be made on forms provided by the Director of Public Works and shall be
accompanied by a sketch or drawing describing the work to be done. The
sketch or drawing shall be in sufficient detail to facilitate an inspection
of the excavation by Town personnel. The Director of Public Works may
require details, plans and specifications and other engineering data to
be submitted with the application if he shall deem such to be necessary.
The permit shall be obtained at least 72 hours prior to commencement of
excavation activities.
§ 125-2. Discharge from pipes on public grounds.
No person, firm or corporation shall lay, construct, open or maintain any
drain or conductor pipe in such manner that the water from the same is
discharged on any sidewalk, any Town Highway, or public ground in the
Town of Cromwell.
§ 125-3. Notification of Call Before You Dig.
Call Before You Dig (CBYD) (1-800-922-4455) must be notified at least three
full working days prior to any excavation, and no permit will be issued
without an appropriate CBYD ticket number.
§ 125-4. Fees.
A. Contractors applying for a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall pay a
fee to the Town of Cromwell in the amounts computed by measuring the surface
area of such excavation as follows:
(1) Thirty-five dollars for the 500 square feet of excavation or fraction thereof; and
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-4
1:101
(2) Thirty-five dollars for each additional 500 square feet of excavation or fraction
thereof, as indicated below:
Surface Area
(square feet) Permit Fee
Up to 500 $35
501 to 1,000 $70
1,001 to 1,500 $105
1,501 to 2,000 $140
2,001 to 2,500 $175
2,501 to 3,000 $210
3,001 to 3,500 $245
3,501 to 4,000 $280
4,001 to 4,500 $315
4,501 to 5,000 $350
(continuing in increments of $35 for each 500 square feet or fraction thereof)
B. No permit fee shall be required of a private contractor or contractors doing
work for the Town of Cromwell or any department, agency or commission
thereof when done under the direction of the Director of Public Works of the
Town of Cromwell.
§ 125-5. Insurance and bond.
A. No permit for any excavation in any Town street or highway in the Town of
Cromwell shall be granted until the contractor shall file with the Director of
Public Works:
(1) Proof of insurance as follows:
(a) Automobile: $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily injury and/or
property damage.
(2) Comprehensive general liability:
(a) Each occurrence: $1,000,000.
(b) General aggregate: $2,000,000.
(c) Products: completed operations aggregate: $2,000,000.
(3) Workers' compensation employer's liability: $100,000/$5,000/$100,000.
(4) Umbrella: $1,000,000 per occurrence.
(5) Proof of a performance bond in the minimum amount of $5,000 and in greater
amounts as on the following page. Said performance will be an amount relative
to the area to be excavated as determined by the Director of Public Works, all
predicated on the contractor restoring the street or highway to a condition an
approved by the Director of Public Works.
§ 125-4 CROMWELL CODE § 125-5
1:102
Surface Area
(square feet) Bond Amount
Up to 1,000 $5,000
1,001 to 1,200 $6,000
1,201 to 1,400 $7,000
1,401 to 1,600 $8,000
1,601 to 1,900 $9,000
1,901 to. 2,000 $10,000
(continuing in increments of $1,000 for each 200 square feet or fraction
thereof)
B. All such bonds and insurance coverage shall be for a term of at least one
year and shall be kept in force continuously until the maintenance provisions
hereinafter specified are satisfied. Evidence of renewal of coverage shall be
furnished annually to the Director of Public Works.
C. The contractor shall hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Cromwell for any
and all liability, damages, and costs which may in any manner be incurred by the
Town of Cromwell by reason of or in connection with the issuance of a permit
for such excavation or by reason of any act or omission of the contractor, his
agents, or servants.
D. Contractors and public service corporations may dispense with the filing of a
separate insurance policy and bond for each excavation by filing annually with
the first Director of Public Works the proper evidence of insurance coverage
and performance bond hereinbefore required, provided, however, that an
application must be made for a permit for each separate excavation. Evidence
of insurance coverage and performance bond shall be filed in the form and in
companies or sureties satisfactory to the Director of Public Works. The surety
company shall be licensed to do business in Connecticut and a form of surety
bond is attached to this chapter.23
§ 125-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $50 for each day of the violation.
§ 125-7. Stop-work orders; completion of work by Town.
A. Whenever a permit has been issued and the regulations herein are not
complied with, a stop-work order shall be delivered to the person, firm
or corporation, or its representative, by the Director of Public Works.
Upon such delivery, all work shall cease, the excavation shall be refilled
or otherwise made safe and secure, and the permit shall be deemed to
be suspended until the Director of Public Works authorizes, in writing, a
resumption of the work. The Director of Public Works or his authorized
agent shall be authorized to issue stop-work orders.
23.Editor's Note: The form of surety bond is on file in the Town offices.
§ 125-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-7
1:103
B. Any work not conforming to the details and specifications prescribed by
the Director of Public Works may be completed by the Town, and all costs
for such work shall be billed to the person, firm or corporation taking
out such permit. No further permits shall be issued to said person, firm
or corporation so billed until the balance owed the Town is paid. All
remittances shall be payable to the Treasurer of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 125-8. Regulations.
A. The contractor shall at all times take all proper precautions to safeguard
any sewer lines, water mains and services, electrical conduits, telephone
conduits, gas main and services, or appurtenances encountered in
excavation, and shall properly maintain such installations so as to
provide uninterrupted service of the same. In locations where the use
of power equipment will endanger such installations, the work must be
done by hand labor.
B. Excavations must be made in open cut, and no tunneling will be allowed
except by special written permission from the Director of Public Works.
Trenches shall be braced and sheeted when needed to meet applicable
federal and state trench safety regulations.
C. No excavated material is to be placed on private property without
written permission from the property owner, such written permission to
be obtained by the contractor and filed with the Director of Public Works
prior to placing excavated material on private property.
D. All excess material removed from streets, highways, Town properties
or rights-of-way granted in favor of the Town of Cromwell that is not
required or suitable for backfilling the excavation will remain the
property of the Town of Cromwell and must be removed to and/or
disposed of at a site approved by the Director of Public Works.
§ 125-9. Permit required; protection of excavations; safe passage of
traffic.
A permit issued by the Director of Public Works and the Chief of Police shall
be obtained prior to excavation of any street or highway within the Town
of Cromwell, excluding Interstate 91 and Route 9. A permit issued by the
Chief of Police shall be obtained for any street or highway maintained by
the State of Connecticut. All excavations shall be protected at all times in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The Chief
of Police may proscribe such protection as deems necessary to allow for the
safe passage of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, including requiring police
officers or flaggers, whenever there are road closings, lane closings or other
restrictions to traffic. Only 1/2 of the traveled portion of a street or highway
shall be excavated, permitting safe passage of vehicular traffic on the
remaining half. Under no circumstances shall an excavation or opening be
made across the width of the entire street or highway in such a manner as
to prohibit safe passage of vehicular traffic without the written permission
of the Chief of Police. Excavation permits shall be obtained prior to the
commencement of the excavation work and prior to causing any redirection
of traffic. In the event of an emergency requiring excavation of a street or
§ 125-7 CROMWELL CODE § 125-9
1:104
highway, verbal notice shall be made to the Cromwell Police Department
prior to excavation.
§ 125-10. Restoring excavations.
A. All excavations provided for in this chapter shall be backfilled with
bank-run gravel or material approved by the Director of Public Works.
Material removed from the excavations may be used for backfill only
with permission of the Director of Public Works or his authorized agent.
All backfilling must be done in properly compacted layers not exceeding
12 inches in depth after compaction. No muck, clay, frozen earth, topsoil,
stones over six inches in any dimension or other deleterious material
shall be placed in excavation, but shall be disposed of as indicated
above. The approved backfill material shall be placed and compacted
at a moisture content between 4% and 6% (based on dry density, by
weight), or within 2% of the optimum moisture content as determined by
the moisture-density relationship test specified in American Society For
Testing And Materials, AD1557.
B. At locations where the contractor elects to consolidate the backfill
material by the so-called "Ho-Pac" method, the compacted layers shall
not exceed four feet in depth after compaction. The vibratory compactor
shall be placed directly on the backfill surface, and the compaction effort
shall continue until no further visible settlement occurs.
§ 125-11. Restoring pavement.
A. After the excavation has been backfilled and compacted as indicated
above, 12 inches of processed aggregate base shall be placed and
compacted in three four-inch layers. The material used and the method
of compaction shall be in conformance with the State of Connecticut
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads,
Bridges and Incidental Construction, Form 817, and future revisions
thereto. A temporary bituminous patch, at least two inches in depth,
shall be placed and compacted on top of the aggregate base so that the
surface of the patched excavation is slightly domed above the adjacent
pavement. After a minimum period of 60 days and a maximum of 360
days, the temporary patch material and any fouled aggregate base,
shall be removed and replaced with new aggregate base if needed, and
permanent bituminous material as indicated below:
(1) One and one-half inches of bituminous concrete surface course on
two inches of bituminous concrete binder course.
B. The bituminous pavement material and the method of placement shall
also be in conformance with Form 817 or the latest revision. After
the removal of the temporary patch and prior to the placement of the
permanent bituminous material, the existing pavement will be cut back
as directed by the Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative to create vertical faces which will either be by Public
Works construction permit ordinance parallel or perpendicular to the
new pavement. The vertical faces will be sealed with 85/100 asphaltic
material to ensure a good bond between the old and new pavement
material. The surface of the repaved excavation shall be flush with
§ 125-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-11
1:105
the adjacent pavement. All excavations shall be properly protected by
barricades and warning lights furnished and maintained by the
contractor during the curing period. Curbs and sidewalks are considered
a part of the pavement and are to be restored to their original condition
in accordance with applicable Town standards and specifications. All
grassed areas or open areas are to be rough graded with boulders
larger than six inches removed from the site. All lawned areas are to be
fine graded with four inches of topsoil and seeded as approved by the
Director of Public Works. All other highway facilities, signs, pavement
markings, sewers or subsurface structures shall be restored to their
original condition before excavation was made
§ 125-12. Maintenance of patches; repair by Town.
A. The contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of the repaired
patch during the life of the temporary patch and for a period of one
year after the acceptance of the permanent patch by the Director of
Public Works. In the event that it is necessary to make repairs to the
excavation or restoration of the pavement during the one-year period,
said guarantee shall extend for an additional period of sixty days. The
performance bond shall include said conditions of maintenance within its
provisions.
B. Any patches not satisfactorily maintained by the contractor may be
repaired by the Town of Cromwell, and the following charges shall be
billed to the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the patch: $150
per repair on weekdays and $250 per repair on weekends and holidays.
No further permits shall be issued to the person, firm, or corporation so
billed until the balance owed the Town is paid. All remittances shall be
payable to the Treasurer of the Town of Cromwell.
Chapter 128
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 110. Fireworks — See Ch. 134.
§ 128-1. Discharge restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm in the Town of Cromwell without
first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police, unless sanctioned by
the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection24 or unless
discharged as a member of an Official Honor Guard.
A. The discharge of any firearm in the Town of Cromwell by a person under
the age of 18 years, except under proper supervision, is prohibited.
24.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
§ 125-11 CROMWELL CODE § 128-1
1:106
B. The discharge of any firearm within 500 feet of any building in the Town
of Cromwell is prohibited.
§ 128-2. Permits.
Permits for the discharge of firearms shall be issued by the Chief of Police
free of charge for any lawful purpose. Permits shall be valid for one year.
§ 128-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $99.
§ 128-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any person discharging firearms on an
established target practice range of an organized rifle, gun or hunting club
or on any approved indoor range, nor shall it apply to any landowner using
firearms when in the act of protecting his or her property from destructive
animals or under circumstances permitted by state law.
§ 128-5. Provisions subject to statute.
This chapter is subject to all of the provisions of the General Statutes of the
State of Connecticut, including but not limited to those concerning fisheries,
game and firearms.
§ 128-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to restrict the discharge of firearms in the
Town of Cromwell in the interest of public safety.
Chapter 130
FIRE LANES
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking for the handicapped — See Ch. 172. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 221.
§ 128-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-1
1:107
§ 130-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANE — A passageway designed in accordance with this chapter for
the purpose of permitting free passage of fire-fighting ladder trucks and
other emergency vehicles from the public highways to all areas or portions
of areas of any private or public property, 24 hours a day in all seasons and
all weather conditions. A fire lane is established as hereinafter set forth.
§ 130-2. Obstruction of fire lanes and other apparatus;
responsibility for compliance.
Fire lanes established under this chapter shall be kept free of ice, snow
and all other obstructions. Fire hydrants and/or sprinkler connector devices
located on public or private property shall be accessible from said fire
lanes and shall also be kept free of ice, snow and all other obstructions.
Compliance with this section shall be the responsibility of the owner of
property on which a fire lane, fire hydrant or sprinkler connector device is
located.
§ 130-3. Establishment of fire lanes.
Whenever the Fire Marshal of the Town of Cromwell shall determine that
the reasonable safety and welfare of persons occupying or using any
premises, public or private, requires the establishment of a fire lane for
access of fire-fighting and other emergency vehicles, he shall establish
such fire lane by written order. Such written order shall include the exact
locations, dimensions, descriptions and/or maps of such areas to be
established as fire lanes and shall be approved by the written signature and
dated by the Fire Marshal or his representative. The written order shall be
effective on the date of its filing with the Town Clerk as set forth hereinafter.
§ 130-4. Notice of establishment.
Copies of the written order establishing a fire lane shall be filed with the
Town Clerk and the Police Chief. A copy of such order shall simultaneously
be sent by registered or certified mail to the owner of record of any property
on which a fire lane is established. A copy of the order shall also be
delivered to the occupants of the property, if any.
§ 130-5. Appeal from establishment. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Any person or persons aggrieved by the establishment of a fire lane may
file with the Town Clerk, within 15 days after the effective date of an
order establishing a fire lane, written notice of appeal setting forth therein
reasons therefor. The Town Manager shall conduct a hearing on the appeal
within 30 days, and after hearing, they may affirm, modify or rescind such
order.
§ 130-1 CROMWELL CODE § 130-6
1:108
§ 130-6. Marking of lanes.
Upon establishment of a fire lane in accordance with this chapter, the
Fire Marshal shall give notice to the owner of property to erect or install
adequate signs, markings and/or other devices as the Fire Marshal shall
determine to delineate said fire lane. Signs, markings and/or other devices
erected or installed on privately owned premises shall be at the expense of
the owner and shall be of a standard size and color, of standard lettering
and mounting, conforming to specifications established by the Fire Marshal.
In the event that an owner of property upon which a fire lane is established
fails to erect or install the markings determined by the Fire Marshal, he
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 130-10 hereof.
§ 130-7. Parking restrictions.
No person shall park or permit a motor vehicle or any other obstruction,
other than an authorized emergency vehicle, to stand in a fire lane which
has been established in accordance with this chapter, except when actually
picking up or discharging passengers.
§ 130-8. Removal of vehicles; expenses.
Any motor vehicle found standing in a fire lane which has been established
in accordance with this chapter may be towed, upon the direction of a
police officer, to any public or private parking facility, and all expense of
towing, storage or any other related charges incurred shall be borne by the
registered owner of such vehicle.
§ 130-9. Penalty for parking in fire lane. [Amended BOS 5-19-1993;
BOS 5-10-2006]
Whenever a vehicle or other obstruction is found in violation of § 130-7, a
police officer shall serve upon the operator of such vehicle or obstruction
or place upon such vehicle or obstruction a notice directing the operator
thereof to appear at the Town Clerk’s office prior to a time specified in said
notice to pay a fine in an amount specified in said notice. If the operator of
the motor vehicle cannot be identified, the registered owner of the motor
vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle. The fine for
such violation shall be $75. If any fine is not paid within seven days, a
penalty in the amount equal to the fine shall immediately become due and
payable in addition to the original fine.
§ 130-10. Penalty for failure to provide markings. [Amended BOS
5-10-2006]
Failure of property owners to comply with § 130-6 of this chapter, unless the
order is appealed as described in § 130-5 of this chapter within 30 calendar
days of the effective date of the written order, shall subject the property
owner or owners to an additional and separate penalty of $50.
§ 130-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-11
1:109
§ 130-11. When effective; applicability.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon adoption in
accordance with the Charter of the Town of Cromwell and shall apply to
all premises, public or private, regardless of the date such premises were
purchased or title transferred, without regard to any prior understanding
and/or agreement, whether written or verbal, with any person or agency of
the Town of Cromwell.
Chapter 134
FIREWORKS
§ 134-1. Sale permitted.
The Town shall hereby continue to allow the sale of Class C fireworks in the
Town of Cromwell.
Chapter 137
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 76.
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 110.
Health standards — See. Ch. 146.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 178.
Sanitation — See Ch. 189.
Zoning — See Ch. 236.
Farmers' markets — See Ch. 179
§ 137-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED AGENT — One who has been certified by the State of
Connecticut as a food service establishment inspector.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health for the Town of Cromwell
or the Registered Sanitarian, who is his authorized agent, who shall enforce
this chapter.
§ 130-11 CROMWELL CODE § 137-1
1:110
FARMERS' MARKET — As defined in Chapter 179: An approved, formally
organized and regularly scheduled event for the sale of local food produce
and products in a common marketplace which is certified and operated
under the general guidelines and auspices of the State Department of
Agriculture.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient, including ice, used or intended for use, in whole or in part, for
human consumption.
FOOD CLASSES — As defined by the State of Connecticut Public Health
Code and Regulations in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes
§ 19a-36g, as amended.[Amended TC 3-13-2019]
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any vehicle or place where food or beverage
intended for human consumption is manufactured, prepared, stored, offered
for sale, sold, served or given to the public or nonmembers, including
farmers' markets. For purposes of clarification, nothing in this chapter shall
include any religious ceremony, functions at private homes or affairs in
establishments which cater exclusively to members and their guests.
FOOD VENDING MACHINE — A device automatically operated to supply
food without the direct supervision of a human being.
ITINERANT FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS — Commercial food vendors
preparing and selling food from a truck, trailer, tent or other movable
venue.
§ 137-2. License required; conditions of license; posting required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment within
the Town of Cromwell without possessing a valid license or a written
determination from the Director of Health that no license is required. Only
a person who complies with the requirements of the Public Health Code
of the State of Connecticut shall be entitled to receive and retain such a
license. Licenses shall not be transferred from one person to another person
or from one location to another. Unless a different timeline is provided for
in the license, all licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. The owner
or proprietor of a food establishment or a food vending machine shall keep
a valid license posted in a conspicuous public location visible to the patrons
of the establishment, protected against defacement or damage at all times.
§ 137-3. Exemptions.
Residents of the Town of Cromwell offering fresh fruits and vegetables
grown on and sold from their own property shall be exempt from this
chapter.
§ 137-4. Application procedure; fees.
A. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment (including
participation in a farmers' market) shall make application to the Director
of Health. Such application shall be made at the time of submission
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-4
1:111
of an application to any other Town agency if such an application is
required for the planned activity or use or at least five days prior to the
intended opening or change of ownership of such an establishment. The
application shall be on a form provided by the Department of Health, and
it shall be within the Director's discretion to determine whether a license
and/or plan review fee is required.
B. Plan review fee. There shall be a nonrefundable application fee of $100
payable at the time of application, unless exempt. Proposed food
establishments that are exempt from a plan review fee include:
(1) Farms and gardeners of the Town of Cromwell selling homegrown
produce, homemade prepared foods and samples at a farmers'
market.
(2) Cromwell-licensed food establishments intending to participate in a
farmers' market.
(3) Charitable, philanthropic, ecclesiastical and civic organizations
regularly organized and/or functioning in the Town.
C. Such application form shall require, at a minimum:
(1) The name, post office address and telephone number of the owner,
owners or partners who shall be considered the applicant. The same
information must be provided for the manager, who shall be
responsible for the day-to-day operation of the establishment.
(2) The location, type of proposed food operation that is intended and
relevant plans for the construction and operation of the
establishment.
(3) The signature of the applicant and the application fee, if applicable.
(4) Any other information deemed required by the Director of Health.
§ 137-5. License procedure; fees; renewal.
A. It shall be within the discretion of the Director of Health to determine
whether a license is required and the appropriate licensing fee in
accordance with the following license fee schedule.
B. License fee schedule. License fees shall be paid as follows:
(1) Food establishment fees per class, including itinerant vendors:
(a) Class I: $100.
(b) Class II: $150. [Amended TC 3-13-2019]
(c) Class III: $200. [Amended TC 3-13-2019]
(d) Class IV: $200.
(e) Temporary license, seven days or less: $50.
(f) For all food vending machines owned by one vendor at one
location: $10.
(g) Food service plan review for extensive remodeling: $50.
(h) Public schools, nonprofit charitable and religious organizations
and civic groups: no fee.
(i) Local produce sold directly from a commercial garden or farm:
no fee
(j) Farms with a valid food establishment license issued by another
health district or municipality: no fee.
(k) Food establishments already holding a valid food establishment
license from the Town of Cromwell: no fee.
§ 137-4 CROMWELL CODE § 137-5
1:112
(l) Itinerant food establishments: an amount equal to the fee for that
food establishment class.
(2) Where there has been a failure to file the required application within
the five-day period specified and the establishment has commenced
and/or continued to operate without the required approval or
license, there shall be a penalty which shall be added to and
collected with all the other fees required. The penalty shall be 50% of
the fees required, if any, or $10, whichever is greater, for every seven
calendar days or part thereof during which the establishment shall
have operated without an appropriate approval or license from the
Director of Health. This penalty shall be doubled for every additional
week or part thereof during which operation of the establishment
unlawfully continues. The imposition or payment of this penalty shall
not be deemed to excuse the operation of a food establishment
without the required approval or license or to prevent the imposition
of any other penalty prescribed by this chapter or other provision of
law.
(3) Renewal of license. The holder of a valid food establishment license
may submit an application, amended with the current date, if
necessary, 30 days prior to the expiration of the current license. The
license holder has the obligation to initiate the renewal request.
(4) Duties of Director of Health in issuing license. After submission
of a completed application and after investigation, the Director of
Health shall determine whether a license is required and issue that
license if the food establishment conforms to the requirements of
this chapter and the regulations of the appropriate state agencies
that are incorporated into this chapter. If the Director of Health
finds that the establishment is incomplete or fails to meet these
requirements or if the establishment does not comply with other
municipal codes or regulations, the license may, at the discretion of
the Director of Health, be either denied without prejudice, or action
may be suspended for a stated period not to exceed 30 days for such
compliance to be accomplished.
§ 137-6. Inspection; procedure upon discovery of violations.
A. The Director of Health or his certified agent shall inspect and reinspect
each food establishment within the Town of Cromwell as is necessary for
the enforcement of this chapter.
B. After proper identification, the Director of Health or his certified agent
shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time any food
establishment, licensed or not, for the purpose of determining
compliance with this chapter. Inspections necessary after business hours
shall be allowed upon reasonable notice to the license holder or
manager.
C. The Director of Health or his certified agent shall be permitted to
examine all areas of the food establishment and its surroundings and
all employment and business records of the establishment to obtain
pertinent information pertaining to the equipment, food and supplies
§ 137-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-6
1:113
purchased, received and used as well as the health and hygiene of the
persons employed.
D. The Director of Health or his certified agent may condemn, upon
immediate notice, foods, foodstuffs and other related substances which
have been subjected to fire, smoke, flooding, loss of refrigeration or
other gross mistreatment. The Director of Health or his certified agent
shall make an itemized list of such destroyed items to be kept as a
record, a copy of which shall be made available to the license holder
upon request.
E. The Director of Health or his certified agent may, without prior written
notice, obtain a sample and/or place a hold order upon any food,
foodstuff or substance which he has determined or has probable cause to
believe unwholesome, deteriorated, adulterated or otherwise potentially
unsafe for consumption or use.
F. The Director of Health or his certified agent will confirm such action with
written notice to the license holder by means of an inspection report or
notice of violation.
G. Under a hold order such foods or other substances shall be suitably
stored to maintain the conditions as originally found so long as adequate
safeguards can be maintained against the removal or misuse of the items
in question. No foodstuffs or the containers thereof shall be relabeled,
repacked, reprocessed, altered or disposed of or used without the
written permission of the Director of Health.
§ 137-7. Notice of violation; reinspection.
A. Whenever the Director of Health or his certified agent makes an
inspection and finds a violation of the Public Health Code or of this
chapter, he shall make notice of such violation by means of an inspection
report or other written notice. In any such notice of violation, there shall
be stated:
(1) The specific violation.
(2) A definite and reasonable time for its correction, considering the
duration of the operation of the food establishment, the hazard to the
public and the complexity of the correction.
(3) The consequence of failure to correct the violation.
(4) A statement that an opportunity for an administrative hearing before
the Department of Public Health can be requested to contest the
notice of the violation or hold order if such a written request is
submitted by the license holder to the Department of Public Health
within three business days of the first knowledge of the notice, either
written or oral.
B. Whenever a reinspection is made subsequent to an initial inspection
which resulted in the issuance of a notice of violation and the
investigator finds that the violation(s) has not been corrected, an
inspection fee of $75 shall be paid and collected for each such
reinspection required.
C. The imposition of this fee or its payment shall not be deemed to excuse
any violation found pursuant to this chapter or to prevent the imposition
of any penalty prescribed by this chapter or other provision of law.
§ 137-6 CROMWELL CODE § 137-8
1:114
§ 137-8. Suspension of license.
A. A license may be temporarily suspended by the Director of Health upon
violation by the food establishment or its operators of any requirement of
this chapter, for any condition that is deemed by the Director of Health
to be an imminent health hazard, for serious or repeated violations or
for interference with the Director of Health or his certified agent in the
performance of his duties.
B. Notice of suspension of a license must be given orally, but must be
followed within 18 hours by written notice or confirmation. Said written
notice must contain the reasons for the action and shall direct the
operators of the establishment to immediately discontinue all food
service operations. Said notice shall also inform the license holder of his
right to a hearing before the Commissioner of Health if written request
for such hearing is submitted to the Department of Public Health within
three days of the notice of suspension.
C. Any person whose license has been suspended may make written
request for a reinspection. Such request must contain a signed
statement that the cited violations have been corrected. A reinspection
shall be made within five days of receipt of such a request, and if the
violations have been corrected, the license will be reinstated.
D. Upon receipt of an order of suspension, the license holder shall post
a copy of said order upon the inner surface of a glass panel facing
outwards onto the public entity to the establishment so that the public
may have notice of the suspension of the license to operate. Failure to
post said copy or to remove the same shall be an assumption of full
liability for any cause of action, public or private, based upon defiance of
said order, and the license holder and those having notice of said order
shall hold the Town of Cromwell blameless.
§ 137-9. Revocation of license.
A. A food establishment license may be revoked by the Director of Health
for refusal to comply with an order of suspension or the regulations of
the Public Health Code or for repeated violations which demonstrate
an inability to provide wholesome and hygienic foods to the public. A
license can only be revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been
provided before the Department of Public Health. Notice of a revocation
of a license shall provide at least 12 working days before the date of
delivery of the notice and the date of its effect. Said notice will be in
writing and signed by the Director of Health.
B. In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, § 12-146a, a food
establishment license may be denied or revoked by the Director of
Health for any premises for which personal property taxes due on such
property, used in a business enterprise located on the premises for which
such license for food establishment is sought, are delinquent, as follows:
(1) Such taxes remain unpaid, in whole or in part, for one year past the
date upon which such taxes were due; and
(2) The total unpaid taxes, for the current and any prior tax period(s)
combined, exceed 50% of the current annual taxes due for such
§ 137-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-9
1:115
business personal property used by the business seeking such
license for food establishment.
C. All other procedures for revocation shall be as described in § 137-9,
except that any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation pursuant
to the preceding Subsection B may appeal such decision as provided
in this Subsection C. Hearings concerning any denial or revocation of
any food establishment license hereunder shall be in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes, § 7-152c, as the same may be amended
from time to time. The Town Manager shall appoint not more than
two persons to serve as hearing officers. No such hearing officer shall
be a police officer or employee or person who issues citations. The
compensation of the hearing officers shall be set by the Town Council. In
addition to the requirements of Connecticut General Statutes, § 7-152c,
all hearings under this chapter shall conform to the requirements for
fundamental fairness, rules of evidence, and other procedures required
by law for administrative hearings involving the denial or revocation of
licenses.
D. Except for a revocation pursuant to Subsection B above, a license holder
or establishment that has had its license revoked shall not be eligible for
consideration of a new application for a food establishment license until
30 days have elapsed after the correction of all defects and violations
noted in prior inspection reports and notices of violations.
§ 137-10. Communications; appeals.
A. All communications to the license holder shall be properly delivered
and served when a copy of the inspection report or other notice has
been left with the operator of the establishment, or in the door if the
establishment is closed, or has been personally delivered or mailed by
certified mail to the license holder as specified by name and address
on the current license application. The term "operator" shall include the
senior employee on the premises at the time of delivery.
B. Any person aggrieved by a regulation or by an action of the Director of
Health shall have the right to a review by the superior of that party. If
such a review is not forthcoming or is unsatisfactory, the aggrieved party
can petition for an appeal before the Commissioner of Health.
§ 137-11. Standards; limitation on appeals.
A. The Director of Health is authorized to establish requirements for food
establishments and vending machines beyond those requirements
currently in effect as the regulations of the Connecticut Department of
Health and the Department of Consumer Protection, which are herein
incorporated into this chapter.
B. The right to appeal is limited to 20 days after the enactment of the
regulation.
§ 137-12. Submission of plans of new or renovated structures.
A. When food establishments are hereafter constructed, renovated or
remodeled, or when existing structures are to be converted for use as
a food establishment, or when a change is to be made in the menu
§ 137-9 CROMWELL CODE § 137-12
1:116
requiring a change in equipment or operation of an existing food
establishment, such intentions shall require the submission of detailed
plans to the Director of Health prior to the obtaining of any other
required permits and prior to the start of alterations.
B. Such plans shall show the layout, construction materials, arrangement
of work and storage areas, the location, size and type of fixed equipment
and facilities. The menu, service expectations and any other information
necessary to evaluate the proposed construction or alteration may be
required for submission and evaluation.
§ 137-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, in addition
to any other penalties or fees provided herein, be subject to a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $200 and/or imprisonment for up to 30
days for each day that an offense continues between the date of notice of
violation and the date of correction, as known by reinspection or the date of
disposition by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 137-14. Suspension of provisions.
During emergencies and disasters, the provisions of this chapter may be
waived.
§ 137-15. Failure of Town to act on applications for temporary
licenses.
If an application for a temporary license is submitted and not acted upon
within 10 days, then the intended opening and operation of such
establishment shall not be delayed by the Town.
Chapter 146
HEALTH STANDARDS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Commission — See Ch. 60.
Animals — See Ch. 82.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Food establishments — See Ch. 137.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Sanitation — See Ch. 189.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
§ 137-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-15
1:117
§ 146-1. Purpose.
For purposes of more ready reference in the field of environmental health
and to document our present facilities and personnel, this chapter is written
for specific application to the Town of Cromwell.
§ 146-2. Applicability of State Code.
A. The Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, using the latest
supplement at all times, shall apply to Cromwell, Connecticut, in all
matters pertaining to the regulation of water supply; quarantine for
disease; pollution of ground, water and air; garbage disposal; sewage
disposal; sanitation of restaurants, boardinghomes, convalescent
hospitals, camps, schools and all other dwellings; also morticians,
funerals, beauty parlors, barbershops, dairies, food-dispensing
businesses, motels and hotels.
B. Whenever the state regulations are altered or amended so as to affect
local ordinances, the latter may be interpreted by the local Director of
Health to comply with the state revisions.
§ 146-3. Local enforcing officers.
A. The local organization shall consist of a Director of Health, a Sanitarian
and Building Inspector and any other personnel that may be needed if
and when the expanding population requires more technical help.
B. The Director of Health shall be a qualified individual working on a parttime
basis. His remuneration shall be a salary determined by the Town
Council. He shall be appointed every four years by the Town Council,
subject to approval by the State Commissioner of Health. His duties shall
be as follows: [Amended STM 12-29-1969; TC 6-16-2014]
(1) He shall be responsible for the enforcement of the health, sanitary
and housing standards codes, regulations and ordinances.
(2) He may make new ordinances as needed, subject to the approval of
the Town Council.
(3) He may and shall call upon the State Department of Health for advice
and assistance in difficult problems and those of magnitude, such
as large subdivisions, nursing homes, convalescent hospitals, motels
and restaurants.
(4) He shall keep in contact with the local Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Town Council, and the Town Manager, and they
in turn will contact him or his authorized representative before
granting permits and changes, which in any manner may involve
sanitation and the health of the population.
(5) He shall supervise the work of the Sanitary Inspector and consult
with him at weekly intervals as near as possible and at all other times
that urgency requires.
(6) He shall render an annual report, in writing, in June of each year, for
inclusion in the annual Town Report. This should include a resume of
§ 137-15 CROMWELL CODE § 146-3
1:118
the work of the Department and any other matter which he deems of
interest to and for the good of the population.
(7) He shall also perform any other duties as prescribed by the State
Health Code which have not been stated above.
C. There shall be a Sanitarian and Building Inspector appointed by the
Town Council. He shall serve on a full-time basis as an employee of
the Town. He shall continue in office on a merit basis as long as he
properly fulfills his duties. He shall have had some experience and/or
training in these fields of work. He may, at the time of his appointment,
be subject to examination at the discretion of the Town Council, with
recommendations from the Town Manager and the Director of Health.
His duties shall be as follows: [Amended STM 12-29-1969; TC
6-16-2014]
(1) He shall act as an authorized representative of the local Director at
all times and all phases of sanitation.
(2) He may receive complaints regarding nuisances and shall consult
with the Director in regard to their correction.
(3) He shall consult as frequently as necessary with the local Director
in regard to complaints and problems of sanitation.
(4) He shall meet with the Planning and Zoning Commission and act as
liaison representative for the Health Department.
(5) Upon adoption of a contemplated housing code,25 he shall assist in
the enforcement of those regulations.
(6) He shall be familiar with state and local regulations in sanitation
matters so he may instruct applicants for permits as to all
requirements.
(7) He shall maintain records and diagrams and maps regarding all
sanitary installations in new construction, as well as any major
alterations in old installations.
(8) He shall perform the seepage tests, supervise installation and make
a final inspection of all sanitary installations and grant final
approval, in writing. When percolation tests are performed by a
qualified licensed engineer, hired by the builders or owners of any
project, he may accept their reports after proper study without
performing the tests himself. Also, he may under certain
circumstances request that the applicant shall have seepage tests
performed by a qualified licensed sanitary engineer at the
applicant's expense and shall have such report filed with the
Sanitarian for his consideration.
(9) He shall submit to the local Director of Health, on a quarterly basis,
a list of permits granted for sanitary installations, noting the fees
charged and the total of such fees and shall state at the bottom of
the list the following quotation: "These services were paid for by the
Town directly to the inspector on a salary rather than a fee basis."
This report shall be made on a state Form O.A. 75, which form will
be supplied by the Director. They shall be in triplicate.
(10) Each year, at the end of June, he shall submit a written report
to the Director of Health briefly summarizing the previous year's
work and adding any comments that will be of interest to the
§ 146-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:119
townspeople. A copy of this report is to be sent to the Town
Manager and the Town Council.
(11) He shall issue certificates of occupancy according to § 146-15 of
this chapter.
§ 146-4. Right of entry.
The local Director of Health and his authorized representatives shall have
the right of entry onto private property for the purpose of investigating any
complaints of nuisances.
§ 146-5. Complaints.
Any complaint made to the Director of Health may be required by him
to be in writing and bear the signature of the complainant. Telephone
complainants must identify themselves by name and address.
§ 146-6. Enforcement. [Amended BOS 4-9-1997]
The local Director of Health shall enforce these ordinances at all times
as per the authority of the State Code and health statutes. The appeal
provisions of Article I, § 1-1B, of this Code shall not apply to violations of the
State Code.
§ 146-7. Reportable diseases and quarantine.
A. Every physician shall report, in writing or by phone, all diseases of a
communicable nature, as listed by the State Code, Section 19-13-A2
(1965).26
B. No parent or guardian nor any school official or teacher shall allow a child
to attend school who has or may have any of the diseases listed in the State
Code, Section 19-13-A2 (1965).
C. No person afflicted with any communicable diseases, as listed in Section
19-13-A2, shall attend any public meeting or assembly or travel in any
public conveyance without special permission from the Director.
D. Release from isolation or quarantine from any of the common contagious
diseases shall be according to rules as agreed upon by the area directors of
Middletown and vicinity (1966).
E. Controls on communicable diseases.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 151, Housing Standards.
26.Editor's Note: Section 19-13-A2 of the Public Health Code was repealed 10-25-1989. See
now Title 19a, Public Health and Well-Being, § 19-a-36-A1 et seq.
§ 146-3 CROMWELL CODE § 146-7
1:120
Disease
Pupil with disease
excluded from school,
may not be
readmitted: Contacts Remarks
Chicken pox 7 days after appearance
of first crop of vesicles
Not excluded
German measles
(rubella)
5 days after appearance
of rash
Not excluded
Measles (rubeola) 5 days after appearance
of rash
Not excluded
Mumps When swelling of parotid
glands has subsided
completely
Not excluded
Ringworm of scalp Only if under physician's
care, confirmed by note
from physician
Not excluded
Streptococcal
infection of upper
respiratory tract,
including scarlet
fever
If under physician's care
when clinically
recovered; otherwise, at
least 7 days from onset
of first symptom
Not excluded
Disease
When cases and
contacts are excluded
from school, pupil with
disease may be
readmitted: Contacts Remarks
Diphtheria (cases
and carriers)
When 2 successive
cultures from nose and
throat taken not less
than 24 hours apart are
negative; must have
permit from Health
Department
Excluded
from school
and
readmitted
only when 2
successive
noise and
throat
cultures
taken not
less than 24
hours apart
are negative
Which
cultures are
persistently
positive in
the absence
of clinical
disease,
virulence
tests will be
done
§ 146-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-7
1:121
Other Diseases of Public Health Significance
Disease Control Measures
Impetigo Permit pupils to remain in school, if under medical
treatment; check contacts daily
Pediculosis Exclude pupils from school until treatment has been
inaugurated; inspect all pupils daily and advise
treatment if indicated
§ 146-8. Required immunizations.
No superintendent, principal or teacher of any public or private school in
this Town shall permit any child to attend school until such child shall
have been vaccinated against smallpox and immunized against diphtheria,
whooping cough, tetanus and poliomyelitis, unless a child's parents or
guardian present evidence from a physician that, in his opinion, it would
not be prudent to so immunize because of disease or allergy. A certificate of
immunization must be presented at the time of enrollment at school.
§ 146-9. Public nuisances.
A. The following conditions are specifically declared to constitute public
nuisances:
(1) Bakeries, restaurants and other places where food is prepared or
served that are not kept in a clean and sanitary condition or in which
persons who have any communicable disease are employed or for
which suitable toilet facilities are not provided or in which there is
evidence that rats, mice or vermin are present.
(2) Spoiled or diseased meats, whether exposed and offered for sale or
being transported or kept for sale.
(3) Barns or stables, hog pens, chicken yards or manure piles or
accumulations of organic material so maintained as to be in a
breeding place for flies.
(4) The discharge or exposure of sewage, garbage or any other organic
filth into or on any public place in such a way that transmission of
infective material may result thereby.
(5) Privies not screened against flies in populous districts and privies
likely to pollute the ground- or surface water from which water
supply is obtained.
(6) Transportation of garbage, night soil or other organic filth, except in
tightly covered conveyances which prevent leakage or access of flies.
(7) Stagnant water likely to afford breeding places for mosquitoes within
a residential district or within a distance of 1,000 feet therefrom.
(8) Bone-boiling, fat-rendering establishments or tallow or soap works
or other trades, when they can be shown to affect public health or
produce serious offense.
(9) Buildings or any part thereof which are in dilapidated or filthy
condition which may endanger the life or health of persons living in
the vicinity.
§ 146-7 CROMWELL CODE § 146-9
1:122
B. Upon receiving notice of any nuisance, as stated above, the local
Director shall, as soon as possible, investigate the same. If he finds
conditions to come within the above definitions, he shall notify the
offender or offenders both verbally and by writing. He shall use the
official Form O.S.E. 18, stating the facts of his findings and specify the
period of time in which the nuisance shall be abated. If such an order is
disobeyed, he may report the facts to the prosecuting authorities. A copy
must be kept in the Director's file, and one shall be sent to the office of
the Sanitarian.
§ 146-10. Sewage disposal; fees. [Amended STM 12-29-1969; BOS
7-12-2006; BOS 12-4-2008; BOS 6-15-2011]
The purpose of this section is to amend the ordinance for sewer fee changes.
A. No dwelling, apartment house, hotel, motel or commercial building may
be constructed unless the plans for the sewage disposal system have
been approved by the local director or his authorized representative.
No such structure shall be occupied until the final installation of such
system is approved.
B. All human and domestic sewage, including kitchen and laundry wastes,
shall be disposed of in properly managed sewers, septic tank systems,
privy vaults or by other means, in accordance with the State Public
Health Code, Section 19-13-B20a through B20r (1969)27 and January 15,
1970, using the latest revision of said code at all times.
C. Where public sewer lines are available in any given area, all dwellings,
commercial buildings, hotels and motels, new and old, producing human
wastes and soiled water and chemicals shall be connected to such sewer
lines. All such dwellings, commercial buildings, hotels and motels must
make necessary changes and connect their systems to these lines within
a twelve-month period after such line is declared open and functioning.
In case a private disposal system is malfunctioning and/or creating a
nuisance, the connection to the public sewer line must be made within
three months. Any deviation from standard connection shall only be
done by special permission of the Director of Health or his authorized
representative.
D. Where public sewers are not available, individual subsurface disposal
systems must be installed on each lot in compliance with the State Public
Health Code, using the latest revision of said code at all times.
E. A permit must be obtained from the Sanitarian for all new disposal
systems and for major repairs or changes in old ones that have become
defective. The fee for the review of plans for all new disposal systems
shall be $100. The fee for the review of plans for repairs and changes
to existing systems shall be $75. The fee shall be $100 for a new or
repair installation. Services and fees shall be as follows: [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
(1) Reviewing the plot plan that the builder or owner must submit
showing the location of the house, well and disposal system, with
27.Editor's Note: Sections 19-13-B20a through -B20r of the Public Health Code were
repealed 8-16-1982.
§ 146-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-10
1:123
distances to neighboring installations of like nature. The fee shall be
$100.
(2) Seepage tests made in test holes in the proposed area of seepage
and at the proper depth, unless these are supplied by a licensed
registered engineer employed by the applicant.
(3) Observations of a seven-foot-deep hole where other regulations
request such in specific instances. The soil test fee shall be $100 per
lot.
(4) Inspection of the completed system before backfill.
F. No two-family, multiple-family or apartment building shall be
constructed or renovated to such in any area unless public sewage is
available.
G. Any private sewage disposal treatment system which contemplates
discharge of treated sewage into any stream or surface water must have
the approval of the State Department of Health and Water Resources
Commission28 before any construction of buildings is started.
H. Trailer parks must conform to the above subsections in regard to all
regulations set forth in the State Public Health Code, Section 19-13-B28
(1969).29
I. A house-connection sewer shall not pass within 75 feet of a well, unless
the sewer is constructed of cast-iron pipe with leaded or equivalent
joints. No sewer, however constructed, shall pass within 25 feet of a
well.
J. No sewer line may pass within 100 feet of a public water-supply well. If
it must be placed between 100 feet and 200 feet from such a supply, it
must be constructed of cast-iron pipe with leaded or equivalent joints.
K. If private wells are unfavorably located with regard to sewers, it may
be necessary to insist on abandonment of such wells and require tie-in
with the public water supply, if available, or relocation of the well. The
fee for reviewing new well installations shall be $100. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
L. Approval of building conversions, additions or changes in use in areas
without public sewers.
(1) The Director of Health shall have the powers contained within
§ 19a-13-B100a of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies
with respect to the approval of any proposed building conversion/
change in use, building addition, attached or detached garage,
accessory structure, below- or aboveground pool, or the
preservation of any sewage disposal area, located in an area where
public sewers are not available.
(2) The terms contained within this Subsection L shall be defined in
accordance with § 19a-13-B100a(a) of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies.
(3) An application under this Subsection L shall be submitted to the
Department of Health with a fee of $50.
28.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
29.Editor's Note: Section 19-13-B28 of the Public Health Code was repealed 6-2-1997.
§ 146-10 CROMWELL CODE § 146-10
1:124
(4) A final decision by the Director of Health made pursuant to this
Subsection L shall be made in writing and sent to the applicant.
Any decision adverse to the applicant or which limits the application
shall set forth the facts and conclusions upon which the decision
is based. Such written decision shall be deemed equivalent to an
order and may be appealed pursuant to § 19a-229 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 146-11. Prohibition of sewage overflows and nuisances.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit the creation or
maintenance of any sewage overflow or nuisance, the abatement of which
shall be subject to the provisions of § 146-9B.
§ 146-12. Private sewage disposal systems for commercial
buildings.
For the minimum requirements for installation of private sewage disposal
systems or commercial buildings, refer to State Code, Section 19-13-B20a
through B20r (1969)30 and January 15, 1970, using the latest revision of said
code at all times.
§ 146-13. Subdivisions. [Amended STM 12-29-1969; BOS 5-8-1985]
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission, upon receiving an application for
a realty subdivision, will notify the Director of Health or the Sanitarian of
this fact and submit to them plans and maps of the proposed subdivision.
After proper investigation, the Director of Health shall render a written
report to the Commission, approving the plans or disapproving them. In
case of disapproval, he must state all the reasons for such decision.
B. Sewage disposal. All installations shall be connected to a public sewer
system when available. When individual subsurface disposal systems
have to be installed, they must conform to all the regulations and
statutes of the state and local codes regarding such disposal and,
specifically, as follows:
(1) Minimum seepage rate should be one inch in 20 minutes or faster.
(2) Bottom of seepage trenches and leaching cesspools must be at least
18 inches above maximum groundwater level.
(3) Ledge rock shall be at least four feet below the bottom of seepage
trenches or leaching cesspools. If trenches 36 inches in depth are
used, ledge rock should be at least seven feet below the surface.
§ 146-14. Garbage disposal.
A. No person shall throw, dump or deposit any filth, garbage, decaying
animal or vegetable matter which may be prejudicial to health or a
nuisance factor upon any vacant lot, highway or public place, nor in any
brook, pond or spring. This does not preclude the proper use of fertilizer
upon the land.
30.Editor's Note: Sections 19-13-B20a through -B20r of the Public Health Code were
repealed 8-16-1982.
§ 146-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-14
1:125
B. No garbage or odor-producing material shall be burned in open
incinerators at any time or place. The residual contents left from burning
other combustible trash shall not be left so as to attract vermin or flies.
C. All public and commercial garbage- and refuse-collecting conveyances
shall be properly and tightly covered so as not to allow spillage from the
vehicle at any time.
D. The owner or landlord of any multiple-unit dwelling shall supply the
tenants with proper receptacles for the deposition of rubbish and
garbage. The latter shall be in separate containers, and all shall be
tightly covered at all times. The landlord shall be responsible to the
Director of Health for the tenants' cooperation in these matters, and he
shall instruct them properly at the time of moving in.
§ 146-15. Certificates of occupancy.
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the local Building Inspector
and Sanitarian to the owners of any private dwelling, motel, hotel,
apartment house and commercial building, whether new or structurally
altered, after he has been satisfied that all sanitary and building code
ordinances have been adhered to, and the Fire Marshal has given his
approval in writing. The latter is particularly required for multiple-housing
units and commercial buildings.
§ 146-16. Animals.
A. No person shall keep dogs, cats, rabbits or such domestic animals as
pigs, goats, cows, horses and fowl in any locality in Town so as to create,
in the opinion of the Director of Health, a nuisance or a health hazard.
B. Barns and yards to contain domestic animals and fowl shall be at least
250 feet from the high-water mark of any watercourse or reservoir.
[Amended BOS 8-12-1998]
C. The term "high-water mark" as used in this section applies to any
depression in which water may flow at any time during the year.
D. Wastes from such compounds shall not be allowed to accumulate in
such quantity as to become a permanent breeding place for flies and
mosquitoes.
E. It shall be the purpose of this chapter to correct any present violations
within nonfarm areas.
§ 146-17. Drainage.
A. No discharge from seepage fields or laundry water shall be allowed to
empty into any street drain or open ditch.
B. No groundwater drainage nor water from roofs, cellars or yards shall
discharge into or near any sewage disposal system nor into any public
sewer.
C. No person shall direct any stormwater or wastewater onto neighboring
property which is not his own without special written consent of the
second owner (neighbor) and the Director of Health.
D. Sink drainage or laundry-water systems, where no flush water toilet
fixtures are connected, shall be constructed with a septic tank and
§ 146-14 CROMWELL CODE § 146-17
1:126
seepage system at least 1/2 the capacity specified for the usual house
sewerage systems.
§ 146-18. Violations and penalties.
A. All violations of this chapter shall be investigated by the Director of
Health and/or his Sanitary Inspector. Violators shall be notified verbally
and by official written notice, on Form O.S.E. 18, and signed by the local
Director of Health. This form indicates, on the back page, the penalties
that may be invoked if the notice is disregarded.
B. The repeal of the present health regulations and of its supplements
and revisions shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or
any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established
accruing before the date this chapter goes into effect.
§ 146-19. Water supplies. [Added STM 12-29-1969]
A. Approved public water supplies, when available, shall be used to supply
all buildings and dwellings, public and private, occupied or used by
human occupants. This does not apply to any existing or contemplated
private water supply which, in the opinion of the Director of Health, is so
located and constructed that it is not polluted or in danger of pollution.
B. In the absence or unavailability of public water supply, private wells
or springs may be constructed and developed according to the Public
Health Code of the State of Connecticut, Section 19-13-B51 through
19-13-B52 (1969 Revision), or as amended.31
C. No such well or spring shall be constructed or located within 75 feet
of the nearest property line of a public highway or any street or road
contemplated for acceptance now or in the future by the Town of
Cromwell.
§ 146-20. Amendments.
It is agreed that this chapter may be supplemented or changed as needed in
the future after proper notification and Town Meeting as prescribed by law.
§ 146-21. Personal service establishments. [Added BOS 7-12-2006;
amended TC 6-16-2014; TC 8-5-2019]
A. Authority of the Director of Health. The Director of Health or his or her
designee shall have the full power to enter and inspect all barbershops,
salons, tattoo, body piercing studios and tanning salons within the Town
of Cromwell during their usual business hours to ensure proper sanitary
conditions.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BARBERSHOP — The practice, as stated in Connecticut General
Statutes § 20-234, when done upon the head, face and neck for cosmetic
purposes and done for the public, with or without compensation
therefor, shall be construed as practicing the occupation of barber or
31.Editor's Note: See now Sections 19-13-B51a through -B51m of the Public Health Code.
§ 146-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-21
1:127
master barber within the meaning of this chapter: shaving or trimming
the beard; cutting hair; styling or cutting hairpieces and wigs; giving
facial and scalp massages or application of oils, creams, lotions or
other preparations, either by hand or mechanical appliances; singeing,
shampooing or dyeing the hair or applying hair tonic; and applying
cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, powders, oils, clays or lotions to
scalp, face or neck; provided nothing in this chapter shall permit any
of the services or acts herein described to be used for the treatment or
cure of any physical or mental disease or ailment.
BODY PIERCING — Involves the puncturing, piercing, or creating a
channel through any part of the body other than the earlobe (i.e., lower
portion of the auricle having no cartilage) for the purpose of inserting a
decorative object.
ESTABLISHMENT — Encompasses the terms "salon," "tanning salon"
and "barbershop" when used collectively.
HAIRDRESSING AND COSMETOLOGY — As defined in Connecticut
General Statutes § 20-250. The art of dressing, arranging, curling,
waving, weaving, cutting, singeing, bleaching and coloring the hair and
treating the scalp of any person, and massaging, cleansing, stimulating,
manipulating, exercising or beautifying with the use of the hands,
appliances, cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions, creams,
powders, oils or clays and doing similar work on the face, neck and
arms, and manicuring the fingernails of any person for compensation,
provided nothing in this definition shall prohibit an unlicensed person
from performing facials, eyebrow arching, shampooing or manicuring
of the fingernails or, for cosmetic purposes only, trimming, filing and
painting the healthy toenails, excluding cutting nail beds, corns and
calluses or other medical treatment involving the foot or ankle, or
braiding hair.
NAIL TECHNICIAN — A person who, for compensation, cuts, shapes,
polishes, or enhances the appearance of nails of the hands or feet,
including, but not limited to, the application and removal of sculptured
or artificial nails as set forth in Connecticut General Statutes § 19a-231.
OPERATOR — An individual designated by the tanning facility to control
operation of the tanning facility and to instruct and assist the consumer
in the proper operation of the tanning device.
SALON — Includes any shop, store, day spa, or other commercial
establishment at which the practice of barbering, as described in
Connecticut General Statutes § 20-234, hairdressing and cosmetology,
as defined herein and in Connecticut General Statutes § 20-250, or the
services of a nail technician, or any combination thereof, is offered and
provided.
STUDENT TATTOO TECHNICIAN — A person practicing tattooing on
another person under the supervision of a licensed technician
[Connecticut General Statutes § 20-266n(5)].
§ 146-21 CROMWELL CODE § 146-21
1:128
TANNING DEVICE — Any equipment that emits radiation used for
tanning of the skin, such as a sunlamp, tanning booth or tanning bed
that emits ultraviolet radiation, and includes any accompanying
equipment, such as timers or handrails.
TANNING SALON — Any place where a tanning device is used for a
fee, membership dues, or other compensation as stated in Connecticut
General Statutes § 19a-232.
TATTOOING — Marking or coloring, in an indelible manner, the skin of
any person by pricking with coloring matter by injection into the skin
with permanent dye or ink or by producing scars (Connecticut General
Statutes § 19a-92a[1]32).
TATTOO ARTIST/TECHNICIAN — A person who practices tattooing on
another person; effective July 1, 2014, shall include any and all
described practices permitted by state law performed by a tattoo artist/
technician licensed in the State of Connecticut (Connecticut General
Statutes § 20-266n).
TATTOO EQUIPMENT — Any equipment, instruments or utensils used
in the application of ink to the skin, including permanent cosmetics.
WORK AREA — A separate room with one or more work stations, or a
private room set aside to serve one customer at a time.
WORK STATION — A chair, countertop and floor space set aside for the
purpose of serving a customer, including floor space for the operator to
stand while serving the customer.
C. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization
to operate any salon or establishment that performs massage therapy,
manicures, pedicures, facials, the shampooing or cutting of the hair or
the barbering of hair, care or conditioning of the skin, including tanning,
within the Town of Cromwell without the possession of a valid license
issued by the Director of Health or his representative.
D. Conditions of license; expiration. Only a person who complies with the
requirements of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut
and the Code of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut, shall be entitled
to receive and retain such a license. Licenses shall not be transferred
from one person to another person or from one location to another. All
licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year.
E. Posting required. The owner or proprietor of any salon shall keep a valid
license posted in a conspicuous public location visible to the patrons
of the establishment, protected against defacement or damage, at all
times.
F. Fee. Each of these services shall be charged a licensing fee of $85.
G. Citation and license revocation procedures. Any license issued under
this chapter may be revoked by the Director of Health, or his or her
duly authorized designee, in accordance with this chapter, whenever the
32.Editor’s Note: Connecticut General Statutes § 19a-92a was repealed 2013, P.A. 13-234, §
157, effective 7-1-2014. See now Connecticut General Statutes § 20-266n.
§ 146-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-21
1:129
Director of Health, or his or her duly authorized designee, finds a hazard
to the public health or the existence of a violation under this chapter,
the Connecticut Public Health Code, and any other applicable codes,
regulations or statutes. When the Director of Health uncovers such
hazard or violation, he/she shall issue a written notice to the license
holder citing the conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken,
and specifying the time period within which the action shall be taken.
If the corrective action is not taken within the time period set forth in
the written notice, a written order shall be issued revoking the license
and prohibiting further use of the establishment until said violations are
corrected. If the conditions, in the judgment of the Director of Health,
or his or her duly authorized designee, constitute a substantial hazard
to the public health, he/she may immediately revoke the license or order
immediate correction.
H. Age restriction on use of tanning device. Pursuant to Connecticut
General Statutes § 19a-232, an operator shall not allow any person
under 17 years of age to use a tanning device. Any operator who,
knowing that a person is under 17 years of age or under circumstances
where such operator should know that a person is under 17 years of age,
allows such person to use a tanning device shall be fined not more than
$100. Such fine shall be payable to the Town of Cromwell and collected
by the Director of Health or his or her duly authorized designee.
I. Display of license. Any license issued under this chapter shall be
displayed in a prominent place at the salon, barbershop, or tanning
salon. Failure to do so may result in revocation of a license issued under
this chapter.
J. Equipment. All shops, stores or places of business shall be properly
equipped to conduct the business of hairdressing and cosmetology, as
well as tattoo and body piercing studios. There shall be one wash bowl
for each shampoo chair and three operators. Shampoo bowls shall be
used for hairdressing and cosmetology work only. A utility sink shall be
provided for proper cleansing of instruments. Shampoo bowls, cabinets,
combs, brushes, hand sinks, and towels shall be provided by the shop
owner and be in good working condition and clean. Booths or working
areas shall provide 36 square feet as minimum area for each operator
employed in the shop. This area shall not include any space devoted
to waiting rooms and other purposes. No dryers shall be placed in any
waiting room or in the three-foot passageway, which is the minimum
amount of space for passageways that shall be maintained throughout
the shop.
K. Sanitation.
(1) No attendant who is affected with any infectious disease in a
communicable form shall attend to any person without taking
appropriate precautions. Attendants shall wash their hands
thoroughly with soap and hot water before attending to any person.
Attendants shall wear clean, washable uniforms at all times. No
animals or pets shall be kept in a beauty salon or studio.
(2) All brushes, combs, instruments and applicators shall be cleansed
and disinfected after each use. Individual head rest coverings shall
§ 146-21 CROMWELL CODE § 146-21
1:130
be supplied for each person. In manicuring, a clean paper lining for
the finger bowl shall be used for each person. Brushes, scissors,
clippers, tweezers, combs, rubber discs, parts of vibrators and other
utensils and appliances shall be disinfected after use upon any
person. No tools shall be left exposed on work stands, but after
each use shall be cleansed, disinfected and kept in a clean, closed
drawer or cabinet. No towel shall be used for more than one person
without being laundered. Clean towels shall be delivered in bags
and kept in a clean, closed cabinet or closet. Suitable containers
for soiled towels, brushes and combs shall be provided. No powder
puff, sponge, neck duster or brush roller shall be used for more
than one person. The use of solid soap in common, or for more than
one person, is prohibited. All hair dropping upon the floor shall be
removed therefrom as soon as possible and in such manner as not to
cause a nuisance.
(3) Proper ventilation shall be provided for excess heat and odors.
Floors shall have hard washable surfaces in areas where tinting or
shampooing is done or where such chemicals as sodium hydroxide,
peroxide or thioglycolate are used. Floors shall be maintained in
a clean state at all times. Toilets shall meet requirements of the
regulations governing plumbing in the public code.
(4) Effective EPA-approved sanitizing solution shall be used for brushes,
combs, and other implements.
(5) An adequate supply of hot and cold running water at proper
temperature from a municipal or approved private source shall be
provided for service of customers, cleanliness of employees, and for
washing of floors, walls, ceilings, and equipment. There shall be a
minimum of one hand-washing facility conveniently located in or
adjacent to each private treatment room and in each work area and
bathroom in order to provide for proper hand washing.
L. Tattoo license required; age restriction.
(1) No person shall engage in the practice of tattooing unless the
person is a licensed tattoo technician per Connecticut General
Statutes Chapter 387a, §§ 20-266n through 20-266s.
(2) No person shall tattoo or perform body piercing (see definition) on
an unemancipated minor under 18 years of age without the written
permission of the minor's parent or legal guardian. Permission forms
shall be held on site for one year.
M. All reusable equipment that comes into contact with the blood or skin
must be properly sterilized by thoroughly cleaning with an ultrasonic
machine or other approved method and then holding in a steam
autoclave at an adequate temperature, time and pressure, or another
equal process. Verification of achieving sterilization with temperaturesensitive
indicator tape is required to be included in every batch placed
in an autoclave following manufacturer instruction regarding spore
(Bacillus stearothermophilus) testing. Documentation by a licensed
laboratory, to ensure sterilization capability of the autoclave, must be
maintained for two years. The Cromwell Health Department must be
notified within 24 hours of receipt of a report that nonsterile conditions
§ 146-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-21
1:131
were identified. Single-use disposable needles and ink tubes are
required.
N. Sterilized water shall be used for dilution of any tattoo ink.
O. Connecticut Department of Health and Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection requirements must be followed regarding the
disposal of sharps and biomedical waste.
P. Professional license required. All operators and employees of a salon,
barbershop, tattoo or body piercing studio, or tanning salon that are
engaged in the practices described herein shall hold the proper
professional license issued by the State of Connecticut. Failure to do so
may result in revocation of a license issued under this chapter.
§ 146-22. Public swimming pools or child day-care centers. [Added
BOS 7-12-2006]
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to
operate a public swimming pool or child day-care center within the Town
of Cromwell without a valid license issued by the Director of Health or
his representative.
B. Conditions of license; expiration. Only a person who complies with the
requirements of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut
and the Code of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut, shall be entitled
to receive and retain such a license. Licenses shall not be transferred
from one person to another person or from one location to another. All
licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year.
C. Posting required. The owner or proprietor shall keep a valid license
posted in a conspicuous public location visible to the patrons of the
establishment, protected against defacement or damage, at all times.
D. Fee. The fee for a commercial pool shall be $100. The fee for a day-care
center license shall be $50. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Chapter 147
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 158.
§ 147-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARDBOARD — Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials which have a minimum of contamination by food or other
material.
§ 146-21 CROMWELL CODE § 147-1
1:132
COLLECTOR — Any party entity who holds himself out for hire to collect
solid wastes or recyclables from persons or entities within the Town of
Cromwell.
ENTITY — Any institution, public or private corporation, partnership,
association or any other party, public or private, however organized, which
generates solid waste at a location within the Town of Cromwell other than
a "person" as defined by this chapter.
GLASS FOOD CONTAINER — A glass bottle or jar of any size or shape used
to package food products suitable for human or animal consumption.
LEAVES — The foliage of trees.
METAL FOOD CONTAINER — An aluminum, bimetal, steel, tin-plated steel
or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to package food
products suitable for human or animal consumption.
NEWSPAPER — Used or discarded newsprint which has a minimum of
contamination by food or other material.
OFFICE PAPER — Used or discarded high-grade white paper and Manila
paper, including but not limited to paper utilized for file folders, tab cards,
writing, typing, printing, computer printing and photocopying, which is
suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination. Office
paper generated by households is excluded.
PERSON — Any individual who generates solid waste from residential
property within the Town of Cromwell.
RECYCLABLES — Cardboard, glass food containers, plastic food containers,
metal food containers, newspapers, office paper, scrap metal, storage
batteries and waste oil.[Amended BOS 2-13-1992]
RECYCLE — To separate or divert an item or items from the solid waste
stream for the purposes of processing it or causing it to be processed into a
material produce, including the production of compost, in order to provide
for disposition of the item or items in a manner, other than incineration
or landfilling, which will best protect the environment. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the use of waste oil as fuel in an oil burner.
SCRAP METAL — Used or discarded items which consist predominantly
of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or
alloys thereof, including but not limited to white goods and metal food
containers.
STORAGE BATTERY — Lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor
vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles,
tractors and like applications.
TOWN — The Town of Cromwell, Connecticut.
WASTE OIL — Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines, but excludes hydraulic fluids, cutting oils, mineral spirits, paint
thinners, gasoline and vegetable oil.
§ 147-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-2
1:133
§ 147-2. Recyclables.
The following items shall be recycled pursuant to this chapter:
A. Cardboard.
B. Glass food containers.
C. Leaves.
D. Metal food containers.
E. Newspaper.
F. Office paper.
G. Scrap metal.
H. Storage batteries.
I. Waste oil.
J. Plastic food containers. [Added BOS 2-13-1992]
§ 147-3. Source separation required.
Each person and entity shall separate recyclables from other solid wastes.
§ 147-4. Preparation of recyclables for collection. [Amended BOS
2-13-1992]
For residential units, glass, plastic and metal food containers shall be rinsed
and placed in recycling containers provided by the Town or collectors;
newspapers and flattened corrugated cardboard shall be bundled and
placed on top of the container. Recycling containers shall not be used for
other waste. Recyclables shall not be mixed with other waste.
§ 147-5. Placement of recyclables for collection.
Containers of recyclables shall be placed curbside before 6:00 a.m. on the
day designated for collection.
§ 147-6. Authorization of collector; ownership of recyclables.
Only the Town and collectors may collect recyclables within the Town. From
the time of placement at the curb for collection by collectors, all recyclables
shall become the property of the Town.
§ 147-7. Responsibilities of collector.
A collector who has reason to believe that a person or entity from whom
he collects solid waste has violated the separation requirements set forth
in § 147-3 of this chapter shall issue a warning notice and promptly notify
the Town of the alleged violations. Collectors shall also assist the Town in
identifying persons and entities responsible for mixing recyclables and solid
waste in violation of this chapter.
§ 147-8. Scavenging prohibited.
The collection or pickup of recyclables not authorized by this chapter is
prohibited.
§ 147-2 CROMWELL CODE § 147-9
1:134
§ 147-9. Disposition of recyclables.
Collectors shall deliver recyclables to such location or locations designated
by the Town for processing and sale. Notwithstanding other provisions of
this chapter, the Town may from time to time designate locations at which
persons and/or entities may deposit specified recyclables.
§ 147-10. Waste oil.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, each person and entity
shall separate waste oil from other solid wastes and recyclables. Each
person shall deliver waste oil to locations designated by the Town. Each
entity shall dispose of its waste oil in an environmentally sound manner and
shall report the method of such disposal to the Town.
§ 147-11. Storage batteries.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, each person and
commercial entity shall separate storage batteries from other solid wastes
and recyclables. Each person shall deliver storage batteries to locations
designated by the Town. Each entity shall dispose of storage batteries in an
environmentally sound manner and shall report the method of such disposal
to the Town.
§ 147-12. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Director of Public Works shall promulgate rules and regulations in
conformity with this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be published
at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town of
Cromwell and shall be posted in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 147-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter and/or any
rules or regulations promulgated hereunder shall be fined not more than
$99 for each offense. Each continuing day of violation shall be considered
a separate offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any collector shall be
subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Section 22a-220a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, for violations defined therein.
Chapter 149
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES, EQUAL
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 147-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-13
1:135
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landlord registration — See Ch. 150. Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
§ 149-1. Declaration of policy.
It is the policy of the Town of Cromwell to safeguard all individuals within
the Town from discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex or
national origin in connection with housing, thereby to protect their interest
in personal dignity and freedom from humiliation, to make available to the
Town their full productive capacities, to secure the Town against strife and
unrest which would menace its democratic institutions and to preserve the
public safety and general welfare.
§ 149-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER — The Town Manager of the Town of
Cromwell.[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
DISCRIMINATE — To cause any difference in treatment based on race,
color, religion, sex or national origin, and includes segregation based upon
any of the foregoing categories.
FAIR HOUSING OFFICER — The person responsible for accepting and
acting upon housing discrimination complaints. The Fair Housing Officer
shall be the Town Manager or a duly appointed representative of the Town
Manager.[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
FAIR HOUSING REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee appointed by the
Town Council and established to assist the Fair Housing Officer in the
review or housing discrimination complaints. "Review Committee" means
"Fair Housing Review Committee."[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any dwelling, housing unit, structure or
portion thereof used or to be used for residential purposes.
OWNER — Any person having or exercising the right to sell, rent or lease
any housing accommodation.
§ 149-3. Prohibited practices.
In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this section which
affect any housing accommodation on the open market or in connection
with any public sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation, it shall be a prohibited unlawful practice for a person,
owner, financial institution, real estate broker or real estate salesman or any
representative of the above to:
§ 147-13 CROMWELL CODE § 149-3
1:136
A. Refuse to sell, purchase, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise deny to
or withhold any housing accommodation or real estate from a person
because of his race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
B. Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of
the sale, financing, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation or real estate or in the furnishing of facilities or services
in connection therewith.
C. Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase,
exchange, rent or lease any housing accommodation from or to a person
because of his race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
D. Refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease
of any housing accommodation to a person because of his race, color,
religion, sex or national origin.
E. Represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not available
for inspection, sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease when it is
known to such person, owner, financial institution, real estate broker
or real estate salesman or representatives of any of them that, in fact,
it is so available; or refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing
accommodation because of his race, color, religion, sex or national
origin.
F. Discriminate against a person by failing or refusing to show housing
accommodations which are listed for sale or rental.
G. Retaliate against a person because he has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding,
hearing or conference under this chapter by adjusting his rental, by
failing to provide proper services or by refusing to deal with such person.
§ 149-4. Exemptions.
The provisions of the chapter shall not apply:
A. To the rental or lease of any housing units in a housing accommodation
for not more than two families living independently of each other, if
the owner or members of his family reside in one of such housing
accommodations.
B. To the rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, if such
rental is by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by the owner
of the housing accommodation and he or members of his family reside in
such housing accommodation.
C. With respect to the prohibition of sex discrimination, to rental of sleeping
accommodations provided on a temporary or permanent basis for the
exclusive use of persons of the same sex.
§ 149-5. Enforcement powers.
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the Fair Housing Officer, and he/she shall have full
operating responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the chapter. In
addition to any powers or duties heretofore conferred on said Officer, he/
she shall have the power and duty to:
§ 149-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-5
1:137
A. Meet and exercise his/her powers at any place within the Town of
Cromwell for the purpose of implementing and administering this
chapter.
B. Seek the advise and/or services of the Town Counsel, if deemed
necessary, and appoint and empower a Fair Housing Review Committee
to assist in effecting the purposes and provisions of this chapter.
C. Accept gifts or bequests, grants or other payments, public or private,
and duly recorded as such, to help finance its activities.
D. Receive, initiate, investigate, seek to conciliate, hold hearings on and
pass upon complaints alleging violations of this chapter.
E. Hold hearings, administer oaths or take the testimony of any person
under oath.
F. Issue remedial orders requiring cessation of violation of this chapter
or requiring such affirmative action as in the judgment of the Fair
Housing Officer and/or Review Committee will carry out the purposes of
the chapter, including, where appropriate, an order forbidding the sale,
transfer or leasing of any housing accommodation or ordering the sale
or leasing of a housing accommodation to a person found to have been
denied the rights protected by this chapter.
G. Apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for such temporary or
permanent relief as it deems necessary.
H. With the approval of the Town Council, adopt, promulgate, amend and
rescind rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter,
including regulations requiring the posting of notices prepared or
approved by the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee.
[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 149-6. Enforcement procedures.
A. Any person or persons claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice
prohibited by this chapter may file a written complaint in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Fair Housing Officer. No complaint
hereunder may be filed later than 30 days after the aggrieved person
becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice nor, in any event, more
than 60 days after the alleged unlawful practice occurred. Within the
above time limitations, any member of the Fair Housing Review
Committee who has reason to believe an unlawful practice has occurred
may file a complaint, naming the Committee itself or the Fair Housing
Officer as the party complainant.
B. Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, in the event
that any proceeding is instituted before the Connecticut Commission
on Human Rights and Opportunities growing out of substantially the
same facts, no complaint shall be acted upon by the Fair Housing Officer
and/or Review Committee, and any action already undertaken upon a
complaint shall be suspended. In the event of the institution of such a
proceeding, the action of the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights
and Opportunities shall be final.
C. Upon receipt of a complaint, the Fair Housing Officer shall serve the
complaint and a written statement setting forth the rights of the parties
and the procedures to be followed by the Fair Housing Officer and/or
§ 149-5 CROMWELL CODE § 149-6
1:138
Review Committee in the investigation and adjudication of the complaint
upon the person or persons charged with a violation of this chapter,
hereinafter referred to as the "respondent."
D. Upon receipt of a complaint, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review
Committee shall conduct a preliminary investigation of the complaint
and shall, within 21 days after service of the complaint on the
respondent, prepare a written report.
E. The Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee shall, within 10
days after completion of the report of the preliminary investigation,
determine whether there is probable cause to believe that an unlawful
practice has been committed.
(1) If the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee determines that
there is no such probable cause, the complaint shall be dismissed.
(2) If the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review Committee determines that
there is such probable cause, the Fair Housing Officer and/or Review
Committee shall make an effort to eliminate the unlawful practice by
conference and conciliation, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
F. Within 30 days after the Fair Housing Officer has determined that
probable cause exists, unless an order has been issued dismissing the
complaint or stating the terms of a conciliation agreement, the Fair
Housing Officer shall recommend to the parties involved that they
initiate action before the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and
Opportunities.
Chapter 150
LANDLORD REGISTRATION
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blighted buildings — See Ch. 97.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 103.
Condominium conversion — See Ch. 112.
Equal housing opportunities — See Ch. 149.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
§ 150-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Landlord
Registration Ordinance."
§ 149-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:139
§ 150-2. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General
Statutes Sections 47a-6a, 47a-6b, and 7-148.
§ 150-3. Findings and purpose. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The Town Council of the Town of Cromwell finds that the identification and
knowledge of the whereabouts of nonresident owners of residential rental
housing units located within the Town of Cromwell is in the best interest of
the community and will promote the public health, welfare, and safety of the
residents of Cromwell. Accordingly, by enacting this chapter, the Town of
Cromwell seeks to better protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
welfare and quality of life of its residents by requiring nonresident owners
of residential rental housing units located within Cromwell to comply with
this chapter.
§ 150-4. Definitions.
The definitions contained within Connecticut General Statutes Section
47a-6a(a) shall apply to the terms of this chapter. In addition to such
statutory definitions, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
NONRESIDENT OWNER — Any owner of the property at an address, as
defined herein, who does not reside at such address and has not so resided
for the preceding 30 days or more.
RESIDENT OWNER — Any owner of the property at an address, as defined
herein, who currently resides at such property and has done so for 30 days
or more, which is owned by her or him.
§ 150-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all occupied or vacant residential rental property
within the Town of Cromwell. Such property that is owned by the State
of Connecticut shall be exempt, unless the property is owned by an entity
leasing real property from the State of Connecticut.
§ 150-6. Required registration.
A. By October 1, 2011, any nonresident owner of an existing occupied or
vacant residential rental real property or dwelling unit shall be required
to file and maintain on file in the Cromwell Health Department the
current residential address of the nonresident owner of such property,
if the owner is an individual. If a nonresident owner is a corporation,
partnership, trust or other legal recognized entity, then the current
residential address of the agent in charge of the property or dwelling
unit shall be filed in the Cromwell Health Department.
B. If such residential address changes, notice of the new residential
address shall be provided by such nonresident owner or agent in charge
of the building to the Health Department of the Town of Cromwell not
more than 30 days after the date that the address change occurred.
§ 150-2 CROMWELL CODE § 150-6
1:140
C. If any such nonresident owner or agent fails to maintain on file an
address as required by this section, the address to which the Town mails
property tax bills for the residential rental property or dwelling unit shall
be deemed to be the nonresident owner or agent's current address. Such
address may be used for compliance with the provisions of Subsection D
of this section.
D. Service of state or municipal orders relating to maintenance of any
such residential rental property or dwelling unit or compliance with
state law and local codes concerning such real property directed to the
nonresident owner or agent at the address on file, or deemed to be on
file in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be sufficient
proof of service of notice of such orders in any subsequent criminal or
civil action against the nonresident owner or agent for failure to comply
with the orders.
§ 150-7. Violations and penalties.
A. As provided in Connecticut General Statutes Sections 47a-6a and
47a-6b, any nonresident owner or agent who violates any provision of
this chapter shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $100 for
the first violation and not more than $200 for any subsequent violation.
B. The Health Department of the Town of Cromwell shall send notice of the
assessment to the nonresident owner or agent of the property that is the
subject of the violation.
C. Any person who is assessed a civil penalty pursuant to this section
may appeal therefrom to the Cromwell Hearing Officer, provided that
such person must file a petition to reopen assessment with the Hearing
Officer, together with the entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee
for a small claims case pursuant to Section 52-259 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, no later than 10 days after the receipt of notice of such
assessment.
§ 150-8. Severability.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section or clause or
provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional or ultra vires, such decision
shall affect only such particular section, clause or provision so declared
unconstitutional and shall not affect any other section, clause or provision
of this chapter.
§ 150-9. Word usage.
Whenever used, the singular number shall include the plural, the plural the
singular, and the use of either gender shall include both genders.
§ 150-10. When effective.
Following its adoption by the Board of Selectmen, this chapter shall become
effective on the 30th day after publication in a newspaper having circulation
within the Town.
§ 150-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-10
1:141
Chapter 151
HOUSING STANDARDS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 82.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Health standards — See Ch. 146.
Equal housing opportunities — See Ch. 149.
Landlord registration — See Ch. 150.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Sanitation — See Ch. 189.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
§ 151-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground but
having less than 1/2 its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The legally designated health authority of the
Town or his authorized representative.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that
temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a
dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping or by other recognized and legal pest
elimination methods approved by the Director of Health.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
§ 150-10 CROMWELL CODE § 151-1
1:142
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water-closet compartments, laundries, recreation areas,
pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
MODERATE COOKING FACILITIES — Portable electric plug-in or small
gas appliances and a refrigerator or an icebox.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking
or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS — A temperature of 5° F.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following facilities and equipment:
water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed
clothes-washing machines and any other similar supplied fixtures.
REASONABLE TIME FOR INSPECTION — The interval of time between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in the case of emergency
when an inspection may be made at any time, provided that such
inspection is necessary in the interest of public safety, health and
welfare.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner
or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or
daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not
for cooking or eating purposes; provided, however, that in the case of a
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling unit as owner
or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any
such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he were the owner.
(2)
§ 151-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-1
1:143
rooming unit containing not more than one room and occupied by not
more than two persons, moderate cooking facilities may be permitted.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and unregistered
motor vehicles or parts thereof.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter, which is designated to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
B. Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as if they were followed by the words
"or any part thereof."
§ 151-2. Inspection of premises.
The Director of Health is authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within the Town of Cromwell in order that he may perform
his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings
and of the general public.
§ 151-3. Right of entry.
For the purpose of making such inspections, the Director of Health is
hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times
all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit or the person
in charge thereof shall give the Director of Health free access to such
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
§ 151-4. Officials not liable.
In the application of the preceding section and all other parts of this
chapter, the Director of Health or his authorized representatives acting for
the municipality in the discharge of their duties shall not thereby render
themselves personally liable and are hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of their duties.
§ 151-1 CROMWELL CODE § 151-5
1:144
§ 151-5. Occupants required to provide access for repairs and
alterations.
Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give
the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 151-6. Conflicts with other legislation.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, demolition or health ordinance
or code of the Town or state statutes, the provision which establishes the
higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety
of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is
found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the
Town which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection
of the health and safety of the people, the provision of this chapter shall be
deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared
to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this
chapter.
§ 151-7. Housing Code Board of Appeals. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
There shall be a Housing Code Board of Appeals consisting of the Chief
of the Cromwell Fire Department, three electors appointed by the Town
Council, and the Building Inspector. The Chairman of the Board shall be one
of the appointees. The Board shall adopt rules for its procedure and meet
every six months and at the call of the Chairman and at such other times
as the Board may determine. The Board shall elect from its membership
a member to act as Clerk. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public, and it shall keep minutes of its proceedings.
§ 151-8. Notice of violation; manner of service.
Whenever the Director of Health determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall
give notice of such alleged violation to the person responsible therefor as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
A. Be put in writing.
B. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
D. Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is
served upon him personally or if a copy thereof is sent by registered mail
§ 151-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-8
1:145
to his last known address or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the
laws of the state.
E. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action, which if taken will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
F. Copies of such notices and orders shall be forwarded to the Chief of the
Fire Department and the Building Department.
§ 151-9. Hearings on notices.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Director of Health, provided that such person shall
file in the office of the Director of Health a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within
10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition,
the Director of Health shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice
should be modified or withdrawn.
§ 151-10. Time for hearings.
The hearing referred to in § 151-9 shall be commenced not later than 10
days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that, upon
application of the petitioner, the Director of Health may postpone the date
of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period if in his
judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement, with proper notice to the petitioners.
§ 151-11. Records of hearings.
The proceedings at the hearing referred to in §§ 151-9 and 151-10, including
the findings and decision of the Director of Health, shall be summarized,
reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of
the Director of Health. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice
or order issued in connection with the matter.
§ 151-12. Decision following hearings.
After the hearing referred to in §§ 151-9 through 151-11, the Director
of Health shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon
his finding as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the
Director of Health sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be
an order. Any notice served pursuant to § 151-8 shall automatically become
§ 151-8 CROMWELL CODE § 151-12
1:146
an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Director of Health within 10 days after such notice is served.
§ 151-13. Appeals of decisions.
Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement or decision of the Director
of Health in the enforcement of this chapter or of any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto may appeal to the Housing Code Board of Appeals
by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof within 10 days
of making of the order, requirement or decision complained of with the
secretary of the Board. The Board shall fix a time for the hearing of any
appeal and shall give notice to the parties and decide the same within a
reasonable time. At such hearing any party may appear in person or by
agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement or decision appealed from and shall make
such order, requirement or decision as in its opinion ought to be made in
the premises and shall have the powers of the Director of Health, provided
that the affirmative vote of three members shall be necessary to reverse
or modify the order, requirement or decision appealed from. If there shall
be difficulty or unreasonable hardship in carrying out the strict letter of
the ordinance upon which the order, requirement or decision appealed from
was based, the Board shall have authority in passing upon such appeal
to vary or modify the application, either permanently or for a specified
length of time, of any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the
use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures so that the spirit
of such ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured
and substantial justice done. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Housing Code Board of Appeals may seek relief therefrom, as provided by
the laws of the state.
§ 151-14. Emergency orders.
Whenever the Director of Health finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order
shall be effective immediately.
§ 151-15. Promulgation of rules and regulations; effect.
The Director of Health is authorized to make and, after a public hearing
has been held in accordance with the laws governing the conduct of public
hearings by the Director of Health, to adopt such written rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, provided that such rules and regulations shall not
be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Health shall
file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt with the
Town Clerk. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect
as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall
be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 151-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-16
1:147
§ 151-16. Equipment required in all dwelling units.
On or before three years following the effective date of this chapter, in every
dwelling or dwelling unit there shall be supplied in good working order the
following:
A. A kitchen sink.
B. A bathroom with plumbing, including a lavatory, a bathtub or shower and
a water closet. If a water closet is supplied in a separate compartment, a
lavatory basin shall be also supplied therein.
§ 151-17. Required plumbing fixtures in rooming houses.
On or before one year following the effective date of this chapter, for every
eight persons or fraction thereof housed in every rooming house, there shall
be supplied a bathroom with plumbing, including a lavatory, a bathtub or
shower and a water closet. If the water closet is supplied in a separate
compartment, a lavatory basin shall also be supplied therein. No required
facilities shall be located in a basement or cellar, except by written approval
by the Director of Health.
§ 151-18. Water and sewer connections.
All required plumbing shall be connected to a continuous source of water
supply and to a sewage disposal system approved by the Director of Health.
§ 151-19. Water supply requirements.
All required plumbing, other than the water closet, shall be properly
connected with both hot and cold water lines. The water-heating facilities,
whether supplied by the owner or tenant, shall be capable of supplying
an adequate amount of water to every required kitchen sink, lavatory and
bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120° F., whether or not
the heating facilities on the premises are in operation.
§ 151-20. Garbage and rubbish containers.
An adequate number of metal garbage and rubbish containers with tightly
fitting covers shall be provided by the owner of each dwelling containing
three or more dwelling units and of each rooming house for the use of
tenants. In the case of dwellings consisting of fewer than three dwelling
units, the tenant shall supply such containers for his own use.
§ 151-21. Minimum standards for heat, light and ventilation.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area measured
between stops shall be at least 10% of the floor area of each habitable
room, except that when the only window in a room is a skylight-type
§ 151-16 CROMWELL CODE § 151-21
1:148
window, the total area of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of the
floor area.
B. Every habitable room shall have at least one easily opened window
or skylight with a total operable window area of at least 45% of the
minimum window size required in Subsection A of this section, except
where there is a mechanical ventilating device provided, of a type
approved by the Director of Health. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
C. Every bathroom and water-closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilating requirements for habitable rooms contained in
Subsections A and B of this section, except that no window or skylight
shall be required in a bathroom or water-closet compartment which is
equipped with a mechanical ventilating system approved by the Director
of Health.
D. In all habitable rooms of dwellings, dwelling units and rooming houses
located within 300 feet of available power lines there shall be supplied
at least two separate wall-type electric convenience outlets or one such
convenience-type outlet and one ceiling- or wall-type electric light
fixture. In special instances when it becomes necessary to have a special
floor-unit outlet, only an approved floor-unit outlet may be installed by
special permission of the Fire Marshal.
E. In every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming house there shall be
available heating facilities whether supplied by the owner or tenant
which are capable of safely heating every habitable room, bathroom
and water-closet compartment to a temperature of at least 70° F., at a
distance three feet above floor level, under ordinary minimum winter
conditions. Heat, where supplied by the owner, shall be supplied in
accordance with Section 19-65 of the 1958 Revision of the Connecticut
General Statutes or the latest revision thereof.33
§ 151-22. General maintenance requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming house which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, in sound repair and capable of affording
privacy.
B. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, in sound working condition and in good repair.
C. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and
shall be kept in sound condition and in good repair.
D. Every water-closet compartment and bathroom floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
33.Editor's Note: See now C.G.S. § 19a-109, Heating and provision of utilities for buildings.
§ 151-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-22
1:149
E. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed and installed that it will
function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory
and sanitary working condition.
§ 151-23. Discontinuance of required utilities prohibited.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility, which is required under this chapter, to be removed from or shut
off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, let or occupied by him,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process or during the temporary emergencies
when discontinuance of service is approved by the Director of Health.
§ 151-24. Structures to be kept sanitary and in good repair;
responsibility.
The owner shall keep all and every part of a dwelling or rooming house and
the lot on which it is situated in good repair, clean and free from vermin,
rodents, dirt, filth, garbage or other things or matter dangerous to life or
health; however, the tenant, if any, shall also be liable if a violation is caused
by a willful act, assistance or negligence of his own or of that of any member
of his family or household or of his guests.
§ 151-25. Occupancy or lease of structure not meeting standards
prohibited.
No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling or
rooming unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
§ 151-26. Minimum space and access requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another, for the purpose of living therein,
any dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room which does not comply with
the following requirements:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms and in every habitable room
in a rooming house, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall
contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
C. Every dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming house shall have such room
arrangements that access to a water-closet compartment or bathroom
intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can
be had without going through another sleeping room; also room
arrangements shall be such that access to a sleeping room can be had
§ 151-22 CROMWELL CODE § 151-26
1:150
without going through another sleeping room or bathroom or watercloset
compartment.
D. At least 1/2 of the area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
§ 151-27. Use of cellar as dwelling unit prohibited.
No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
§ 151-28. Restrictions on use of basement.
No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
A. The floor and walls are impervious to leakage or underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
B. The total window area in each habitable room is at least equal to the
minimum window sizes required in § 151-21.
C. Such required window area is located entirely above the grade of the
ground adjoining such window area.
D. The total operable window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum as required in § 151-21, except where a mechanical device
affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Director of Health is
supplied. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 151-29. Maintenance of public areas.
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units and every
proprietor of a rooming house containing two or more habitable rooms shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared
or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof; however, the tenant
shall also be liable if a violation is caused by a willful act, assistance or
negligence of his own or of that of any member of his family or household
or of his guests.
§ 151-30. Occupant required to maintain quarters.
Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room in a rooming
house shall keep that part of the dwelling which he occupies or controls in
a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 151-31. Disposal of garbage and refuse.
Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room in a rooming
house shall dispose of his garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary
manner by placing it in the container referred to under § 151-20.
§ 151-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-32
1:151
§ 151-32. Maintenance of plumbing.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit and every proprietor of a rooming house
shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 151-33. Use of common areas.
All walking spaces in halls or passageways commonly used by more than
one occupant shall be kept free of brooms, mops, toys, chairs, furniture
and similar objects. Occupants shall not tie dogs in halls or passageways
commonly used by more than one occupant and shall maintain or handle
their dogs or other animals so as to prevent their excreta from being
deposited on roofs, stairways, halls and entrances.
§ 151-34. Exits.
Unobstructed approved dual means of egress to ground level must be
provided in every dwelling housing more than one family; such egress to be
available from each floor level of said dwelling.
§ 151-35. Maintenance of yards.
Every yard shall be properly graded and drained by the owner. Roominghouse
operators and dwelling owners shall keep their yards clean and free
of rodent infestation.
§ 151-36. Control of rodents, insects and other vermin.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. The operator of a rooming house shall be
responsible for any extermination which may be required.
§ 151-37. Licenses for rooming houses; fees. [Amended BOS
7-12-2006]
A. License required. No person shall operate a rooming house unless he
holds a valid rooming house license issued by the Director of Health after
inspection and approval of the premises by the Director of Health, the Fire
Marshal and Building Inspector.
B. Posting required. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
within the rooming house at all times.
C. Conditions of license; expiration. Such license shall not be transferable.
Every person holding such a license shall give notice, in writing, to the
Director of Health within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given
away or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any
§ 151-32 CROMWELL CODE § 151-37
1:152
rooming house. Every rooming house license shall expire at the end of one
year following the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked for
violation of this chapter.
D. Fee. The fee for such license and for its renewal shall be based on the
number of rooms: [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Number of Rooms Fee
25 or less $100
More than 25 $150
More than 50 $175
More than 100 $225
E. An individual who is an owner of a rooming house, whether such house is
currently occupied or vacant, shall file his current residential address with
the Cromwell Health Department and shall update such address within 14
days of any change of address. If a corporation, partnership, trust or other
such entity is an owner of a rooming house, whether such house is currently
occupied or vacant, it shall file the residential address of the agent in charge
of the rooming house with the Cromwell Health Department. Each owner
or agent shall pay an annual fee of $50 for the registration of the property.
[Added BOS 12-4-2008]
§ 151-38. Linen requirements in rooming houses.
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied clean bed linen
once a week and towels therein at least twice every week and prior to the
letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for
the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
§ 151-39. Required exits in rooming houses.
Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading
to a safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of the state
and Town.
§ 151-40. Responsibilities of operators of rooming houses.
The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house, and he shall
be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises
where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
§ 151-41. Applicability to hotels and motels.
Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also
apply to hotels and motels.
§ 151-42. Unfit dwellings.
§ 151-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-42
1:153
A. The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human
habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of
such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance
with the following requirements.
B. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and
shall be so designated and placarded by the Director of Health:
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe
or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
(3) One which, because of its general condition or location, is insanitary
or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of
the public.
C. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation
and so designated and placarded by the Director of Health shall be
vacated as ordered by the Director of Health.
D. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation
until written approval is secured from and such placard is removed
by the Director of Health. The Director of Health shall remove such
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
E. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation
and placarded as such, except as provided in this section.
F. Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human
habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
under the procedure set forth in §§ 151-7 through 151-13.
§ 151-43. Abatement of lead paint hazards. [Added BOS
7-11-200134]
A. Every foundation, floor, roof, ceiling, exterior and interior wall and
accessory structure shall be reasonably weathertight and dampfree,
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be capable of
affording privacy. All exterior wood surfaces shall be protected from the
elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment.
(1) No lead paint or lead-based paint or other toxic paint or materials
shall be used on any exposed exterior or interior surface of any
premises containing one or more dwelling units.
(2) In each instance where conditions disclose cracked, chipped,
blistered, flaked, chalking, peeling, loose or falling paint, and there
is reason to believe that the presence of lead paint or lead-based
paint or toxic material exists as a potential hazard, the Director of
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 151-43 as § 151-44.
§ 151-42 CROMWELL CODE § 151-43
1:154
Health or his authorized representative may take sufficient samples
and submit the samples for analysis, the cost of which shall be at the
property owner's expense, and, if a hazard exists, may make such
orders as are necessary to eliminate or remove the hazard.
(3) Painted portions of all buildings used in whole or in part for human
habitation, as well as any accessory structures on the premises
thereof, shall be kept free of cracked, chipped, blistered, flaked,
chalking, peeling, loose or falling paint. Any such surface shall be
properly prepared and repainted with a paint or other covering
conforming to the standards as required in accordance with the
Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. § 4831), as the
same may be amended from time to time.
(4) In accordance with § 19a-111c of the Connecticut General Statutes,
the owner of any dwelling in which the paint, plaster or other
material is found to contain toxic levels of lead and in which children
under the age of six reside shall abate, remediate or manage such
dangerous materials consistent with the regulations adopted in
accordance with Chapter 54 of the Connecticut General Statutes by
the Commissioner of Public Health and the General Statutes and
Chapter 51 of the Code of the Town of Cromwell. The Director
of Health may require any such owner to submit evidence of
compliance with the aforesaid regulations, statutes, and Code from
qualified testing firms acceptable to the Director. A fee of $100 shall
be paid by the owner to the Health Department at the time such
evidence is submitted to the Health Department. [Amended BOS
12-4-2008]
B. Testing and compliance.
(1) Whenever the Director of Health receives a report of lead poisoning
or otherwise determines that a child under the age of six has an
abnormal body burden of lead, the Director may cause the paint,
water and soil on the premises of the dwelling in which such child
resides to be tested for lead content at the property owner's expense.
The Director shall take appropriate action to compel abatement of
hazardous conditions if the lead content of paint, water or soil on
such premises exceeds the permissible limits thereof as established
in this subsection.
(a) For purposes of this subsection, abatement shall be required if
the lead content of paint on the premises exceeds the standards
established in accordance with the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning
Act (42 U.S.C. § 4831), as the same may be amended from time
to time.
(b) Similarly, abatement shall be required if the lead content of
water on the premises meets or exceeds 0.05 of one milligram
per liter.
(c) Abatement of soil may be required when lead levels are 500 parts
per million or greater.
(2) The Director of Health may engage or order the engagement, at
the property owner's expense, of qualified firms to perform testing
for lead content in paint, water and soil. In addition, the Director
§ 151-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-43
1:155
of Health may engage or order the engagement, at the property
owner's expense, of firms to conduct abatement to ensure
compliance with abatement regulations and with any abatement
orders issued hereunder and to certify that abatement has been
successfully accomplished.
C. Written approval must be obtained from the Director of Health prior to
the commencement of sandblasting work on any exterior surface. Those
surfaces to be sandblasted must first be tested for lead by a professional
environmental testing service at the property owner's expense. If the
testing reveals the presence of lead, the property owner must perform
the work according to approved methods, including the use of equipment
to ensure that no particulate matter shall escape into the atmosphere,
soil or onto other property.
§ 151-44. Violations and penalties; appeals. [Amended BOS
4-9-1997]
A. Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared unlawful or
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared
to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of any such provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $100 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The appeal provisions of Chapter 1, Article I, § 1-1B, of this Code shall
not apply to violations of this chapter.
§ 151-45. Demolition; fees. [Added BOS 12-4-2008]
No person may demolish any facility or structure prior to providing the
Director of Health with a complete environmental review, including
notification of the abatement of asbestos, lead and petroleum products,
including tank disposal, pest control, and septic system and well
abandonment, and receiving a written approval for such proposed
demolition from the Director. Such approval shall not waive any other
applicable Town, state or federal requirement for such proposed demolition.
The Director, prior to providing an approval of such proposed demolition,
may inspect the facility or structure involved and/or require the person
proposing such demolition to provide information which, in his discretion, is
deemed necessary prior to the issuance of an approval of such demolition.
A fee of $150 shall be submitted to the Health Department with the
environmental review. An accessory building of less than 200 square feet
shall be exempt from this fee.
§ 151-46. Outdoor wood-burning furnaces. [Added TC 2-8-2017]
A. Definition. For purposes of this section, in accord with C.G.S. § 22a-174K,
an "outdoor wood-burning furnace" is defined as an accessory structure
or appliance designed to be located outside living space ordinarily used
for human habitation and designed to transfer or provide heat, via
liquid or other means, through the burning of wood or solid waste,
§ 151-43 CROMWELL CODE § 151-46
1:156
for heating spaces other than where such structure or appliance is
located, any other structure or appliance on the premises, or for heating
domestic, swimming pool, hot tub or Jacuzzi water. "Outdoor woodburning
furnace" does not include a fire pit, wood-fired barbecue or
chiminea.
B. Outdoor wood-burning furnaces as defined in C.G.S. § 22a-174K are
permitted in all zones by a zoning permit, providing the proposed unit
complies with all the requirements of C.G.S. § 22a-174K and is located
a minimum of 200 feet from the nearest residence or commercial area
and the chimney does not exceed the maximum height of structures
permitted in the zone. Only outdoor wood-burning furnaces which have
been certified under the voluntary partnership agreement with the EPA
are acceptable.
C. Limitations for installation and construction. No person shall, from the
effective date of this section, construct, install, establish, modify, operate
or use an outdoor wood-burning furnace, unless:
(1) The outdoor wood-burning furnace was constructed, installed,
established, modified, operated or in use prior to the effective date
of this section; and
(2) The outdoor wood-burning furnace complies with the provisions of
C.G.S. § 22a-174K.
D. Operational limitations.
(1) All installed and constructed outdoor wood-burning furnaces, as
established under Subsection B, are subject to regulation for proper
use and operation, and improper operation will be determined by,
but not limited to, the following factors:
(a) Generation of heavy, thick, blinding, environmentally polluting,
hazardous or public-health-compromising smoke or furnace
discharge; or
(b) Generation of toxic, environmentally polluting, hazardous or
public-health-compromising odors; or
(c) Failure to operate the unit in accord with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
(2) The furnace shall be operative only during the months of November
through April.
E. Enforcement Officer: the person designated by the Town Manager,
including the Director of Health, the Town's Zoning Enforcement Officer,
the Chief of Police and/or the Town Manager's designee(s).
Chapter 157
HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 130.
Maintenance of nonresidential
property — See Ch. 162, Art. I.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
§ 151-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-46
1:157

ARTICLE I
Specifications
§ 157-1. Purpose; compliance with specifications required.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to authorize the Cromwell Fire
District to regulate the installation and maintenance of fire hydrants in
the Town of Cromwell.
B. Compliance with certain specifications required. Any developer of
residential, industrial or commercial property in the Town of Cromwell
that is required to install private or municipal hydrants as a condition of
plan approval shall install hydrants which are fully in accordance with
the color and specifications of the Cromwell Fire District. It shall be
the responsibility of the Cromwell Fire Marshal or designee to review
all development plans within his or her jurisdiction regarding the
installation of private or municipal hydrants and report his or her
findings to the appropriate permitting land use agency of the Town
of Cromwell regarding compliance with § 157-1 of this chapter. The
Building Official of the Town of Cromwell shall issue no building permit
or certificate of occupancy unless and until requirements of this section
have been complied with.
§ 157-2. Location specifications.
Fire hydrants shall be installed where designated by the Cromwell Fire
Marshal or designee. Hydrants shall meet the following specifications:
Installation shall be not less than three feet nor more than five feet from
the outside of the curb or the edge of the pavement. Steamer or five-inch
connections shall be not less than 18 inches above the finished grade. No
obstructions, such as, but not limited to, guard rails, walls, fences, hedges,
bushes or screen planting, shall be placed within three feet of any hydrant
or Cromwell Fire Department connection on any public or private property.
Written fire hydrant specifications shall be available through the Office of
the Cromwell Fire Marshal.
§ 157-3. Maintenance service and standards.
Any person, firm or developer who or which has installed private fire
hydrants in accordance with § 157-1 of this article shall be required to
annually subscribe to and pay for maintenance service, which is available
through the Cromwell Fire District or a qualified service company. All
hydrants shall be maintained in accordance with standards promulgated by
the National Fire Protection Association, Inc. (NFPA). These standards shall
be available through the Office of the Cromwell Fire Marshal.
§ 157-4. Repair of hydrants on private property.
The Town of Cromwell or Cromwell Fire District may repair or order the
repair of a defective hydrant on private property and bill the cost of such
work to the owner. In the event of the owner's failure to pay for said
repair, the Cromwell Fire District may cause a lien to be placed against the
§ 157-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-4
1:159
property, which may be enforced according to § 1-3 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions, of the Cromwell Town Code.
§ 157-5. Existing hydrants.
The owners, entities, or persons in possession and control of property that
includes a fire hydrant shall bring any existing hydrant installed prior to the
effective date of this article into compliance with this article no later than
180 days after the effective date of this article. Fire hydrants shall not be
screened or otherwise obstructed by trees, shrubs, fences, or any structure
that impedes access to the hydrant from the Cromwell Fire District and/
or Cromwell Fire Department personnel. Painting, changing the grade or
any other alteration to the hydrant or its surroundings that diminishes the
visibility of the hydrant shall not be permitted.
§ 157-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine of up to $90 or any larger amount that the Connecticut
General Statutes permit the Town of Cromwell to fine for violations of
municipal ordinances. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. It shall be the
duty of the Cromwell Fire Marshal or designee to report to the Cromwell
Chief of Police any violation of this article and the duty of the Cromwell
Chief of Police or designee to enforce this article.
§ 157-4 CROMWELL CODE § 157-6
1:160
ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 157-7. Purpose; removal required.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to allow fire hydrants to be readily
accessible for attachment of hoses, and to facilitate connection to mobile
fire apparatus, and to authorize the Cromwell Fire District to enforce
said regulations.
B. Removal required. All owners, entities, or persons in possession and
control of private property that includes a fire hydrant shall remove snow
and ice abutting the hydrant that has accumulated higher than a point
four inches below the bottom of the lowest outlet on any fire hydrant
within 24 hours after the cessation of a snow or ice storm.
§ 157-8. Violations and penalties.
If the property owner, person, or entity in possession of private property
that includes a fire hydrant fails to remove snow and ice around such
hydrant within 24 hours after the cessation of a snow or ice storm, such
person may be fined up to $90 or any larger amount that the Connecticut
General Statutes permit the Town of Cromwell to fine for violations of
municipal ordinances. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day of neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this
article. If the Director of the Water Division orders the removal of the
snow and ice, as provided for in § 157-9C, the property owners, persons,
or entities in possession and control of such hydrant shall be billed for
the expenses of said removal in addition to the penalties provided in this
section.
§ 157-9. Enforcement; clearing of hydrants by Water Division.
A. It shall be the duty of the Cromwell Fire Marshal or designee to report
to the Cromwell Chief of Police any violation of this article and the duty
of the Cromwell Chief of Police or designee to enforce this article.
B. It shall be the duty of the Cromwell Fire Marshal or designee to report
promptly to the Director of the Water Division any violations of § 157-7.
It shall be the duty of the Director of the Water Division of the Cromwell
Fire District to cause the hydrant to be cleared.
C. The Water Division section of the Cromwell Fire District shall ensure
that snow and ice abutting any fire hydrants is removed in accordance
with this article. Where the property owner, entity, or person in control
of private property that includes a fire hydrant has failed to remove snow
and ice 24 hours after the cessation of a snow or ice storm, the Director
of the Water Division may order the removal of such snow and ice so
that the hydrant is cleared, with the cost of such removal being charged
to such property owner, person, entity, or person in control of private
property that includes a fire hydrant. The Water Division may engage an
independent contractor to provide this snow or ice removal service.
§ 157-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-9
1:161
Chapter 158
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health standards — See Ch. 146.
Recycling — See Ch. 147.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Memorial greens — See Ch. 163.
Sanitation — See Ch. 189.
§ 158-1. Littering highways prohibited; penalty.
Any person or persons throwing trash on the highways within the Town of
Cromwell from a standing or moving motor vehicle or otherwise shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $50.
Chapter 160
LOITERING
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 110.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 130.
Memorial greens — See Ch. 163.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 221.
§ 160-1. Loitering prohibited. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter upon any public or quasi-public
property within the Town of Cromwell and upon private property where
the owner thereof or his agent has given the Town of Cromwell written
permission to regulate loitering thereon and the Town Council has agreed
to regulate the same.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 157-9 CROMWELL CODE § 160-2
1:162
LOITER — Encompasses one or more of the following acts committed on
public, quasi-public or on private property being regulated by the Town of
Cromwell:
QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes the area in front of or adjacent to
any store, shop, restaurant, luncheonette, bar or other place of business and
shall also include any parking lots adjacent thereto.
§ 160-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $100 for each offense.
Chapter 162
MAINTENANCE
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 103.
Equal housing opportunities — See Ch. 149.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Use of public property — See Ch. 181.
Obstructing the free, unhampered passage of pedestrians, bicycles or
motorized vehicles.
A.
Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully upon
such property.
B.
Causing inconvenience, annoyance or alarm or creating the risk thereof
to any person.
C.
Refusing to leave such property when so requested by a peace officer
or other officer having the power of arrest.
D.
§ 160-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-3
1:163

ARTICLE I
Nonresidential Property
[Adopted BOS 7-9-1997]
§ 162-1. Findings and declaration of policy.
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Town of Cromwell
structures used for nonresidential purposes which are, or may become
in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment and
maintenance; or further that such conditions including but not limited to
structural deterioration, lack of maintenance, lack of essential heating,
plumbing, storage or refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or
upkeep of essential utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards,
inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions and
overcrowding constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and
reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the Town of Cromwell.
It is further found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance
and progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of
creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are
not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid condition will grow and spread and
will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to
correct and eliminate the same, and that by reasons of timely regulations
and restrictions as herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be
prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained,
the desirability and amenities of nonresidential uses and adjacent or nearby
residential neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and
welfare protected and fostered. It is further found that many vacant or
blighted buildings can be repaired or rehabilitated and reused so as to
provide decent, safe and sanitary commercial facilities and hence to become
productive properties for the owners and a source of property taxes for the
Town.
§ 162-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, morals and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of nonresidential premises; to
establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other
physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid
facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to authorize and
establish procedures for the inspection of premises; to fix penalties for the
violations of this article; and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation
of premises unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use. This article is
hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest, and it
is intended that this article be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes
as stated herein.
§ 162-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-3
1:165
§ 162-3. Title.
The short title of this article shall be "Commercial Structures Code of
Cromwell."
§ 162-4. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this article,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on the
same premises.
BUILDING — A structure adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy
for use for public, institutional, business, industrial or storage purposes.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
FIRE HAZARD —
GARBAGE — All kitchen refuse of residences, hotels, restaurants or other
places where food is prepared for human consumption, and all offal from
fish, meat and vegetable markets, and all vegetable or organic substances
unfit for food that are subject to immediate decay.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises which constitute a health hazard.
JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle not displaying proper
registration plates and which is worn out, inoperative or which is ready for
dismantling or destruction.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a premises, or
a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the
owner.
Any device or condition likely to cause fire and which is so situated as
to endanger either persons or property.
A.
The creation, maintenance or continuance of any physical condition
by reason of which there exists a use, accumulation or storage of
combustible or explosive material sufficient in amount or so located
or in such a manner as to put in jeopardy, in event of ignition, either
persons or property.
B.
The obstruction to or of fire escapes, stairways, aisles, exits, doors,
windows, passageways or halls, likely, in the event of fire, to interfere
with the operations of the Fire Department or of the safety and ready
egress of occupants.
C.
§ 162-3 CROMWELL CODE § 162-4
1:166
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control as owner or
agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratix,
trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession,
regardless of how such possession was obtained.
PLUMBING — All of the following supplies, facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, waste pipes, water closets,
sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed
clothes-washing machines, catch basins, vents and any other similar
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas
lines, and water pipes and lines utilized in conjunction with air-conditioning
equipment.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the building or
structures thereon.
REFUSE — Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth,
filth, garbage, trash, refuse, debris and junk motor vehicles.
REST ROOMS — An enclosed space containing one or more toilets and one
or more lavatories or fixtures serving similar purposes.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include, but not be limited to, the residue from
the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, plastic or other synthetic
materials, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery, abandoned automobiles and dust.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of any materials, whether fixed or
portable, forming a construction, including buildings.
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from any space by
natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
window, skylights, doors or stacks with or without wind-driven devices.
WEATHERING — Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the
elements.
§ 162-5. Applicability.
Every building and the premises on which it is situated which are not
governed by the provisions of Chapter 151, Housing Standards, of this
Code shall comply with the provisions of this article, whether or not such
buildings shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after
the enactment of this article, and irrespective of any permits or licenses
which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or
premises for the construction or repair of the building or for the installation
or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-6
1:167
§ 162-6. Minimum standards.
This article establishes minimum standards for the continued occupancy
and use of all buildings to which it applies and does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or
use of the building, equipment or facilities including, but not limited to,
the Connecticut Basic Building Code, the Cromwell Zoning Regulations,
Chapter 146, Health Standards, of this Code, Chapter 158, Littering, of this
Code, and other applicable Town and state laws.
§ 162-7. Responsibilities of owner, operator and occupant.
A. Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in this article and also in Chapter 151, Housing Standards,
of this Code and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and no
owner or operator shall be relieved from any such duty and responsibility
nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by
reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible therefor and in
violation thereof.
B. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities in this article
and also in Chapter 151, Housing Standards, in this Code and all the
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and the occupant shall not be
relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend
against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the
owner or operator is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
C. Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this section, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand
and the occupant on the other shall not be altered or affected by any
agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between
them and other parties.
§ 162-8. Duties and responsibilities of owner and operator.
The following duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed on every
owner and operator of any building covered by the provisions of this article:
A. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free
of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians
and persons utilizing the premises and free of unsanitary conditions,
and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the
owner or operator. The items prohibited hereby shall include but not be
limited to brush, weeds, broken glass, stump roots, obnoxious growth,
filth, garbage, trash, debris, dead and dying trees and limbs or other
natural growth, loose or overhanging objects, ground surface hazards
and junk motor vehicles.
B. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and
damage and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
C. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained
structurally sound, free from defects and so maintained as to capably
perform at all times the functions for which they were designed.
Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing equipment shall
provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected
§ 162-6 CROMWELL CODE § 162-8
1:168
equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight and capable
of withstanding the action of the flue gas.
D. Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally
sound, in good repair and free from defects.
E. The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures
shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all
buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance which will create
confidence in, and encourage the patronage of or use by, tenants,
customers, business invitees, employees and others who may be
expected to use or visit the premises in the ordinary course of business.
F. Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns, hedges and bushes shall
be kept trimmed and in good health.
G. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted
pursuant to other ordinances or laws shall be maintained in good repair.
Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or those upon
which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked shall, with their
supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a good state or
repair by the owner of the sign.
H. All display windows or storefronts constructed of plate glass shall be
kept clean and free of cracks, and no storage shall be permitted therein
unless shielded from public view.
I. All storefronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required, and
shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the event that repairs
to a storefront become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the
same, similar or comparable materials used in the construction of the
storefront in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area
or areas. Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be kept painted,
where required, and in good repair.
J. Except for "For Rent" and "For Sale" signs, any temporary sign or other
paper advertising materials glued or otherwise attached to an exterior
building surface, window or windows or otherwise exposed to public
view shall be removed at the expiration of the event or sale for which it
is erected or within 60 days after erection, whichever shall occur first.
K. Any awnings or marquees and their accompanying structural members
which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises
shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance
or a safety hazard. In the event that such awnings or marquees are
not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall,
together with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the
event that said awning or marquees are made of cloth or plastic, or
of similar materials, said cloth or plastic where exposed to public view
shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence or
excessive weathering, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing herein
shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks
or other parts of the public domain.
L. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure shall be kept
in good repair and kept painted where necessary for purposes of
§ 162-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-8
1:169
preservation and appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free
of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive
peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate
maintenance.
M. Rest rooms shall be surfaced with waterproof floors and shall be kept
dry, clean and sanitary at all times. Sufficient rest rooms shall be
installed and maintained for each sex commensurate with the use of
the premises. Every rest room shall be provided with a permanently
installed artificial lighting fixture and a wall switch therefor which is
free from danger of short-circuiting.
N. All premises shall be properly connected to and provided with electric
power as requested for the operation of the structure. All such
connections and electrical equipment shall be installed and maintained
in conformity with the provisions of the National Electrical Code and
other applicable ordinances.
O. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted
conspicuously, and no fuse shall be installed in a fuse box in excess
of the stated maximum; except that owners and operators shall not be
responsible for a violation in fuse installations occurring without their
knowledge where the correct maximum fuse size is stated on the fuse
box, and the fuse box is located within any part of the premises which is
in the exclusive possession of the occupant. In those cases, the occupant
shall be responsible for such violations.
§ 162-9. Duties of occupant.
The following duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed upon every
occupant of any building covered by the provisions of this article:
A. Upon discovery by an occupant of any violation of this article, such
occupant shall report the same to the owner or operator. Upon failure of
the owner or operator to act in five days, then the occupant shall report
the same to the inspector immediately.
B. All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for the accumulation of
garbage or refuse.
D. Every occupant shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in
and on the premises subject to its control.
E. No occupant shall install electrical fuses in a fuse box in excess of the
limit posted on such fuse box. In the event that a fuse box is not posted
with fuse limits, the occupant shall promptly upon discovery of such
condition report the same to the owner or operator. Upon failure of the
owner or operator to act in five days to post such fuse limits, then the
occupant shall report the same to the inspector immediately.
§ 162-10. Administration and enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the
Public Health Coordinator of the Town of Cromwell or his/her designated
agent referenced herein as the "inspector."
§ 162-8 CROMWELL CODE § 162-11
1:170
§ 162-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Whenever in this article any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful or
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to
be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this article, the inspector
may obtain a citation for such violation, which violation shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed $100, provided that prior to issuing such citation,
the inspector shall issue a written warning providing notice of the specific
violation(s). Each day of any violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition, with the written consent of the Town Manager,
the inspector may refer any violation of this article to the state attorney for
criminal prosecution as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, or
may refer any violation to the Town Attorney for injunctive relief or other
civil action.
§ 162-12. Conflict with other ordinances or laws.
In any case where the provisions of this article impose a higher standard
than that set forth in any other ordinance or law, then the standards as
set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this article impose a
lower standard than any other ordinance or law, then the higher standard
contained in such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 162-13. Enforcement and compliance.
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this article
shall constitute a defense to any violation of any other ordinance of the
Town applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein
relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any other
provision, nor any official of the Town from enforcing any such other
provision.
§ 162-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-13
1:171
Chapter 163
MEMORIAL GREENS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
40.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 76.
Animals — See Ch. 82.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Loitering — See Ch. 160.
§ 163-1. Designation of regulated areas.
The following memorial greens shall be regulated by this chapter:
A. Valor Green.
B. Memorial Green.
C. Patriots Corner.
D. Gold Star Green.
E. Any other land within the Town of Cromwell dedicated as a memorial
green.
§ 163-2. Littering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit, throw or place waste materials, paper or
litter upon the memorial greens of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 163-3. Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any intoxicating beverage on
a memorial green.
§ 163-4. Use of vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate any motorized vehicle or bicycle upon any
memorial green of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 163-5. Damage to objects prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to cut, destroy, deface, dig or remove any tree, bush,
shrub, plant, flower, grass, playground, flag or flagpole, markers, decorative
memorial or any portion thereof located on a memorial green.
§ 163-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person other than the Town of Cromwell or any person granted
authorization by the Town of Cromwell who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
Chapter 168
§ 162-13 CROMWELL CODE § 163-6
1:172
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 73.
Animals — See Ch. 82.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
§ 168-1. Purpose.
It is recognized that people have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize
their health, safety or welfare or degrade the quality of their lives. This
chapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
welfare and quality of life for the citizens of the Town of Cromwell through
the reduction, control and prevention of noise.
§ 168-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the terms below shall have the following
meanings:
BACKGROUND NOISE — Noise of a measurable intensity which exists at
a point as a result of a combination of many distant sources individually
indistinguishable.
BUSINESS ZONE — Those areas so designated under the Business Zone of
the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Cromwell.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Town of Cromwell or a duly
authorized officer subject to his/her order.
CONSTRUCTION — The assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration,
demolition or site preparation for or of public or private rights-of-way,
buildings or other structures, utilities or property.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Any equipment or device operated by fuel
or electric power used in construction or demolition.
CONTINUOUS NOISE — Ongoing noise, the intensity of which remains at
a measurable level (which may vary) without interruption over an indefinite
period or a specified period of time.
DAYTIME HOURS — The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday and the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
Sunday.
DECIBEL — A unit of measurement of the sound level, the symbol for which
is "dB."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
§ 163-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-2
1:173
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle authorized by any local
authority to have sound warning devices, such as sirens and bells, which
can lawfully be used when responding to an emergency.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following an emergency or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure to imminent changes.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the
standard set forth in § 168-5.
IMPULSE NOISE — Sound of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay, the level of which is measured with a
sound-level meter, which shall conform with ANSI S12.7-1986 (R1993).
INDUSTRIAL NOISE — Those areas so designated under the Industrial
Zone of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Cromwell.
INTRUSION ALARM — A device with an audible signal, which, when
activated, indicates an intrusion by an unauthorized person.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle as defined in Subdivisions (30) and (31)
of Section 14-1, Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as
amended.35
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday
evening through Saturday morning and between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
Saturday evening through Sunday morning.
NOISE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level as measured with a sound-level
meter.
NOISE LEVEL, A-WEIGHTED — The sound-pressure level as measured with
a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network. The sound level is
designated "dbA."
OCTAVE BAND SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level for
the sound contained within the specified preferred octave band, stated in
dB, as described in ANSI S1.6-1984 (R1994).
ONE-THIRD OCTAVE BAND SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The soundpressure
level for the sound contained within the specified preferred onethird
octave band, stated in dB, as described in ANSI S1.6-1984 (R1994).
PEAK SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL) — The absolute maximum value of
the instantaneous sound-pressure level occurring in a specified time period.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency or political or
administration subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, owned or controlled by a person. A noise emitter's premises
35.Editor's Note: See now the definitions of "motor vehicle" and "motorcycle" in C.G.S. § 14-1,
Subdivisions (53) and (54).
§ 168-2 CROMWELL CODE § 168-2
1:174
includes contiguous publicly dedicated street and highway rights-of-way, all
road rights-of-way and waters of the state.
PROMINENT DISCRETE TONE — The presence of acoustic energy
concentrated in a narrow frequency range, including but not limited to
an audible tone, which produces a one-third octave sound-pressure level
greater than that of either adjacent one-third octave and which exceeds
the arithmetic average of the two adjacent one-third octave band levels by
an amount greater than that shown below for the one-third octave band
containing the concentration of acoustic energy.
One-Third Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Average Exceedence
(dB)
100 16
125 14
160 12
200 11
250 9
315 8
400 7
500 6
630 6
800 5
1,000 4
1,250 4
1,600 4
2,000 3
2,500 3
3,150 3
4,000 3
5,000 4
6,300 4
8,000 5
10,000 6
PROPERTY LINE — That real or imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled
by any person from contiguous real property owned and controlled by
another person and which separates real property from the public right-ofway.
§ 168-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-2
1:175
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley, park, waterway, railroad or similar place which is owned or
controlled by a government entity.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Those areas so designated under Residential Zone
of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Cromwell.
SOUND — A transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media
in the form of vibrations which constitute alteration in pressure or position
of particle in the medium and which, in air, evoke physiological sensations,
including but not limited to an auditory response when impinging on the
ear.
SOUND ANALYZER — A device, generally used in conjunction with a soundlevel
meter, for measuring the sound-pressure level of a noise as a function
of frequency, expressed in Hertz (Hz), in octave bands, one-third octave
bands or other standard ranges. The sound analyzer shall conform, as a
minimum, to Type E, Class II, as specified in ANSI S1.11-1986 (R1993).
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument used to measure sound levels. A
sound-level meter shall conform, at a minimum, to the American National
Standards Institute operation specifications for sound level meters
S1.4-1983 (R1994).
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL, A-WEIGHTED — The A-weighted soundpressure
level, expressed in decibels (dBA), measured on a sound-level
meter.
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL) — Equals 20 times the logarithm to the
base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure in question to the standard
reference pressure of 20 micro-Pascals, expressed in decibel (dB) units.
§ 168-3. Noise measurement procedures.
For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this chapter, the
following guidelines shall be applicable:
A. A person conducting sound measurements shall have been trained in
the techniques and principles of sound-measuring equipment and
instrumentation.
B. Instruments used to determine sound-level measurement shall be soundlevel
meters and analyzers as defined by this chapter.
C. The following steps should be taken when preparing to take sound-level
measurements:
(1) The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the
preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed.
(2) Measurements to determine compliance with § 168-5 shall be taken
at a point that is located more or less one foot beyond the property
line of the noise emitter's premises and within the noise receptor's
premises.
§ 168-2 CROMWELL CODE § 168-4
1:176
§ 168-4. Classification of noise zones.
Noise zones within the Town of Cromwell shall be classified as to zoning
applicable for the parcel or tract of land and the surrounding parcels or
tracts. Noise zones specified herein shall correspond to the following zoning
descriptions in the Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map of the Town of
Cromwell:
Zone Actual or Intended Use Current Zoning**
A Residential A-40, A-25, A-15, PRD-1, PRD-2
B Commercial B, DB, PO, WMXD
C Industrial I
NOTES: ** Based on the Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map of the Town
of Cromwell.
§ 168-5. Noise zone standards.
A. A-weighted noise level standards. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or
cause to be emitted any noise beyond the property lines of his/her premises in
excess of the following noise levels:
Receptor Noise Zone Class
(dBA)
Emitter Noise Zone C B A-Day A-Night
Class C 70 66 61 51
Class B 62 62 55 45
Class A 62 55 55 45
B. Octave band noise standards.
(1) Class A receptor, daytime. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to emitted any noise beyond the property lines of his/her premises, to a Class A receptor
noise zone during daytime hours, in excess of the following noise levels:
Octave Band Sound-Pressure Levels (dB)
Emitted to
Class B Receptor by Emitters in Following
Zones:
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz) Class C Class B Class A
31.5 75 72 72
63 74 71 71
125 69 65 65
250 64 57 57
§ 168-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-5
1:177
Octave Band Sound-Pressure Levels (dB)
Emitted to
Class B Receptor by Emitters in Following
Zones:
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz) Class C Class B Class A
500 58 51 51
1,000 52 45 45
2,000 47 39 39
4,000 43 34 34
8,000 40 32 32
(2) Class A receptor, nighttime. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be
emitted any noise beyond the property lines of his/her premises, to a Class A receptor
noise zone during nighttime hours, in excess of the following noise levels:
Octave Band Sound-Pressure Levels (dB)
Emitted to
Class A Receptor by Emitters in Following
Zones:
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz) Class C Class B Class A
31.5 69 63 63
63 67 61 61
125 62 55 55
250 54 47 47
500 47 40 40
1,000 41 35 35
2,000 36 30 30
4,000 32 25 25
8,000 32 25 25
(a) Class B receptor, at any time. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to emitted any noise beyond the property lines of his/her premises, to a Class B receptor
noise zone at any time, in excess of the following noise levels:
§ 168-5 CROMWELL CODE § 168-5
1:178
Octave Band Sound-Pressure Levels Emitted to
Class A Receptor by Emitters in Following
Zones:
Octave Band Center Frequency
(Hz) Class C Class B Class 31.5 80 79 72
63 79 78 71
125 74 72 65
250 69 64 57
500 63 58 51
1,000 57 52 45
2,000 52 46 39
4,000 48 41 34
8,000 45 39 32
C. Impulsive noise standards.
(1) Class A receptor, nighttime. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause
to be emitted any impulse noise beyond the property lines of his/her premises,
to a Class A receptor noise zone during nighttime hours, in excess of 80 dB peak
sound-pressure level.
(2) Any receptor, at any time. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to
be emitted any impulse noise beyond the property lines of his/her premises, to
any receptor noise zone at any time, in excess of 100 dB peak sound pressure
level.
D. Prominent discrete tone noise standards.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any continuous
noise beyond the property lines of his/her premises which possesses one of more
audible prominent discrete tones in excess of the following noise levels:
Receptor Noise Zone Class
(dBA)
Emitter Noise Zone C B A-Day A-Night
Class C 65 61 56 46
Class B 57 57 50 40
Class A 57 50 50 40
§ 168-6. Delivery trucks.
In addition to the noise prohibitions in § 168-5, no person shall unload or
cause to be unloaded delivery trucks within 200 feet of a residential district
between one hour after sundown and 7:00 a.m.
§ 168-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-7
1:179
§ 168-7. Exceptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to:
(1) Natural phenomena.
(2) Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church.
(3) Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any
other alarm system in an emergency situation.
(4) A public emergency sound system.
(5) Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration or other state or federal safety regulations.
(6) Farming equipment or farming activity.
(7) An emergency.
(8) Snow removal equipment.
B. The following shall be exempt from this chapter, subject to special
conditions as specified:
(1) Noise generated by any construction equipment which is operated
during daytime hours, provided that the operation of construction
equipment during nighttime hours shall not exceed the maximum
noise levels as specified in § 168-5 of this chapter.
(2) Noise from domestic power equipment during daytime hours.
(3) Noise from demolition work conducted during daytime hours,
provided that when considered emergency work, demolition shall be
exempted at all times from the noise levels set in this chapter.
(4) Noise created by aircraft flight operations which are specifically
preempted by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(5) Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted
by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by
the Town, including but not limited to parades, spring events, or
noise created by blasting other than that conducted in connections
with construction activities, provided that the blasting is conducted
between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. local time, at specified hours
previously announced to the local public, and provided that a permit
for such blasting has been obtained from local authorities.
[Amended TC 6-16-201436]
(6) Noise created by leaf, refuse and solid waste collection, provided
that the activity is conducted during daytime hours.
(7) Noise created by a fire or intrusion alarm, from the time of activation
of the audible signal, for a period of time not exceeding 10 minutes,
when such alarm is attached to a vehicle, or 30 minutes when
attached to any building or structure.
(8) Noise generated by engine-powered or motor-driven lawn care or
maintenance equipment on Class A property between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided that noise discharged from
exhausts is adequately muffled to prevent loud noises therefrom.
(9) Public-address systems used in election campaign activities during
daytime hours only.
36.Editor's Note: This legislation also redesignated former Subsection B(7) through (10) as
Subsection B(6) through (9), respectively.
§ 168-7 CROMWELL CODE § 168-8
1:180
§ 168-8. Vehicle noise restrictions.
The following activities are prohibited:
A. Motor vehicle noise. All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the
Town of Cromwell shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel
levels set forth in the regulations authorized in Section 14-80a of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
B. Motor vehicle sound-amplifying devices. No sound-amplifying devices on
or within motor vehicles shall emit noise in excess of the noise levels as
specified in § 168-5.
C. Unregistered recreational vehicle noise. No person shall create or cause
to be created any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise due to the
operation of an unregistered recreational vehicle. A noise shall be
deemed to be unreasonably loud and a violation of this chapter when the
noise so generated exceeds the noise level standards set forth in § 168-5.
§ 168-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person in violation of any of the sections of this chapter shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed $50. Each day that such violation continues after
the time for correction of the violation given in an order shall constitute a
continuing violation, and the amount of the fine shall be doubled for each
day said violation continues, said fine not to exceed $400 per day.
§ 168-10. Variances.
A. Any person living or doing business in the Town of Cromwell may apply
to the Chief of Police for a variance from one or more of the provisions of
this chapter which are more stringent than the Connecticut Department
of Environmental Protection37 regulations for the control of noise,
provided that the applicant supplies all of the following information to
the Chief of Police at least 20 days prior to the start of the activity for
which the variance is sought:
(1) The location and nature of the activity.
(2) The time period and hours of operation of said activity.
(3) The nature and intensity of the noise that will be generated.
B. No variance from this chapter shall be granted unless it has been
demonstrated that:
(1) The proposed activity will not violate any provisions of the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection38 regulations;
(2) The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will not
constitute a danger to the public health; and
(3) Compliance with this chapter constitutes an unreasonable hardship
on the applicant.
C. The application for a variance shall be reviewed and approved or
rejected at least five days prior to the start of the proposed activity.
Approval or rejection shall be made in writing and shall state the
condition(s) of approval, if any, or the reason(s) for rejection.
37.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
38.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
§ 168-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-10
1:181
D. Failure to rule on an application within the designated time shall
constitute approval of the variance.
§ 168-11. Conflict with zoning provisions.
All provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Cromwell which are
more stringent than those set forth herein shall remain in force. If, for any
reason, any word, clause, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be held
to make the same unconstitutional or be superseded by any state law or
regulation, this chapter shall not thereby be invalidated, and the remainder
of this chapter shall continue in effect.
Chapter 172
PARKING FOR THE HANDICAPPED
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 130. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 221.
§ 172-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all new and existing nonresidential sites that
have a parking area for 20 or more vehicles, including but not limited to
shopping centers, office buildings, manufacturing buildings, warehouses,
storage buildings, convalescent homes, schools and public buildings. In
addition, the Traffic Authority may designate handicapped spaces on Town
roads which shall be of such size and location as it may specify.
§ 172-2. Restrictions on designated spaces.
After establishment of specially marked parking spaces for handicapped
persons, no person shall park a motor vehicle in such space unless a
handicapped person is either a passenger or occupant of the vehicle and
the vehicle contains a designation issued by the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicles, pursuant to the General Statutes which shall be visible as per the
statute, C.G.S. § 14-253a.
§ 172-3. Required number of spaces; location.
A. On each site having parking spaces for at least 20 spaces but not more than
25 spaces, at least one space shall be specially designated and reserved for
§ 168-10 CROMWELL CODE § 172-3
1:182
handicapped parking. Additional spaces for handicapped parking shall be in
accordance with the following table:
Total Parking Spaces Number of Handicapped Spaces
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
B. For all sites having total parking spaces in excess of 100, the number of
handicapped spaces shall be determined by the Town Manager. [Amended
TC 6-16-2014]
C. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located as close as possible
to elevators, ramps, walkups and entrances and so located that the
handicapped person is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked
vehicles to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators.
D. The exact location of the parking spaces shall be designated by the Town
Traffic Authority or its designee.
§ 172-4. Marking of spaces.
A. Each such space designated for handicapped parking shall be not less
than 15 feet in width, including three feet of crosshatch, unless the same
would create a nonconforming condition, in which event the existing
parking stall width shall be permitted.
B. Each space shall be designated by signs with white lettering against a
blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking State
Permit Required." Such signs shall be erected, installed and maintained
by and at the expense of the owner, operator, lessee or tenant of said
site. If the signs and markings called for herein are not installed within
30 days after written request by the Town Traffic Authority, the Town
may proceed to install the same and impose the costs thereof against the
owner of the site.
§ 172-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended BOS 5-19-1993; BOS
6-13-2001; BOS 5-10-2006; TC 6-16-2014]
Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of this chapter, a
Cromwell police officer may issue a municipal citation for such violations,
which citation shall provide a fine of $95 payable to the Town Clerk within
seven days of the citation date. If any fine is not paid within seven days,
a penalty in the amount equal to the fine shall immediately become due
and payable in addition to the original fine. The provisions of § 221-7 of this
Code and those relevant portions of the Connecticut General Statutes shall
apply to this section.
§ 172-6. Owner presumed responsible.
The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall
be presumed to be the operator at the time of the violation.
§ 172-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-6
1:183
Chapter 178
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bazaars and raffles — See Ch. 88.
Food establishments — See Ch. 137.
Loitering — See Ch. 160.
Farmers' markets — See Ch. 179.
§ 178-1. License required; exceptions.
A. No person shall sell or offer for sale or solicit orders within the Town
for any provisions, fruits or any articles of food or goods, wares or
merchandise, nor shall any person solicit subscriptions for magazines,
books, etc., unless he shall obtain a license to do so from the Chief of
Police, which said license may contain such conditions as the Chief of
Police may deem expedient and shall be revocable at his discretion, upon
notice.
B. Exceptions.
(1) This chapter shall not apply to salesmen selling goods to retail or
wholesale stores for resale, or to wholesalers selling and delivering
their wares and goods to the merchants of the Town, or to goods,
merchandise or foodstuffs sold and delivered by the licensed
merchants of the Town.
(2) This chapter shall not apply to milk and newspapers, or to businesses
already licensed to operate within the Town unless there is a
significant change in the type of merchandise being offered for sale.
(3) This chapter shall not apply to the selling of food and the parking
of cars by residents during the week of the PGA Golf Tournament.
To qualify for an exception, the activity must be operated by the
property owner. Property owners who sell food will need to obtain
a license from the Cromwell Public Health Coordinator. Compliance
with Connecticut General Statutes § 12-409 (concerning sales and
use taxes), as amended, is the responsibility of the property owner.
(4) This chapter shall not apply to sales by farmers and gardeners of the
produce of their farms, gardens and greenhouses, including fruits,
vegetables and flowers, or to the sale, distribution and delivery
of milk, teas, coffees, spices, groceries, meats and bakery goods,
to sales on approval, to conditional sales of merchandise, or to
the taking of orders for merchandise for future delivery when full
payment is not required at the time of solicitation.
§ 172-6 CROMWELL CODE § 178-1
1:184
(5) This chapter shall not apply to the sale of goods by students of the
schools of the Town, provided that such sales have been approved by
the Board of Education.
§ 178-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FARMERS' MARKET — An approved, formally organized and regularly
scheduled event for the sale of local food produce and products in a
common marketplace which is certified and operated under Chapter 179
and the general guidelines, rules and regulations of the State of Connecticut
Department of Agriculture.
PEDDLER — Includes "hawker" and "huckster" and "vendor" and shall mean
any person, as defined below, selling or bartering or carrying for sale or
barter or exposing therefor any goods, wares or merchandise, either on
foot, from any animal, vehicle or stationary location.
PERSON — Any company, corporation, individual or group of individuals
associated in any form, whether principal or agent, unless specifically
exempted by statute from the provisions hereof.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Any person traveling by foot, animal or
vehicle, or by means of telephone, taking or attempting to take orders for
the sale of goods, wares or merchandise for future delivery or for services
to be performed in the future, whether or not such solicited sales are by
sample and whether or not deposits or advance payments are collected.
§ 178-3. Application procedure.
All peddlers and solicitors shall make application to the Chief of Police prior
to any peddling or solicitation. The application shall be on a form approved
by the Chief of Police. Each applicant shall disclose, at a minimum, the
following:
A. Complete identification, including date and place of birth, residence and
permanent address, physical description and prior criminal record, if
any.
B. Signature.
C. Name of employer.
D. Nature of the product or services in which he is interested.
E. Purposes in obtaining the license.
F. Organization he represents.
G. The nature and extent of the proposed operation in the Town and the
description and number of vehicles, if any, to be operated in connection
with such operation.
H. Evidence of compliance with Connecticut General Statutes § 12-409
(concerning sales and use taxes), as amended.
I. Evidence of Health Code and Chapter 137 Code compliance, where
applicable.
§ 178-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-4
1:185
§ 178-4. Issuance of license.
A. It shall be within the Chief of Police's discretion to determine whether
a particular applicant is exempt from a required license. If the Chief of
Police determines that a license is required for the proposed peddler or
solicitor, all license provisions of this chapter will apply.
B. No license shall be issued to the following:
(1) Any person, association or corporation any of whose members have
been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, including
but not limited to rape, sexual battery, corruption of a minor, child
molestation, harassment or offenses relating to dangerous drugs, as
defined by the Connecticut General Statutes.
(2) Any person who has been determined to be mentally and/or
physically impaired so as to render him or her incapable of holding a
license.
(3) Any applicant who has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor
involving the use of physical violence within five years of the date of
application.
(4) Any person who is on probation or parole at the time of application
shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police to determine if a license shall
be issued. The Chief of Police may require additional information or
the personal appearance by the applicant, or both.
(5) Any person on probation or parole for a felony who has completed
less than two years of probation or parole, or to any person on
probation or parole for a misdemeanor who has completed less than
six months of said probation or parole.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit the discretion
of the Chief of Police to refuse to issue a license for these or other
related issues.
§ 178-5. Permitted hours of operation.
Such licensee, with or without vehicles, shall be licensed to do business only
between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 178-6. Form of license; display required upon request.
Each licensee shall receive, with his license, identification bearing the name
of the licensee, license number and the words "licensed peddler, Town of
Cromwell" or "licensed solicitor, Town of Cromwell," as the case may be, and
with the expiration date of the license. Such identification must be available
for inspection while engaged in peddling or soliciting and must be shown
to any inhabitant of the Town upon request. No such identification shall be
used by any person other than the licensee to whom the same was issued.
§ 178-7. Expiration of license; license not transferable.
Such licenses, unless sooner revoked, shall expire on the last day of
December succeeding the date of the issue thereof and shall be a personal
license to the licensee and shall not be transferable.
§ 178-4 CROMWELL CODE § 178-8
1:186
§ 178-8. License fees.
Fees for peddlers and solicitors shall be computed and paid upon the
issuance of any license and badge pursuant to the prescribed schedule:
A. Persons proposing to peddle or solicit on foot: minimum fee of $50 for
each calendar month or portion thereof; licenses may be obtained for a
longer period at $50 per calendar month up to the period of one calendar
year ending December 31, but in no event to exceed the maximum fee
per year set forth in Connecticut General Statutes § 21-37.
B. Persons proposing to peddle or solicit from a wagon, motor vehicle,
railroad car or other conveyance or peddling prepared food or beverage
items: minimum fee of $50 per calendar month or portion thereof;
licenses may be obtained for a longer period at $50 per calendar month
up to the period of one calendar year ending December 31, but in no
event to exceed the maximum fee per year set forth in Connecticut
General Statutes § 21-37.
§ 178-9. Regulation of operations.
Any person soliciting or peddling within the Town of Cromwell, whether or
not required to be licensed, approved or registered under the provisions of
this chapter, shall conform to the following regulations:
A. The solicitor or peddler shall conduct himself at all times in an orderly
and lawful manner.
B. The solicitor or peddler shall give a written receipt for all orders taken
within the Town of Cromwell, which receipt shall be signed by the
solicitor or peddler and shall set forth a brief description of the goods,
wares or merchandise ordered, the total price thereof and the amount
of the down payment received by the solicitor or peddler from the
purchaser, if any.
C. No peddler or solicitor shall have any exclusive right to any location
in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location
without a permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission, nor shall
be be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations
might impede or inconvenience the public.
D. It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Town of Cromwell to
require any person seen peddling or soliciting and who is not known by
such officer to be duly licensed to produce his peddler's or solicitor's
license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person
found to be violating the same.
§ 178-10. Revocation of license; hearing procedure for citations.
A. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked upon the
issuance of a citation by the Chief of Police of the Town of Cromwell,
after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or canvasser.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
§ 178-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-10
1:187
B. Hearings concerning any violation of or penalties imposed pursuant to
this chapter, including revocation of any license issued hereunder, shall
be in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c, as the
same may be amended from time to time. The Town Manager shall
appoint not more than two persons to serve as hearing officers. Any
such hearing officer shall not be a police officer or employee or person
who issues citations. The compensation of the hearing officers shall be
set by the Town Council. In addition to the requirements of Connecticut
General Statutes § 7-152c, all hearings under this chapter shall conform
to the requirements for fundamental fairness, rules of evidence, and
other procedures required by law for administrative hearing involving
the imposing of fines or penalties, or the revocations of licenses.
§ 178-11. Violations and penalties.
Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $99, and each such
date of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 178-12. Exemptions; registration of charitable organizations.
A. No license under this chapter shall be required for charitable,
philanthropic and ecclesiastical organizations and other civic
organizations regularly organized and/or functioning in the Town, and
such organizations shall be exempt from the application and fee
provisions of this chapter, provided that each person before peddling or
soliciting on behalf of the same shall register with the Chief of Police
the name and address of the organization, the name and address of
the persons intending to peddle or solicit and the purpose of the object
therefor. The registration fee shall be $5 for any such organization and
may be waived for good cause. A copy of such registration shall be
provided each registrant. Such registration shall serve as a means of
identification. For purposes of this section a charitable or philanthropic
organization shall mean a nonprofit organization recognized as tax
exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
B. No license under this chapter shall be required for those participating in
an approved farmers' market as set forth in Chapter 179 that is also a
nonprofit organization recognized as tax exempt under Section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any manner the
Transportation Commissioner's statutory authority concerning state
highways.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as empowering the Town of
Cromwell to prohibit, regulate, control or impose a fee on any person
operating any business on any state highway or land abutting any state
highway pursuant to a contract with the state.
§ 178-13. Required records.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep records of all registrations,
applications and licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter in
§ 178-10 CROMWELL CODE § 178-13
1:188
a book provided for that purpose, giving the number and date of each
license, name, age and residence of the person so licensed, the amount of
the license fee paid and also the date of revocation of any license and to
keep a detailed account of all fees collected for such licenses and to turn
said fees over immediately to the Treasurer of the Town.
Chapter 179
FARMERS' MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bazaars and raffles — See Ch. 88.
Food establishments — See Ch. 137.
Loitering — See Ch. 160.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 178.
§ 179-1. Purpose.
The Town of Cromwell recognizes the community benefits from a properly
certified and approved farmers' market, as well as the need to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the Town's residents. This chapter
is intended to balance those interests by creating the following rules,
procedures and special exceptions for an approved farmers' market.
§ 179-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FARMERS' MARKET — An approved, formally organized and regularly
scheduled event for the sale of local food produce and products in a
common marketplace which is certified and operated under the general
guidelines, rules and regulations of the State Department of Agriculture.
MARKET MANAGER — The person responsible for organizing and applying
for an approved and certified farmers' market.
PERSON — Any company, corporation, individual or group of individuals
associated in any form, whether principal or agent, unless specifically
exempted by statute from the provisions hereof.
VENDOR — Includes "peddler" and "solicitor" and "canvasser" as defined
in Chapter 178 and shall also include any person (as defined above) selling
or bartering or carrying for sale or barter or offering therefor any goods,
wares, merchandise or services.
§ 179-3. Permit required; general rules for approval.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to host a farmers' market in the Town
of Cromwell unless it has been approved in accordance with this chapter
and has received a permit from the Chief of Police.
§ 178-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-3
1:189
B. In addition to the other requirements under this chapter, an approved
farmers' market must meet all of the following criteria, terms and
conditions.
(1) The farmers' market must be certified and operated under the
general guidelines, rules and regulations of the State Department of
Agriculture for certified farmers' markets.
(2) The farmers' market must have a responsible Market Manager as
defined herein.
(3) The farmers' market must be organized principally for the purpose
of offering for sale Connecticut grown farm products as defined by
the Department of Agriculture and state law.
(4) All farmers' markets must have made application and received a
permit from the Chief of Police in accordance with §§ 179-4 and
179-5 below.
(5) All farmers' markets must comply with all other Town ordinances and
zoning regulations and obtain any necessary zoning permits.
(6) All farmers' markets must be approved by the Chief of Police as to
location, parking and hours of operation.
(7) Any proposed use of Town property for a farmers' market also must
be approved by the Town Council for both location and hours of
operation.
(8) All farmers' markets shall be deemed a seasonal use subject to
annual approval in accordance herewith.
§ 179-4. Permit application procedure.
A. The Market Manager shall make an application to the Chief of Police at
least 10 days prior to each farmers' market season verifying compliance
with state certification for farmers' markets and providing a list and
relevant information for all proposed vendors on a form provided by the
Chief of Police.
B. The Market Manager shall be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the need to update the approved vendor list as necessary and no less
than 24 hours prior to each actual Farmer's Market event to account
for new vendors. It shall be the responsibility of the Market Manager to
ensure that each vendor is listed on an approved application form from
the Chief of Police.
§ 179-5. Issuance of permit.
A. It shall be within the Chief of Police's discretion to determine whether
a particular application meets the requirements of this chapter. The
Chief of Police also has the discretion to deny authorization for any
particular vendor or person associated with such vendor to participate
in the farmers' market based upon the following:
(1) Any person, association or corporation any of whose members have
been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, including
but not limited to rape, sexual battery, corruption of a minor, child
molestation, harassment or offenses relating to dangerous drugs, as
defined by the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 179-3 CROMWELL CODE § 179-5
1:190
(2) Any person who has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor
involving the use of physical violence within five years of the date of
application.
(3) Any person who is on probation or parole at the time of application
shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police and may require additional
information.
(4) Any person on probation or parole for a felony who has completed
less than two years of probation or parole, or to any person on
probation or parole for a misdemeanor who has completed less than
six months of said probation or parole.
(5) Prior violation of this chapter or other rules or regulations governing
the operation of the farmers' market.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit the discretion of
the Chief of Police to refuse participation by any person for these or
other related issues.
B. The permit, along with the list of approved vendors, as may be amended,
shall be posted and available for public viewing at each farmers' market
event.
C. All vendors on an approved list in conjunction with a farmers' market
that is a nonprofit organization recognized as tax exempt under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be exempt from complying
with Chapter 178 only during the hours of and at the location of that
approved farmers' market event but shall be otherwise responsible for
complying with this chapter and all other applicable state and local laws.
§ 179-6. Expiration of permit; permit not transferable.
Each permit, unless sooner revoked, shall be deemed seasonal and shall
expire on the last day of December succeeding the date of the issuance
thereof and shall be personal to the Market Manager who made application
and shall not be transferable.
§ 179-7. Revocation of permit; exclusion of particular vendors.
A. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police of the Town of Cromwell, after notice and a hearing before the
Town Council, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Failure to abide by all applicable state and local laws.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
B. Any violation of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the Town
by the Market Manager and/or its vendors is the joint and severable
responsibility of the Market Manager and the offending vendor and may
result, in addition to the imposition of any applicable penalties, in the
imposition of other sanctions. Other sanctions may include, at the Chief
of Police's discretion, a prohibition on approval of any future applications
on behalf of that Market Manager for a farmers' market and/or denying
future participation by a particular vendor.
§ 179-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-8
1:191
§ 179-8. Required records.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep records of all applications
and permits granted under the provisions of this chapter in a book provided
for that purpose, giving the number and date of each permit, list of vendors
and market manager(s).
Chapter 181
PUBLIC PROPERTY, USE OF
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 181-1. Promulgation of rules; exception.
Subject to the approval of the Town Council, the Town Manager of the Town
of Cromwell shall promulgate rules and regulations for the use or rental
of public properties. This chapter does not include any building under the
jurisdiction of the Board of Education.
Chapter 183
RACING
§ 183-1. Certain types of racing prohibited; uses accessory to racing
in adjacent municipalities prohibited.
Horse racing, dog racing, stock car racing, motorcycle racing and any other
motorized vehicular racing is prohibited within the territorial limits of the
Town of Cromwell. Also prohibited is the stabling of horses, stabling of dogs
or parking of vehicles in connection with horse racing, dog racing, stock
car racing, motor vehicle racing and any other motorized vehicular racing
which may take place in any Town adjacent to the territorial limits of the
Town of Cromwell.
§ 183-2. Participation, promotion or sponsoring racing in Town
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, promote, sponsor or
be actively associated with the promotion of any of the following types of
racing, which said events are designed to take place within the territorial
limits of the Town of Cromwell, as follows:
A. Horse racing in any form.
B. Stock car, motorcycle or any other motorized vehicular racing.
§ 179-8 CROMWELL CODE § 183-2
1:192
C. Dog racing.
§ 183-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, association,
copartnership, company, firm or other aggregation of individuals.
§ 183-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
more than the maximum allowed by state statutes.
Chapter 186
(RESERVED)
Chapter 189
SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 82.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Food establishments — See Ch. 137.
Health standards — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Sewers — See Ch. 198.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 230.
§ 189-1. Form of complaints.
Any complaint made to the Town Health Officer may be required by him to
be in writing and bear the signature of the complainant.
§ 189-2. Physician required to report certain contagious diseases.
Every physician shall report, in writing, to the Town Health Officer, within
12 hours after his recognition of the disease, every case of cholera, yellow
fever, typhus fever, leprosy, smallpox, diphtheria, membranous croup,
typhoid fever, scarlet fever, cerebro spinal fever, whooping cough, measles,
pulmonary tuberculosis or other contagious or infectious disease, except
those of a venereal nature.
§ 183-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-3
1:193
§ 189-3. Householder required to report certain contagious
diseases when no physician is in attendance.
Every householder in whose house any person shall be ill with any of the
following diseases: cholera, yellow fever, typhus fever, leprosy, smallpox,
diphtheria, membranous croup, typhoid fever, scarlet fever, cerebro spinal
fever, whooping cough, measles, pulmonary tuberculosis (consumption) or
other contagious or infectious disease, except those of a venereal nature,
shall report the same to the Town Health Officer within 12 hours of the
first appearance of such disease, provided that no physician shall be in
attendance.
§ 189-4. Permission required for change of residence or removal of
articles from dwellings wherein contagious diseases exist.
Until permission has been received from the Health Officer, no clothing
or other property that may have been exposed to the infection of cholera,
yellow fever, typhus fever, leprosy, smallpox, diphtheria, membranous croup
or scarlet fever shall be removed from the house; nor shall any occupant
of such infected dwelling change his residence without the consent of said
Health Officer.
§ 189-5. Attendance at school by children afflicted with or exposed
to certain diseases prohibited.
No superintendent, principal or teacher of any school and no parent or
guardian of any child attending school shall permit a child sick with
smallpox, scarlet fever, diphtheria, membranous croup, measles, whooping
cough, consumption, chicken pox, mumps, sore throat, scabies (itch) or a
child afflicted with lice to attend school; nor shall any child residing in any
household in which such disease shall exist or any child afflicted with a rash
or an eruption be allowed to attend school without a written permit from
the Health Officer.
§ 189-6. Person afflicted with certain diseases prohibited from
attending public meetings or using public conveyances.
No person affected with smallpox, diphtheria, membranous croup, scarlet
fever, whooping cough or measles shall attend any public meeting or
assembly or travel in any public conveyance.
§ 189-7. Notice of certain diseases to be posted on buildings.
Warning of the existence of diphtheria, membranous croup, typhus fever,
measles, smallpox, whooping cough, typhoid fever or scarlet fever in any
building shall be given to the public by placing, in a place conspicuous to
the public on the outside near each common entrance to said building, a
placard giving the name of said disease.
§ 189-3 CROMWELL CODE § 189-8
1:194
§ 189-8. Method of quarantine for certain diseases.
All cases of diphtheria, membranous croup, typhus fever, smallpox, scarlet
fever and primary cases of measles reported in this Town or of which the
Health Officer has information shall be quarantined in such manner as he
may direct.
§ 189-9. Disposal of bodies and disinfection of materials.
No person shall allow to be retained or unburied the dead body of any
human being for a longer time than four days, or whose death has been
caused by cholera, yellow fever, typhus fever, smallpox, typhoid fever,
diphtheria, membranous croup or scarlet fever for a longer time than 36
hours after the death of such person, without a permit from the Town Health
Officer, which permit shall specify the length of time during which such
body may remain unburied; and when death has been caused by one of
the diseases herein mentioned, the body shall be immediately thereafter
disinfected or enclosed in a hermetically sealed coffin, which shall not
thereafter be opened; and the funeral of such person, except when death
is caused by typhoid fever, shall be attended at the house, only by the
undertaker, his assistants and persons living in the house, where such
person died, and by a clergyman, who shall take such precautions as the
Health Officer may direct. In the removal thereof for burial or otherwise,
the body shall not be carried in a vehicle with other passengers. The
bedding, clothing and furniture of the room wherein such person died shall
be thoroughly disinfected and otherwise treated as the Town Health Officer
may order.
§ 189-10. Sewage disposal systems to be designed to prevent
contamination to water sources.
No privy vault, cesspool or reservoir into which a privy, water closets or
sinks are drained, except it be watertight, nor any other than a watertight
sewer or drain shall be established or permitted so near a well, spring
or other source of water used for drinking or culinary purposes as, in
the judgment of the Town Health Officer, to contaminate the same. When
any privy vault or cesspool is discontinued, the contents shall be entirely
removed and the vault filled with earth or other suitable material.
§ 189-11. Certain facilities to be kept in inoffensive condition.
No person shall keep and maintain upon his premises, at any time, any privy,
water closet, sink, drain, cesspool, stable or pigsty except in a clean and
inoffensive condition.
§ 189-12. Drainage into water sources prohibited.
No sewage drain, privy vault, cesspool or sink shall empty into any stream,
pond or other source of water or ice supply; nor shall any privy, pigsty or
stable be constructed so near such stream, pond or other source of water or
ice supply that its contents will drain into the same.
§ 189-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-13
1:195
§ 189-13. Disposal creating health hazards prohibited. [Amended
TC 6-16-2014]
No person shall throw, dump or deposit any filth, garbage or decaying
animal or vegetable matter which may be prejudicial to public health
neither upon any vacant lot, highway or public place nor in any brook, pond
or spring. This does not preclude the proper use of fertilizers upon the land.
§ 189-14. Spitting restricted.
No person shall spit upon the floor of any public building or upon the floor
or platform of any trolley car running through or within the limits of this
Town.
§ 189-15. Specifications for plumbing and drainage.
When the Town Health Officer finds that the plumbing or drainage of
any dwelling or habitation in this Town is defective and dangerous to
health or life, the owner or agent having the property in charge shall have
placed, within a reasonable time, proper traps under every sink, basin
and other fixture and shall have each soil pipe carried through the roof
to such height as the Town Health Officer shall direct, not less than two
feet and of undiminished size whenever practicable, and if this cannot be
accomplished, said Town Health Officer shall order such efficient ventilation
and such repair of soil pipes as shall, in his judgment, prevent the pollution
of the premises by sewer gas. All drainpipes passing through the wall of any
building shall be of iron or vitrified, salt-glazed tile, of such thickness as the
Town Health Officer shall determine.
§ 189-16. Cesspools and sinks not to drain into streets.
No person shall bury in, draw off or allow to run into any street or highway
in this Town the contents (or any part thereof) of any cesspool or sink.
§ 189-17. Improper use of receptacles.
No person shall throw into or deposit in any vault, sink, privy or cesspool
any offal, meat, fish, garbage or any other substance, except that of which
such place is the appropriate receptacle.
§ 189-18. Restrictions on keeping of swine, fowl and goats.
No person shall keep swine, fowl or goats in any locality in this Town in
such a manner as to become, in the opinion of the Town Health Officer, a
nuisance.
§ 189-19. Disposal of garbage.
No person shall throw any butcher's offal or garbage or any dead animal
or any putrid or stinking animal or vegetable matter directly into or where
it may get into any street, sewer, receiving basin or into any river, any
§ 189-13 CROMWELL CODE § 189-19
1:196
standing or running water or upon any ground or premises in the built-up
portions of the Town.
§ 189-20. Cleaning and disinfecting of certain areas.
All alleys, backyards, stables, privy vaults, cesspools and other like filthy
places shall be efficiently cleaned and disinfected at regular intervals as
prescribed from time to time by the Town Health Officer.
§ 189-21. Rendering operations.
All persons engaged in the business of boiling or rendering of fat, lard
or animal matter shall cause the scrap of residuum to be so dried or
otherwise prepared as to effectually deprive such material of all offensive
odors and to preserve the same entirely inoffensive immediately after the
removal thereof from the receptacles in which the rendering process may
be conducted.
§ 189-22. Quarantine and disinfecting dwellings.
When any malignant or contagious disease shall exist in any house, the
owner, occupant or person in charge of said house shall carry out such
quarantine and shall disinfect the premises at such times and in such
manner as the Town Health Officer shall order.
§ 189-23. Disinfection of materials.
Clothing, furniture, school books, library books, etc., must not be removed
from the quarantined premises until thoroughly disinfected.
§ 189-24. Supervision of disinfection.
All necessary disinfection shall be done under the supervision of the Health
Officer.
§ 189-25. Notification of convalescence or death.
As soon as the patient is convalescent, the Health Officer shall be notified
by the attending physician or, in case of death, by the undertaker or person
in charge of the body.
§ 189-26. Notification of death by pulmonary tuberculosis.
When death occurs from pulmonary tuberculosis, the Health Officer shall be
notified by the undertaker or person in charge of the body.
§ 189-27. Permission required to enter or leave quarantined
premises.
All persons are forbidden to enter or leave quarantined premises, unless
permitted to do so by the Health Officer.
§ 189-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-28
1:197
§ 189-28. Disposal of garbage and refuse.
No person shall permit the accumulation in or around the immediate vicinity
of any dwelling house or place of business under his control of refuse
matter, such as swill, waste of meat, sour flour, fish or shells, bones, dead
carcasses or any kind of animal or vegetable matter in a state of
decomposition.
§ 189-29. Vaccination of children attending school. [Added
10-17-1902]
No superintendent, principal or teacher of any public or private school, in
this Town, shall permit any child to attend school until such child shall have
been vaccinated or shall have produced evidence from a physician that in
the opinion of said physician it would not be prudent on account of sickness
for such child to be vaccinated.
Chapter 193
SEWERS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Commission — See Ch. 60.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Food establishments — See Ch. 137.
Health standards — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
§ 189-28 CROMWELL CODE § 189-29
1:198
ARTICLE I
Connections and Use
§ 193-1. Purpose.
To ensure the proper removal and disposal of sanitary sewage wastes within
the Town of Cromwell, to ensure the proper operation and maintenance
of the public sewage system and to provide for keeping adequate records
of sewers, appurtenances and connections thereto, the following Articles
regulating the construction, use, repair, alteration, connection to,
discontinuance of use or abandonment of any portion of the sewer system
or its appurtenances, including any pipes discharging directly or indirectly
into the sewage system and any substances being or proposed to be
discharged directly or indirectly into the public sewage system of the Town
of Cromwell and thence into the Mattabassett District sewage treatment
plant, are hereby enacted.
§ 193-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following words or terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping or
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other
drainage pipes within a building and conveys it to a house connection.
CROMWELL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Sewer
Authority of the Town of Cromwell as created by a Special Town Meeting
of April 28, 1965, with all the powers, purposes and objectives as set
forth in Chapter 103 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of
1958, and amendments thereto.39
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — A person authorized by the Town of Cromwell
to act on its behalf in matters of health in accordance with the provisions
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
DRAINLAYER or LICENSED DRAINLAYER — An individual, partnership
or corporation to whom the Connecticut Department of Consumer
Protection has issued a license authorizing said individual, partnership
or corporation to perform work on sanitary sewage systems and who
has been issued a permit to do such work within the territorial limits
of said Town of Cromwell by the Sewer Authority. The term "drainlayer"
may also be applied to Town or State of Connecticut Highway Division
employees and employees of utilities and the Mattabassett Sewer
District when they are engaged in installing, altering and repairing
sanitary sewers or connections and appurtenances thereto under permit
from the Sewer Authority or its agents.
HIS — A person, regardless of gender.
HOUSE CONNECTION — Where the context so indicates or implies, so
much of a pipe or pipes as to connect a main sewer with a building
or buildings, house or houses or other structures for the purpose of
conveying sanitary sewage from said property to the main sewer. The
§ 193-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-2
1:199
house connection, when used in that sense, shall include not only the
pipe extending directly from the main sewer but also pipe or pipes
connecting directly or indirectly thereinto or intended to so connect
or discharge. House connections shall be maintained by the owner or
owners of the property served.
HOUSE CONNECTION LATERAL — A pipe installed incidental to the
original construction of the main sewer or connected to the main sewer
at a later date, extending from said main sewer to some point at the
side of a street, highway or similar location and there capped. When
said pipe is extended to connect a building, buildings, house, houses or
other structure to the main sewer, it shall thereinafter become part of
the house connection as previously described and shall be maintained by
the owner or owners of the property served.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Includes the liquid or water-carried wastes of
any industrial process not clearly included in the definitions of sanitary
sewage, stormwater, cooling water and subsoil drainage herein. In
general, wastewaters carrying any quantity of oils, grease, fats,
abrasives, chemicals, residues of manufacturing processes, wastes from
commercial food preserving or canning and from slaughterhouses or
meat processing plants and similar substances, whether dissolved or
mechanically carried by water, shall be considered as "industrial waste."
INSPECTOR — The person or persons duly authorized by the Sewer
Authority to inspect and approve all construction work associated with
the sanitary sewer system of the Town of Cromwell.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, society, corporation or
group.
PROPERTY OWNER or OWNER — Includes the owner of the fee in any
real estate and also all tenants, lessees or others in control or possession
and use of the property in question or any interest therein and his, her,
its or their agents or representatives.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by a public authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The common waste and water carried wastes
from human dwellings and from toilet and lavatory fixtures, kitchens,
laundries and similar facilities of business and industrial buildings.
Except as specifically authorized, sanitary sewage shall not include
stormwater from roofs, yards, streets or open spaces, water from land
surfaces or brooks, clean waste or overflows from springs, wells or
subsoil drainage, large volumes of clean water from air-conditioning
or other cooling or condensing facilities, clean wastewater from
hydraulically operated contrivances and those wastes included within
the definition of industrial waste in this section, except in the event
that specific provisions for such industrial wastes are set forth by the
39.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 7-245 et seq.
§ 193-2 CROMWELL CODE § 193-2
1:200
Mattabassett District and can be handled without damage to the existing
sewer system of the Town of Cromwell.
SEWER — Includes the main pipe, manholes and other structures and
equipment appurtenant thereto controlled and maintained by the Town
of Cromwell for the conveyance of sanitary sewage and shall not be
understood to include house connections or connections between the
main sewer and individual properties. In the situation where a private
connection enters the system at a manhole, the limit of public ownership
shall be the outside face of the manhole at the point of connection.
TOWN — The Town of Cromwell, County of Middlesex, State of
Connecticut.
WATERCOURSE — A river, stream, brook, waterway, lake, pond, marsh,
swamp, bog or other body of water, natural or artificial, public or private,
which is contained within, flows through or borders upon the Town of
Cromwell or any portion thereof.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 193-3. Connection required where available.
A. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any watercourse, pond, ditch or lake
within the Town of Cromwell or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
Town any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters,
except where a suitable treatment has been provided.
B. Where public sewers are available to any given area, the owner of each
house, building or other structure used for human occupancy, including
residence, employment and recreation, shall, at his own expense, install
sanitary sewage disposal facilities in said structure and shall connect
those facilities to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions
of this article within a twelve-month period after the mailing of written
notice to said owner, at his last known address, that said sewer is
available for use by said property. In the case that a private disposal
system is malfunctioning and/or creating a nuisance, the connection
to said sewer shall be made within the time specified in a written
notification mailed to the last known address of said owner by the
Sewer Authority, its agents and/or the Director of Health of the Town of
Cromwell or his duly authorized agent. Any deviation from a standard
connection shall only be done by special permission of the Sewer
Authority after an affirmative recommendation of the Director of Health
or his agent.
C. Where a public sewer is not available under the provision of Subsection
B, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system in compliance with the Health Ordinance40 of the Town of
Cromwell.
D. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Subsection B, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 146, Health Standards.
§ 193-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-3
1:201
this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be thereafter promptly abandoned, pumped out
and filled with a suitable material so as not to create a hazard to the
public health and safety, except that the private disposal system, after
being pumped out, may be used for the purposes of cellar drainage and
surface drainage if the facility is in suitable condition for such use.
E. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Ordinance of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 193-4. Prohibited acts.
A. No unauthorized person may open the cover of, enter or alter any
manhole meter station or similar appurtenance of any public sewer,
put anything therein or interfere therewith. No person shall insert or
place in any public sewer, manhole, meter station or other appurtenance
thereof any sticks, rubbish or other material which said sewer, manhole,
meter station or appurtenance thereof was not intended to so receive.
B. No person shall maliciously or willfully break, destroy, uncover, deface
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part
of the public sewer system of the Town of Cromwell.
C. No person shall make any connection to any public sewer of the Town
or appurtenance thereof or to any pipe or appurtenance discharging
thereinto or remove or disconnect any existing connection thereunto,
except as provided in §§ 193-5 and 193-7 and the subsections thereof
of this article, provided that the plumbing work and fixtures within the
buildings and similar structures may be built and connected as provided
by the Town plumbing codes, laws and regulations and by permits issued
thereunder. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 193-5. Standards and specifications; costs.
A. The Sewer Authority shall from time to time establish requirements
or specifications to regulate the sizes, materials, methods and
workmanship to be used in the construction of sewers, drains, house
connections and other similar work and appurtenances thereto
connected or intended to be connected or discharge directly or
indirectly into any public sewer of the Town of Cromwell. Such standards
shall provide minimum requirements as to size, depth, slope or rate of
grade for such pipes, shall regulate the kinds of pipe, fittings, methods
of laying, jointing materials used, manner of connecting to preexisting
sewers and general considerations as to location and other pertinent
features. Any such requirements or specifications as the same may be
from time to time amended are hereby made part of this article.
B. The requirements of the Town Building and Plumbing Codes41 shall
be observed with respect to piping and fixtures inside or immediately
adjacent to buildings and within the areas of jurisdiction of said codes,
subject only to the general requirements of this article. Pipe outside
the inner walls of any building or similar structure shall conform to the
requirements of this article as to permits, materials and workmanship,
provided that such pipe or pipes are intended to convey approved
§ 193-3 CROMWELL CODE § 193-5
1:202
sanitary sewage to the public sewer at the time of installation or at some
time in the future.
C. Each independent house or building shall have a direct connection to
the public sewer serving it, separate from any other house or building
set upon another parcel or plot of land. The Sewer Authority may permit
variations of this requirement upon a written request to that effect from
the owners of all land in any way concerned.
D. All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
E. Old house connections may be used in connection with new building only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Sewer Authority
or its authorized representative, to meet all the requirements of this
article.
F. In all buildings where the building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted
by approved artificial means and discharged to the house connection.
G. The inspector or representative of the Sewer Authority shall be notified
not less than the time set by regulations in advance of the time any
connection is to be made to any public sewer of said Town or to any pipe
or similar structure connecting to a public sewer, and such connection
shall only be made in the presence of said inspector or representative
and according to his directions. Said inspector shall be afforded all
reasonable opportunity to oversee the construction of all parts of any
drain connected directly or indirectly or intended to be so connected
to any public sewer of the Town and to obtain and record the location
and other pertinent facts with respect to such sewer. No public sewer
shall be opened or in any way disturbed except in the presence of
an authorized representative of the Sewer Authority. This same
requirement shall apply to repairs or alterations to sewers or pipes
discharging thereto.
H. The Sewer Authority or its authorized representative shall keep a record
of all connections made to public sewers under this article and all
repairs and alterations made to sewer and house connections
connecting to or discharging into public sewers of the Town or intended
to so discharge. Licensed drainlayers and others shall assist the Sewer
Authority to secure data needed for such records.
I. The Sewer Authority or its representative may assist in the installation,
repair and alteration of connections to public sewers and of house
connections discharging thereunto by furnishing such information as
may be in their possession and proper to be furnished to the party
performing such work by taking levels and staking out grades for sewers
and/or house connections where they deem it expedient and in similar
ways. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
J. The Sewer Authority may, in its discretion, in any case where the
quantity or expense of work by Town forces incidental to the
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Building Construction.
§ 193-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-5
1:203
construction, repair or inspection of any sewer or sewer connection
warrants such a requirement, require that the owner of the property
concerned or the drainlayer shall reimburse the Town for the cost of
services of Town employees in work or inspections incidental to said
sewer or sewer connection. The Sewer Authority may make suitable
provision for such reimbursement a condition precedent to the issuance
of any permit for the construction, repair or alteration of such sewer or
sewer connection subject to such directions as the Sewer Authority may
issue.
K. Adequate provisions shall be taken to exclude from public sewers all
water or other materials which may constrict, damage or wrongfully fill
any sewer into which they may be discharged directly or indirectly. To
that end, the open ends of sewer or drain connections shall be kept
closed or protected during construction and during periods when work
on any incomplete job is suspended.
L. When any building or other structure served by a connection to any
public sewer is demolished, destroyed, abandoned or altered so that
any portion of any abandoned plumbing system which is directly or
indirectly connected to any public sewer is no longer used, the open
end of such drain which drains directly or indirectly into a public sewer
shall be promptly closed and sealed off so that no wastes not otherwise
permitted to enter the public sewer shall be so discharged thereunto.
The Sewer Authority shall be notified of such discontinuance or
abandonment and of the closing and sealing of such drain and its
representative afforded an opportunity to see such work performed. All
of said work shall be done by the person or party that demolishes the
building or structure or who alters such system so as to make such
closing and sealing necessary and, in the failure of such person or party
to do so, shall be done by the owner, lessee or tenant of the premises to
the satisfaction of the Sewer Authority, all without expense to the Town.
[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 193-6. Control of discharges.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or uncontaminated industrial process
waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substance
prohibited by the charter, ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by
the Mattabassett District or any other substances which in the opinion
of the Sewer Authority are likely to harm the sewers, sewage treatment
process or equipment or have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a
nuisance.
C. If any waters and wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain substances
referenced in Subsection B of this section, the Sewer Authority may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
§ 193-5 CROMWELL CODE § 193-6
1:204
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes.
D. If the Sewer Authority permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be
subject to review and approval by the Sewer Authority and subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws and the
municipal discharge permit. Further, such pretreatment installations
must be consistent with the requirements of any Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection42 pretreatment permit issued
to the industry.
E. Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Sewer Authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes
and/or other harmful ingredients, except that such traps shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be
of a type and capacity approved by the Sewer Authority and shall be
located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
F. Where preliminary pretreatment or flow equalization facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
G. When required by the Sewer Authority, the owner of any property
serviced by a house connection carrying industrial waste shall install
a suitable control manhole, together with such meters and other
appurtenances in the house connection to facilitate observation
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed
with plans approved by the Sewer Authority. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times. All industries discharging
into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharge as
the Sewer Authority and/or other duly authorized employees of the Town
may reasonably require, including installation, use and maintenance of
monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting results of such
monitoring to the Sewer Authority. Such records shall be made available
upon request by the Sewer Authority to other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters.
H. All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Waste Water, published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
42.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
§ 193-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-6
1:205
manhole in the public sewer at which the house connection is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all
outfalls of the premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken.
I. Any industry held in violation of the provisions of this article may have
its disposal authorization terminated.
J. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength
or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided that such
agreements do not contravene any requirements of federal laws and are
compatible with any user change and industrial cost recovery system in
effect.
§ 193-7. Persons authorized to work on sewers; permits; fees.
A. To ensure compliance with the foregoing section of this article and
to facilitate the supervision of the construction, operation and repair
of sewers and keeping of records thereof, no person other than those
described in Subsection B shall construct, repair, alter or remove any
sewer or house connection connected to or with or discharging directly
or indirectly to or into any public sewer of said Town or intended to
discharge this at some future time, regardless of whether said work is
located in a public street or in public or private land.
B. The following may, as indicated, construct, repair, alter or remove
sewers, subject to supervision and approval of the Sewer Authority or its
authorized agent:
(1) Regular forces of or a contractor employed by the Town of Cromwell
operating under orders of the Town Manager and in the performance
of work for said Town. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
(2) Regular forces of the Mattabassett District, Fire District — Water
Division, and regular forces of the Town or the State Highway
Division, operating under and subject to a permit for the particular
job to be issued by the Sewer Authority or its authorized agent and
while engaged in the regular work and operations of said District,
Water Company, Highway Department of said Town or Highway
Division, Department of Transportation.
(3) Regular forces of any utility company or corporation authorized by
state law to construct, maintain and operate pipes or ducts within
public highways within said Town, while engaged in work incidental
to the regular structures of said utility company and operating under
and subject to the conditions of a permit for the particular job issued
by the Sewer Authority or its authorized agent.
(4) Any person, firm or corporation which shall have been issued a
permit under this article by the Sewer Authority for the Town of
Cromwell to perform work of the type in question during the period
§ 193-6 CROMWELL CODE § 193-7
1:206
provided in said permit and when operating under and subject to the
conditions of a permit for a particular job and issued thereof by the
Sewer Authority or its authorized agent.
(5) An owner-occupant of a single-family home or a member of the
owner-occupant's immediate family, who may apply for and receive a
permit to make such connection, repair or alteration as permitted by
this article. The permittee may be required by the Sewer Authority
to provide bonding and insurance in an amount established by the
Sewer Authority when, in its opinion, such bonding and insurance
are needed for the protection of public and private property that
may be affected by the issuance of said permit. For the purposes of
this article, the term "immediate family" shall be understood to mean
mother, father, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brotherin-
law, sister-in-law or grandchild. When a permit is issued under
the provisions of this section, the permit must be signed for in the
presence of an agent of the Sewer Authority, and the permittee, upon
signing said permit, assumes the responsibility of actually doing the
work covered by said permit and therefore agrees to such terms and
requirements. The permittee also agrees to reimburse the Town for
any expense it incurs in relation to the issuance of said permit.
C. The limitations as to who may construct, alter or repair house
connections and sewers as provided by this section shall not restrict the
usual work of plumbers or others while operating in accordance with
the plumbing and building codes of the Town of Cromwell43 and when
they work within the outside walls of a building or similar structure,
provided that no plumber or other person shall make any connection
to a public sewer of said Town without a permit therefor, even if said
sewer or drain is located under or immediately adjacent to any building
or similar structure, and provided that all drains and fixtures within said
buildings or similar structures and all use of them shall conform to the
requirements of this article as to what may or may not be permitted to
be discharged into public sewers.
D. The Sewer Authority for the Town of Cromwell may issue a permit
to drainlayers or any person, firm or corporation licensed as such by
the State of Connecticut or who has in his employ on the project a
drainlayer licensed as such by the State of Connecticut, who shall have
applied to it on forms to be provided for that purpose and who shall
have furnished the surety bond and insurance required by § 193-8 of
this article. Every application for a permit as a drainlayer shall state
the name of the drainlayer (in case of partnerships or trade names,
both the name under which the firm does business and the names
of all individual members of the firm) and the business address of
the prospective permittee, together with such other information as the
Sewer Authority may properly require. Every permit issued shall expire
on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. Fees for the permits
shall be established from time to time by the Sewer Authority. Initially,
the fee shall be $25.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Building Construction.
§ 193-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-7
1:207
E. Each licensed drainlayer shall be responsible for the faithful
performance of all work performed under the permit issued to him and
for the conduct of all work and all materials furnished on work by his
employees or agents. No work shall be sublet by a licensed drainlayer
under any permit issued in any manner to divest said drainlayer in full
control and responsibility for all parts of said work. Only competent
men shall be employed on work performed under such permit, and only
suitable materials to the standards established by the Sewer Authority
shall be furnished or used on such work. Should the authorized
representative of the Sewer Authority find that any licensed drainlayer
has failed to conform to the requirements of this article and to the
conditions of any permit issued hereunder or that said drainlayer has
not been faithful in the performance of work or furnishing materials
under the permit, such representative may suspend such permit until
the next meeting of the Sewer Authority and shall report the matter to
such meeting. Such suspended drainlayer and any complainant in said
matter shall be notified of such meeting and afforded an opportunity to
be heard on the matter at that time. The Sewer Authority may, after said
opportunity to be heard has been provided, revoke said permit and/or
may extend the suspension of such permit for such period and/or limit
the activities of such drainlayer in such manner as may appear to be in
the public interest.
F. No person, other than those working for and under the direction of
the Town of Cromwell, shall make any excavation for or construct,
install, lay, repair, alter or remove any sewer or drain connection or
appurtenance thereof within the Town of Cromwell, which sewer or
drain connection or appurtenance thereof is in any way connected or
discharges directly or indirectly to or into any public sewer of said
Town or is intended to at some future time to be so connected or so
discharge, until said person or party shall have applied for and secured
from the Sewer Authority or its authorized representative a property
owner's permit for doing such work. Such permits may be issued only to
those qualified to perform such work, as provided in Subsection B of this
section.
(1) The Sewer Authority may authorize competent representatives to act
for it in receiving applications for permits.
(2) Every application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms as
provided by the Sewer Authority for that purpose and shall be signed
by the licensed drainlayer or other qualified person or party or an
authorized agent thereof. The application shall state the location and
ownership of the property to be served by the sewer in question, the
post office address of said property owner and a brief description
of the work to be done and shall contain an agreement that the
permittee shall do the work in accordance with the requirements
of the Sewer Authority of the Town of Cromwell and local laws,
ordinances and regulations and permits as those laws, ordinances
and regulations may apply to the particular location or work and will
save said Town and others harmless from damages, loss, damage
claims, etc., in accordance with the drainlayer's surety bond
§ 193-7 CROMWELL CODE § 193-7
1:208
provided for in § 193-8 hereof, all in such form and detail as may be
directed by the Town in the form provided. When the proposed sewer
work is within the limits of any state highway or any Town highway,
the drainlayer shall present the required permit for excavation from
the Connecticut Department of Transportation or from the Director
of Public Works of the Town of Cromwell, respectively, before the
permit will be issued. No person shall be permitted to receive the
permit other than the licensed drainlayer, who shall sign the permit
in the presence of an authorized agent of the Sewer Authority. In
signing the application and permit, the drainlayer agrees to install
all devices or other equipment necessary to prevent any substances
prohibited from entering the public sewer to do so. Signing of the
permit also indicates the drainlayer's agreement to install and use all
devices or other equipment necessary to prevent injury to any person
or property as a result of the work for which the permit was issued.
(3) All completed applications for permits and a record of the work
performed under every permit issued thereupon shall be kept as
permanent records of the Sewer Authority of the Town of Cromwell.
(4) Each permit to construct, alter or repair any sewer or house
connection under this section shall be issued only after an
application, as herein provided, has been made. It shall state the
location and character of the work to be performed thereunder; the
person granted permission to perform such work; and a time limit
within which the work must be performed and at the expiration
of which the privileges for construction under the permit shall
terminate, unless such time limits shall have been extended in
writing by the Sewer Authority or its authorized representative,
and shall indicate the general character of the wastes which may
be discharged into the sewer in question and any other pertinent
information or conditions. Permits shall not be transferable or
assignable by the permittee.
(5) Permits shall be kept on the premises at all times where work is
in progress and shall be shown to any proper person asking to see
the same. All persons operating under such permits shall be held
responsible for conformity with the requirements thereof and of this
article.
(6) Any permit may be suspended, canceled or terminated by the Sewer
Authority or its authorized representative on written notice to the
permittee for violation of the conditions thereof or for violation of
the conditions of this article or of the standards and specifications
established by the Sewer Authority for such work as provided by
this article and for other reasons of public interest. Suspension,
cancellation or termination of a permit shall not entitle the permittee
to any compensation or reimbursement from the Town or its agents
for any alleged loss or expense incurred thereby, and permits shall
only be issued on this condition.
(7) In the case of a proposed sewer connection from an industrial
building, commercial building, commercial complex or residential
subdivision or any building other than a normal residential building,
§ 193-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-7
1:209
the Town shall be provided with a suitable plan and the proposed
method of connection to the public sewer. Such plan shall be
submitted to the Town prior to the time when the permit is needed to
allow the Town sufficient time to investigate properly the proposed
design of connection and to make any recommendation it may deem
advisable. The developer shall furnish the Sewer Authority a
complete set of construction drawings prepared by and bearing
the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed by the
State of Connecticut. Said plans shall comply with the requirements
established by the Sewer Authority.
(8) Fees for the permits, as outlined herein, shall be established from
time to time by the Sewer Authority. Initially they shall be:
(a) Residential: $25.
(b) Drainlayer: $25.
§ 193-8. Insurance and bonds.
A. Every drainlayer making application for a permit shall be protected by
and pay premiums on policies of insurance coverage for public liability
and bodily injury, insuring him against liability to persons not in his
employ, in the minimum amount of $300,000 for each occurrence, or
in a greater amount when so required by the Sewer Authority. Said
insurance policies shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to
issue such policies by the State of Connecticut. All insurance policies
shall name the Town of Cromwell, the Cromwell Water Pollution Control
Authority, their employees and agents as assureds. Special coverage for
blasting or other circumstances determined by the Sewer Authority to
cause increased risk to the general public or property, whether private
or public, shall be provided by the drainlayer in the amount established
by the Sewer Authority prior to the commencement of any work or
the issuance of any permit. The drainlayer shall also carry workman's
compensation insurance in the amounts specified by the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut and shall provide the Sewer
Authority with proof of such coverage when applying for a permit to
work on sanitary sewers within the Town of Cromwell. It shall be the
responsibility of the drainlayer to provide the Sewer Authority with
insurance certificates for the above described insurance requirements
prior to the commencement of any work relating to the sanitary system
of the Town of Cromwell. The drainlayer may use forms describing the
above requirements provided by the Town or forms acceptable to the
Sewer Authority provided by the insuring company.
B. Every drainlayer making application for a permit shall provide the Sewer
Authority with a performance bond in the amount specified by the Sewer
Authority, which shall not be less than $5,000. The performance bond
may be posted in either of one or a combination of the following ways:
(1) A surety bond issued by a surety company licensed to issue such
bonds within the State of Connecticut.
(2) A letter of credit prepared on the issuing bank's stationery and
signed by an officer of said bank.
(3) A cash bond, the forms for which shall be provided by the Town.
§ 193-7 CROMWELL CODE § 193-8
1:210
C. Upon receipt of any bond by the Authority, it shall be placed in the
custody of the Treasurer of the Town of Cromwell to be held until
released by the Sewer Authority. The Treasurer shall promptly deposit
any cash bond in a local bank and, upon written request of the depositor
of said cash bond, may from time to time release to said depositor any
interest earnings earned by the deposit of said bond. Upon release of
such earnings, the Treasurer shall notify the Sewer Authority, in writing,
of such action.
D. The bond and insurance, in combination, shall provide that the Town
of Cromwell, the Cromwell Water Pollution Control Authority, the State
of Connecticut and their respective employees and agents shall be
indemnified and saved harmless from all suits of every name and
description brought against any of said bodies or their agents or
employees for or on account of any injuries or damages received or
sustained by any person or property in consequence of or resulting
from any work performed by the drainlayer, his agents or employees
or from any act or omission of the drainlayer, his agents or employees
while operating under the permit applied for or from any negligence
regarding such work; that the drainlayer shall reimburse the Town for
any expense to said Town or its agents or employees arising from any
injury or damage to any sewer or other property of said Town or by
reason of any violation by the drainlayer or his agents or employees
of any requirement of this article; that the drainlayer shall faithfully
execute in all respects all work performed under the permit proposed
to be issued; that the drainlayer shall restore the portion of any street
or public place in which the drainlayer may have made an excavation
incidental to work under said permit to the same condition as it was
in prior to said work and also shall keep said street or public place in
such condition as is acceptable by the public official in charge of such
street or place for a period of two years from the date of completion
of said restoration; that the drainlayer shall reimburse the Town or the
state for the expense of repairs to such street or public place made
necessary by reason of the excavation made by the drainlayer; and that
the drainlayer shall comply in all respects with the rules and regulations,
laws, ordinances, etc., relative to work in such streets or public places
and with the terms of the permits which may be issued to the drainlayer.
§ 193-9. Violations and penalties.
A. If any person shall construct, install, alter or repair any sewer,
appurtenance or connection to any public sewer of the Town of Cromwell
in violation of the requirements of this article or, having obtained a
permit as provided by this article, shall construct, install, alter or repair
a sewer, appurtenance or connection thereto without having given the
Sewer Authority or its authorized representative ample notice, time,
opportunity and assistance during regular working hours to inspect such
sewer, appurtenance or connection and the work and materials used
thereon, said Sewer Authority or its authorized representative may, in
its or his discretion, order or direct the person who performed such
work on said sewer, appurtenance or connection, etc., and the owner
§ 193-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-9
1:211
of any property in which said sewer, etc., may be located, or which
may be served thereby or in whose interest and employ said work
was done, to uncover and fully expose any and all portions of said
sewer, appurtenance or connection and afford said inspector adequate
opportunity to examine and inspect such sewer, etc., and to secure such
records thereof as may be proper. If such sewer or connection and
any appurtenance thereof shall be found not to be in full accord with
the requirements of this article and the standards established under its
provisions, then said Sewer Authority or its authorized representative
may order the person, owner or lessee to make changes in or additions
to or remove portions of appurtenances of such sewer, etc., as may
be necessary to ensure that such sewer, etc., will conform to the
requirements of this article and the standards established under its
provisions. All of such work shall be performed by said person, owner or
lessee without delay and without expense to the Town of Cromwell.
B. If the Sewer Authority shall have evidence that a sewer or any part
or appurtenance thereof, which is connected to or discharges into any
public sewer of the Town of Cromwell, has been constructed, repaired or
altered or is or has been used, operated or maintained or substances are
being or have recently been discharged through the same in violation
of the requirements of this article or of the standards established under
its provisions, said Sewer Authority shall inquire into the matter. Said
Sewer Authority may require that the owner, lessee or tenant of the
property where such sewer, etc., may be located or of the property
served by such sewer, etc., assist said Sewer Authority and its
representatives in such inquiry and permit them to examine such sewer,
etc., and observe the manner in which the sewer, etc., is used, operated
or maintained and the wastes discharged into the same. If the Sewer
Authority shall find on such inquiry that there exists good reason to
believe that the requirements of this article have not been or are not
being complied with, they may require the owner, lessee or tenant of said
property to furnish the Sewer Authority with adequate proof that said
requirements are being conformed to and will continue to be complied
with. If it shall appear that said requirements have not been and are
not being conformed to or complied with or that good reason exists to
believe that they may not thereafter be conformed to or complied with,
said Sewer Authority may order and require that the owner, lessee or
tenant shall immediately take such measures or provide and install such
appurtenances to make such changes in such sewer, etc., or manner of
using or maintaining the same that will ensure that said requirements
will be conformed to or complied with thereafter. All assistance, proof,
changes and new appurtenances required by this section to be furnished
or provided by the owner, lessee or tenant in question shall be promptly
furnished by said owner, lessee or tenant without expense to the Town of
Cromwell.
C. If any person, after an order or direction from the Sewer Authority of the
Town of Cromwell, fails to take the remedial steps or perform the acts
required under Subsections A and B of this section or fails thereafter to
use, operate and maintain any connection with the public sewers of the
§ 193-9 CROMWELL CODE § 193-9
1:212
Town or appurtenances thereof, as required by this article, the Sewer
Authority, by such agents as it may choose, may disconnect the house
connection that was wrongfully connected, altered, repaired or used or
through which improper wastes were being discharged into the public
sewer system of the Town. In disconnecting said house connections, the
Sewer Authority may interfere with or cut off sewage from other portions
of the property whereon such violation of this article has occurred or of
any adjacent property which is served by such house connection.
D. If the Sewer Authority shall have disconnected a house connection from
the public sewer system, as above provided, said Sewer Authority may
collect the cost of making such disconnection from any person
responsible for or willfully concerned in or who profited by such violation
of this article.
E. If the Sewer Authority has disconnected any property from the public
sewer system, as above provided, it may thereafter refuse to permit the
restoration of the former connection or of any new connection concerned
in the violation of this article until the claim of the Authority of the cost of
making such disconnection shall have been paid in full, plus interest and
the reasonable overhead of any legal expense incurred by the Authority
in connection therewith.
F. Any person violating any provision of this article may be proceeded
against and fined not exceeding $1,000 for each offense, and, for the
purposes of this article, each day that a violation of this article is
permitted to continue shall be considered as a separate offense.
§ 193-10. Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. The Sewer Authority and other duly authorized employees of the Town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The Sewer Authority or its representative shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil,
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point that has
a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterways or facilities for wastes treatment.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
Subsection A above, the Sewer Authority or duly authorized employees
of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and all applicable safety rules established
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. The company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Town employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, as required in § 193-6
of this article.
C. The Sewer Authority and any other duly authorized employees of the
Town bearing proper identification and credentials shall be permitted
to enter all properties through which the Town has a duly negotiated
§ 193-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:213
easement for the purpose of but not limited to inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewer works, lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work,
if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
§ 193-10 CROMWELL CODE § 193-10
1:214
ARTICLE II
Connections by Developers
§ 193-11. Agreements with developers to build sewers.
A. The Sewer Authority is authorized to enter into agreements on behalf
of the Town of Cromwell with developers, other owners of land or their
agents for the construction of sewers by and at the expense of such
developers, owners or agents in which said sewers may become part of
the public sewer system of the Town of Cromwell under the conditions
hereinafter stipulated, and the Authority is hereby empowered to make
from time to time any regulations stipulating the terms and conditions
of said agreement not inconsistent with the terms and conditions of this
article and applicable Connecticut General Statutes.
B. The duly elected Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Sewer Authority is
authorized to sign said agreements on behalf of the Town of Cromwell
when authorized by a majority vote of said Authority.
C. The terms and text of a standard form of agreement for use under the
authority of this article and any variations from said standard agreement
shall be approved by the Authority's attorney.
D. The Authority shall specify in the terms of such agreements or on plans
to be made part of said agreement the limits, sizes and gradient of the
sewers to be constructed and the nature of and any limitations on the
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes to be conveyed by said sewer. All
the terms of and all subsequent amendments to an ordinance entitled
"An Ordinance of the Town of Cromwell Regulating the Construction
of, Use of, Discharge of Substances Into and Connections to the Public
Sewers of the Town of Cromwell and the Installation of Pipes and
Fixtures Intended to Discharge Wastes Into Said Sewers"44 shall be
applicable to all work done under such agreements.
E. All such agreements shall provide that the full cost of design,
construction or other incidental cost thereto shall be borne by the
developer, owner or agent. The developer, owner or agent shall, prior to
commencement of any work on the proposed sewer or appurtenances,
deposit with the Treasurer of the Town a sum of money determined by
the Authority to be sufficient to defray any cost the Town may incur for
inspection, review, engineering, testing or other costs relative to said
project prior to, after or during the construction of said sewer referred
to in said agreement. Said agreement shall contain the provision that if
at any time during the life of said agreement the aforementioned deposit
proves to be insufficient, the developer shall, upon notification by the
Authority, make such additional deposits as required with the Treasurer
of the Town. Upon acceptance of the sewer into the public sewer system,
the unexpended portion of the deposits will be returned to the developer
or owner.
F. All such agreements shall provide that the developer or owner shall
assume all risks and hold the Town of Cromwell, its agents and
employees harmless for any and all claims for damage arising from the
44.Editor's Note: Said ordinance, adopted 12-29-1969, as amended, was repealed 11-14-1990.
For similar provisions, see Art. I, Connections and Use, of this chapter.
§ 193-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-11
1:215
work or its conduct. To secure such risks, adequate liability, property
damage and compensation insurance in the amounts determined by
the Sewer Authority shall be required from the developer or owner.
Said developer or owner shall furnish the Authority with proper and
acceptable certificates of insurance issued by an insurance company
licensed to do so by the State of Connecticut. Said certificates of
insurance shall provide for continuous renewal until released by the
Authority.
G. All such agreements shall require that the developer or owner shall
deposit with the Treasurer of the Town a performance and maintenance
bond in the amounts specified by the Sewer Authority in a form
acceptable to the Sewer Authority. The term of said bond shall be
established by the Sewer Authority and shall provide for continuous
renewal until released by the Sewer Authority. In the event that a cash
bond is accepted by the Authority, said cash deposit shall be deposited
by the Treasurer of the Town in a local bank or banks in an interestbearing
account. Upon release of said cash bond, all earnings on the
deposit of said bond shall become the property of the developer or
owner having posted said bond. During the period that the bond is being
held, the depositor may request and the Treasurer may allow that the
interest earnings on said deposit may be withdrawn from time to time.
The Treasurer shall, upon releasing such earnings, notify the Sewer
Authority in writing.
H. All such agreements shall require that whenever the proposed sewer is
not in a public highway, adequate rights-of-way shall be conveyed to the
Town of Cromwell. The terms of said conveyance shall be approved by
the Town Attorney and shall be conveyed prior to the acceptance of the
sewer by the Sewer Authority.
I. After such sewer system has been constructed under the terms of said
agreement and the Sewer Authority is of the opinion that said sewer was
constructed in conformance with the plans and specifications and said
sewer conforms to the requirements of the standards established by said
Authority and the maintenance period set forth in said agreement has
expired and all restoration to public or private property disturbed during
the construction of said sewer has been completed or adequate bond
has been provided to assure that any corrective measures necessary
during such maintenance period will be done without cost to the Town,
the Sewer Authority may, by resolution, incorporate said sewer into the
public sewer system of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 193-11 CROMWELL CODE § 193-11
1:216
ARTICLE III
Sewers in Subdivisions
§ 193-12. Sewer Authority approval or waiver required; benefit
assessment.
A. When an owner or developer of a parcel of land within the Town of
Cromwell submits a plan of development for said parcel of land to
the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Cromwell, said
Commission shall not approve such plan of development until said
developer has secured from the Sewer Authority of the Town of
Cromwell an approval of his proposed sanitary sewer system and its
connection to the public sewer system of the Town or a waiver of
such requirement from said Sewer Authority as hereinafter provided in
Subsection B of this section.
B. If a proposed subdivision is located within 5,000 feet of an existing
public sewer system or within an area that the Sewer Authority expects
to extend public sewers into within a five-year period in accordance
with a master sewer plan established by the Sewer Authority or in an
area that is to be serviced by a sewer system that has been designed
but not constructed, the developer shall be required to connect his
proposed sewer system to said public sewer. If in the opinion of the
Sewer Authority such connection is impractical because of the location
of the proposed development in relation to the public sewer or because
the capacity of said public sewer cannot accommodate the projected
flow from such development, the Authority may, by resolution, waive said
requirement to connect to said public sewer. When the Authority is of
such opinion, it shall notify the developer that:
(1) He is released from the requirement to provide a public sewer
system for his proposed development;
(2) He shall be required to install a capped sewage system within the
proposed development and shall deposit with the Town a sum of
money determined by said Authority to be sufficient to connect said
capped system to the public sewer when it becomes practical to do
so; or
(3) He shall be required, as part of his proposed system, to construct
the sewer system the Town had designed but not built. When this
action is required of the developer, the Authority shall agree to
acquire any rights-of-way needed as part of its design, without cost
to the developer, and shall agree to reimburse the developer for
the additional cost of installing any pipes or other appurtenances
required which exceed either the capacity of the sewer system
needed to serve the proposed development or the minimum size
pipes and appurtenances established by the Sewer Authority for
sewer systems within the Town of Cromwell, whichever results in
larger size pipes and appurtenances thereto.
C. When topography indicates that construction of the proposed sewer
within the street line boundaries is impractical, the developer may
propose to install the sewer in rights-of-way off said street lines. If
the developer so proposes, the Sewer Authority is reserved the right
§ 193-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-12
1:217
to either accept or reject such proposal. If the Authority accepts such
proposal, the developer shall deed without cost to the Town all such
rights-of-way that cross over, under or upon any property owned by him
necessary to the construction and future maintenance of the proposed
sewer. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
D. The Sewer Authority is authorized to enter into agreements with
developers allowing said developers to construct a sewer system that
will serve their proposed developments. Such agreements shall define
the conditions and responsibilities of both the Town and the developer
and shall be in a form as approved by the Town Attorney.
E. When topography dictates that a pumping station is needed to convey
effluent from the proposed development to the public sewage system,
the developer shall, at his own expense, install such pump station. If,
in reviewing the plans of the proposed development, the Authority finds
that areas beyond the limits of the proposed development could be
served by the aforesaid pump station, the Authority may require the
developer to include such area in the design capacity of the station,
without cost to the Town. If the design indicates that the pumps and
associated equipment needed to serve the enlarged areas will cause
additional cost to the developer, the Authority may negotiate with the
developer as to the distribution of the costs of such pumping station.
F. When the Town has constructed or caused to be constructed a sewer
to which the proposed sewage system designed to serve the proposed
development is connected or is to be connected, all improvements within
said development shall be subject to a benefit assessment. Said benefit
assessment shall be in accordance with the sewer assessment formula
established by the Sewer Authority now in effect or as revised by said
Authority and in effect at the time the benefit assessment is levied. Such
assessment and assessment formula shall conform to the requirements
of all General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and all applicable
sections of the Code of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 193-12 CROMWELL CODE § 193-12
1:218
ARTICLE IV
Interceptor Sewers
§ 193-13. Deferred assessments.
A. Purpose. In order to provide for the deferment of the costs of interceptor
sewers to such time or times as an extension of such interceptor shall be
designed, constructed and assessed to serve one or more sections of the
Town, this article is enacted by the Town of Cromwell, as provided by the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
B. Excess costs.
(1) Whenever the Authority shall determine that the cost of an
interceptor sewer will exceed the benefit to the area to be sewered
immediately and directly and when such excess cost is due to
increased size or depth or to other costs which are necessary or
incidental in order that such sewer or sewer system of which it is a
part may be suitable for extension in the future to serve other areas
which could be served by such sewer or sewer system, the Authority
may elect to:
(a) Assess such excess costs as an outlet benefit in any area to
be served by the extensions of such sewer or sewer system
being designed and constructed, said assessment to be payable
at the same time as the assessment being levied against those
properties connecting immediately after the construction of the
sewer or sewer system is completed; or
(b) Pay such excess costs and defer the assessment of said excess
costs to properties not directly available to said sewer or sewer
system until such time as the sewer or sewer system is
immediately available to said property or properties.
(2) If the Authority shall elect to proceed under Subsection B(1)(b) of
this section and shall defer the assessment of the costs of outlet
benefits, owners of properties which are located in any area on
which such excess costs shall have been deferred shall be notified
of any proceedings instituted by the Authority for the actual
assessment of said excess costs upon such properties. No caveat or
lien shall be placed on the land records of the Town against any
property located in an area on which such excess costs have been
deferred until after the passage of a resolution by the Authority for
designing and constructing or extension of a sewer system into said
area which results in the sewer system's being then immediately
available to the aforesaid properties. Said deferred excess costs are
to be included as part of the assessments to be made because of such
extension against such properties.
C. Whenever the Authority shall determine that the cost of any sewer
for which a design is in progress or is planned for which a benefit
assessment is to be made shall include a portion of the cost of a sewer
previously constructed which was paid for, either in all or in part, by
the Town, said Authority shall determine the proportion of previously
deferred excess costs of such sewer which will benefit properties served
by the sewer being planned and shall include such costs in the cost
§ 193-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-13
1:219
of the sewer being designed, constructed or extended for the purpose
of determining the amount of the assessment to be levied against the
aforesaid properties; subject, however, to the rights of notice, hearing
appeal or such other right conveyed by this chapter or sections of the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut as may be applicable.
D. Whenever a sewer is to be designed and constructed by a developer
or owner in any area in which excess sewer costs have been deferred
as hereinbefore provided, such deferred costs shall be assessed against
said developer or owner in the same manner and form as assessments
are applied against all other assessable properties.
E. Nothing herein contained shall in any way be construed to change,
abridge, amend or in any way interfere with the application of the
General Statutes in reference to local sewer authorities, their duties,
powers and responsibilities.
§ 193-13 CROMWELL CODE § 193-13
1:220
ARTICLE V
Regulation of Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG)
[Added BOS 4-14-2010]
In an effort to curb sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) from grease
accumulation in its public sanitary sewer system, the CWPCA adopted, at
its public meeting on January 11, 2010, a Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG)
Program. Any nonresidential (excluding industrial) facility connected to the
public sanitary sewer system that is involved in the preparing or serving
of food will be subject to the conditions of this article and must come into
compliance within one year of adoption. The review of this article shall be
completed by the CWPCA at a minimum of once every 10 years from the
date of acceptance.
§ 193-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article (also referred to herein as the "FOG Article")
is to protect the environment by preventing raw sewage overflows and
backups into basements caused by grease hardening in sewer lines causing
blockages.
§ 193-15. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Sewer Administrator of the Town of Cromwell or
persons authorized by the CWPCA to approve FDPs, FHPs and grease trap
requirements.
AUTOMATIC GREASE RECOVERY UNIT (AGRU) — An indoor grease trap
(A trap may also be referred to as an interceptor.) that separates grease
from wastewater by active mechanical or electrical means. Such traps are
typically compact under-the-sink units and should be as far away as possible
from grease-bearing (cleaning) equipment like dishwashers, before exiting
the building. See definition of "grease trap."
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — The practices and procedures
of a facility designed to prevent or minimize environmental damage. BMPs
include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating
procedures, practices to control spillage or leaks, grease disposal, or
provide drainage from material storage.
CROMWELL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY (CWPCA) — The
CWPCA of the Town of Cromwell as created by a Special Town Meeting on
April 28, 1965, with all the powers, purposes and objectives as set forth in
Chapter 103 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958 and
amendments thereto.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG) — Any fats, oils and grease generated
from the food preparation process. All are sometimes referred to as
"grease" or "greases".
§ 193-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-15
1:221
FOG DISCHARGE PERMIT (FDP) — A permit issued by the CWPCA
authorizing the discharge of wastewater to the public sanitary sewer system
from a FPE.
FOOD PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENTS (FPE) — Establishments that
engage in cooking methods that have the potential to produce fats, oils
and grease, including facilities that are regulated by the local Health
Department and are classified as a Class III or Class IV food service
establishment (FSE), as defined by the State Health Code; or are regulated
by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection. These facilities
include, but are not limited to, restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school
kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs, prisons and commercial bakeries.
Industrial food processing facilities are not regulated by this article.
GREASE DISPOSAL FACILITY (GDF) — A regional collection/transfer/
disposal site approved in accordance with the law for the disposal of FOG.
This means a Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)45 approved
publicly/privately owned treatment works that is for the separation and
disposal of FOG by incineration or other methods. Pursuant to Section
22a-174-33 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies related to Title
V source, an in-state regional incinerator must have an operating permit
that lists FOG as a source of fuel.
GREASE TRAP — The term "grease trap" is used collectively to mean both
AGRUs and outdoor grease traps.
HAULER — Any person that collects the contents of a grease trap and
transports it to a grease disposal facility. A hauler may also provide other
services to food preparation establishments related to trap maintenance.
INDOOR TRAP — An AGRU. See definition of "grease trap."
INSPECTOR — The person or persons duly authorized by the CWPCA to
inspect and approve all grease traps and grease BMPs at food preparation
establishments discharging to the public sanitary sewer system.
MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY — The design features of a grease trap
and its ability or capacity required to effectively intercept and retain grease
from grease-laden wastewaters discharged into the public sanitary sewer
system.
OUTDOOR GREASE TRAP — A structure or device designed for the purpose
of removing and preventing FOG from entering the public sanitary sewer
system. These devices are often below-ground units built as two-or-threechamber
baffled tanks. Traps shall have at least one inspection hatch at
grade per chamber to facilitate inspection, cleaning and maintenance by a
hauler. See definition of "grease trap."
PERMITTEE — The permittee represents the FPE and is authorized by the
issuance of a FDP to initiate, create, originate or maintain a wastewater
discharge from the FPE. The permittee shall be the same individual who
holds the food service license for the facility.
45.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP).
§ 193-15 CROMWELL CODE § 193-15
1:222
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, society, corporation or group.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by a public
authority. Includes the main pipe, manholes and other structures and
equipment appurtenant thereto controlled and maintained by the CWPCA
for the conveyance of sanitary sewage.
RENDERABLE GREASE — The uncontaminated fats, oils and grease from
the food preparation process that can be used as a source of material that
is free of impurities and can be recycled into products such as animal feed
or cosmetics.
USER — Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional
limits of the Town of Cromwell, who causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into sanitary sewers within the Town's boundaries,
including entities that contribute such wastewater from mobile sources,
such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
§ 193-16. Objectives; applicability.
A. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into the
Town of Cromwell's public sanitary sewer system.
(2) To prevent clogging or blockage of the Town of Cromwell's public
sanitary sewer system due to grease build-up causing sewage to
back up and flood streets, residences and commercial buildings,
resulting in potential liability to the CWPCA.
(3) To implement a procedure to recover the cost incurred from cleaning
and maintaining sewer lines due to improper grease removal.
(4) To implement a procedure to recover costs for any liability incurred
by the CWPCA for damage caused by grease blockages resulting in
the flooding of streets, residences or commercial buildings.
(5) To issue FOG discharge permits (FDPs) to food preparation
establishments (FPEs) requiring maintenance, monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities.
(6) To establish administrative procedures and reporting requirements.
(7) To establish permit fees for the recovery of costs resulting from this
FOG Article.
(8) To establish enforcement procedures for violations of any part or
requirement of this article.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing FPEs
and future FPEs located within the Town of Cromwell and to all haulers
as defined in this article.
§ 193-17. Food preparation establishment (FPE) permitting
program; effective date of modifications.
All licensed FPEs discharging wastewater to the public sanitary sewer
system are subject to the following requirements.
A. Permitting.
§ 193-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-17
1:223
(1) All FPE permittees shall be required to apply for and obtain a
"FOG discharge permit" (FDP) from the CWPCA. The CWPCA shall
approve or deny all applications for the FDPs in accordance with
the policies and regulations established in this article. The FDP shall
be in addition to any other permits, registrations, or occupational
licenses, which may be required by federal, state or local law. It shall
be a violation of this article for any FPE identified by the CWPCA to
discharge wastewater containing fats, oils, and grease to the public
sanitary sewer system without a current FDP.
(2) Following the initial enactment of this FOG Article, any modification
to this FOG Article shall become effective on January 1 of the year
following enactment of such modification, but in no case shall a
modification of the FOG become effective less than 60 days from
adoption of such modification.
B. Application form. The CWPCA shall provide an application form for a
FDP to all FPEs. All FPEs shall obtain an FDP. All existing FPEs shall
submit a completed application form within 30 days of receipt of the
form or prior to the expiration of their valid FDP. New FPEs shall obtain
a FDP prior to issuance of a food service license. Each application form
submitted shall include the following information.
(1) Contact information.
(2) A drawing in sufficient detail to show the location of all kitchen
equipment that produces or discharges wastewater, including sinks,
dishwashers, floor drains, grease traps, sanitary sewer connections
and appurtenances in the user's premises if known or readily
available.
(3) Hours of facility operation.
(4) For existing FPEs, documentation of all grease trap maintenance
within the past year.
(5) A signed statement by the permittee or by the duly authorized
representative of the permittee that the information or report is
accurate, and that the applicant agrees to abide by the regulations
contained in this article, as well as all applicable federal or state
laws, including any applicable regulations.
C. Application procedure. Filing of a completed application form with fee
will initiate the review process that consists of confirming the
information supplied on the application and inspection of the facility to
ensure compliance with this article. Pre-permit inspections shall occur
not more than 45 days from the date of application. Reinspections shall
occur not more than 45 days from the date of the last inspection that
the facility was found to be in noncompliance. A written report shall be
supplied to the FPE detailing the compliance status and any required
action. If more than two application inspections are required to bring
a facility into compliance, an additional fee as provided for in § 193-21
and Attachment A46 shall be charged for each additional inspection. A
FOG discharge permit shall be issued to the permittee within 14 days of
verification of compliance with this article.
46.Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 193-17 CROMWELL CODE § 193-17
1:224
D. FOG discharge permit (FDP).
(1) Each FDP shall be effective for a one-year period and shall have an
effective expiration and renewal date.
(2) The FDP must be displayed in a prominent location where staff can
see it and a copy kept in the records file.
(3) A FDP shall not be transferred or sold to a new owner. A new owner
is required to apply to the CWPCA for a new FDP.
(4) An application for renewal of a FDP and the fees as provided for in
§ 193-21 shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to expiration of an
existing FDP. Failure to maintain a valid FDP shall be a violation of
this article.
(5) The terms and conditions of the permit are subject to modification
by the CWPCA during the term of the permit. If due to changes in
this article, modifications to a facility are required in order to remain
in compliance, the permittee shall be informed at least 60 days prior
to the effective date of the new requirement or 60 days prior to the
expiration date of the existing permit.
E. Entry. Each FPE shall allow the inspectors of the CWPCA, bearing
proper identification, access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records
examination, measurements, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this article. The refusal of any FPE to allow the
inspector official entry for purposes of inspection or performing such
other duties as shall be required shall constitute a violation of this
article. The CWPCA may pursue legal action as provided for in § 193-23
as may be advisable and reasonably necessary for inspectors to carry
out their duties.
F. Inspection. All FPEs shall be inspected as follows:
(1) Pre-permit inspections. Shall be conducted by the inspector as
established in this section.
(2) Inspections. The inspector shall inspect the FPE on an unscheduled
basis after a FDP has been issued to confirm compliance with the
requirements of this article. All FPEs with a current FDP shall be
inspected. Inspections shall include all equipment, food processing,
cleanup and storage areas and shall include any area that produces
wastewater discharge to the grease trap. The inspector shall also
inspect the grease trap maintenance logbook and file, other
pertinent data to the grease trap and may check the level of the
trap contents and/or take samples/measurements as necessary. The
inspector shall record all observations in a written report. Any
deficiencies as provided in § 193-20 of this article shall be noted.
G. Reinspections. The CWPCA will reinspect the FPE which receives
deficiency notices a minimum of 30 days after original inspection and
will provide written notice of compliance or noncompliance as the case
may be. In the event of continuing noncompliance, successive
reinspections shall be scheduled and appropriate fees as established in
§ 193-21 shall be charged to the FPE concerned.
H. Violation reporting.
§ 193-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-17
1:225
(1) A permittee shall immediately notify the CWPCA by telephone upon
learning or having reason to believe that a discharge may cause a
sewer blockage or adversely affect the public sanitary sewers and
initiate corrective action to prevent further violations.
(2) The permittee shall report, in writing, such violation and corrective
actions taken to the CWPCA within five days of the permittee
learning of such violation. Failure to report may result in a fine
pursuant to § 193-23.
§ 193-18. FOG Hauling Regulation Program.
(Reserved)
§ 193-19. Wastewater discharge limitations.
A. No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from a grease
trap, or alternative pretreatment technology to exceed 100 milligrams
per liter. All analyses shall be conducted according to the current
method as listed in 40 CFR 136 or as approved in writing by the CWPCA.
All costs associated with testing are the responsibility of the FPE.
B. Traps must remove an average of 90% of grease and other extractable
matter.
§ 193-20. Outdoor grease trap requirements.
Requirements: All FPEs are required to have an outdoor grease trap or
inside AGRU. The requirements in this article are in addition to any
applicable requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP)47 General Permit for the Discharge of Wastewater Associated with
Food Preparation Establishments, International Plumbing Code and the
Plumbing and Drainage Institute (PDI) as adopted by the office of the State
Building Inspector.
A. New establishments. On or after the effective date of this article, FPEs which are
newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or
renovated to include an FPE, shall be required to install, operate and maintain
an outdoor grease trap according to the requirements established in Subsection
D, with the exception of those establishments where inadequate space is available
for the installation of an outdoor grease trap or who receive a variance of such
requirement from the CWPCA, in its sole discretion.
B. Existing establishments.
(1) All FPEs existing within the Town of Cromwell prior to the effective date of this
article shall submit an application and obtain a permit to operate and maintain
existing outdoor grease traps, provided they meet the requirements. Indoor
passive grease traps shall be replaced with an outdoor grease trap or AGRU
as determined by the CWPCA. The requirements for outdoor grease traps and
AGRUs shall meet the requirements as established in §§ 193-17 and 193-20.
(2) On or after the effective date of this article, the CWPCA may require an existing
FPE to install, operate and maintain a new grease trap that complies with the
requirements of this article or to modify any noncompliant plumbing or existing
47.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP).
§ 193-17 CROMWELL CODE § 193-20
1:226
trap within 30 days of written notification by the CWPCA when any of the
following conditions exist:
(a) The establishment is found to be contributing grease, in quantities to cause
line stoppages, or increasing maintenance on the public sanitary sewer
system.
(b) The establishment does not have a grease trap.
(c) The establishment has an undersized, irreparable, or defective grease trap
(d) The existing establishment is sold or undergoes a change of ownership.
(e) Remodeling of a kitchen, which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by
the Town of Cromwell.
(f) The establishment has not operated as an FPE for one year prior to
receiving the FDP application form.
C. Variance from outdoor grease trap requirements. An AGRU may only be installed
when authorized by the CWPCA, in its sole discretion, after the FPE has sufficiently
demonstrated to the CWPCA that the installation of an outdoor grease trap would
not be feasible due to space constraints or other relevant considerations. The FPE
shall request a variance in writing, which shall contain the following information:
contact information, location of sewer main and easement; and existing plumbing
drawing, reason or circumstance that the variance is being requested.
D. Outdoor grease trap. Outdoor grease traps shall be installed in all FPEs except
where a variance was approved by the CWPCA as described in Subsection C. All
new and existing outdoor grease traps shall meet the following criteria:
(1) Trap design and location. Outdoor grease traps shall have a minimum of compartments and shall be capable of separation and retention of grease and storage
of settled solids. Access manholes with a minimum diameter of 24 inches shall provided over each trap chamber and sanitary tee. The manhole shall also have readily
removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling
activities. The invert elevation of the inlet shall be between three inches and six inches
above the invert elevation of the outlet. The trap shall be designed, constructed installed for adequate load-bearing capacity. Flow control devices shall be installed
where flow through the trap may exceed the manufacturer's flow ratings.
(2) Trap capacity. Minimum capacity of any one unit shall be 1,000 gallons as required a maximum of 1,500 gallons. Where sufficient capacity cannot be achieved with a single
unit, installation of grease traps in series is required. The CWPCA shall approve grease trap based on manufacturer's maximum flow capacity.
(3) Trap sizing. At a minimum, the trap shall hold discharges equivalent to maximum
flows over a twenty-four-hour period. The minimum volume trap shall be based on following calculations:
(a) Patron-based method.
Fixed Number of Meals Served Water Usage1
Facility
Volume
(gallons per day)
Schools, per pupil 3
Residential camps2 per person 15
Hospital, nursing home, per bed 15
§ 193-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-20
1:227
Notes:
1Adopted from the Connecticut Health Code
2Residential camps: semi-permanent overnight accommodations
IV = MS x GM
Where: IV = Interceptor volume (outdoor grease trap)
MS = Number of meals served (maximum occupancy)
GM = Gallons used per meal from table above
(b) Patron-based method.
Varied Number of Meals Served per Day1
Facility
Volume
(gallons per meal)
Churches, per person 5
Restaurants and bars 5
Notes:
1Adopted from the Connecticut Health Code
IV = MS x GM = (S x LF x H/2) x GM
Where: IV = Interceptor volume (outdoor grease trap)
MS = Number of meals served
GM = Gallons per meal from table above
S = Seating capacity
LF = Loading factor
= 1.25 meal/seat hour for interstate highways
= 1.0 meal/seat hour for freeways, recreation areas
and fixed number of meals
= 0.8 meal/seat hour for main highways
= 0.5 meal/seat hour for other highways and side
streets
H = Hours in operation
(4) Pumping and maintenance. Each FPE shall be responsible for the cost of installing,
inspecting, pumping, cleaning and maintaining its outdoor grease trap. Outdoor grease
trap cleaning shall include complete removal of all contents, including scraping of
excessive solids from the walls, floors, baffles and all pipe work. It shall be the
responsibility of each FPE to inspect its outdoor grease trap during the pumping
operation to ensure proper cleaning and that all fittings and fixtures are functioning
properly.
§ 193-20 CROMWELL CODE § 193-20
1:228
(5) Outdoor trap pumping frequency. Each FPE shall have its outdoor grease trap(pumped whenever 25% of the operating depth of the outdoor grease trap is occupied grease and settled solids or a minimum of once every three months, whichever is more
frequent.
(6) Variance procedure. Written requests for pumping variances may be requested by FPE from the CWPCA, in writing. The FPE must provide documentation demonstrating
sufficient operating depth is available after three months' usage.
(7) Inspections. The inspector shall inspect grease traps as necessary to ensure compliance
with this article.
(8) Disposal. Renderable grease shall not be disposed of in any sewer, septic tank, grease trap. All renderable grease shall be stored in a separate, covered, leakproof,
renderable grease container, stored out of reach of vermin and collected by a renderer/
hauler. Wastes removed from outdoor grease traps shall be disposed of at a grease
disposal facility permitted by DEP.
(9) Recordkeeping. Each FPE shall maintain a logbook in which a record of all grease
trap maintenance is entered, including the date and time of the maintenance, repairs
required, a copy of the FOG discharge permit, records of inspection and log of pumping
activities. The file shall be available at all times for inspection and review by inspector.
E. Alternative grease removal devices. The CWPCA, in its sole discretion, may approve
these types of devices, depending on manufacturer's specifications and verified
operations on a case-by-case basis. Alternative devices such as AGRUs shall be
subject to written approval based on a demonstration prior to installation.
(1) Indoor AGRU. AGRUs shall be prohibited for new FPEs, except for those
establishments where inadequate space is available for the installation of an
outdoor grease trap or at the discretion of the CWPCA. Wastewater in excess of
140° F. shall not be discharged into any grease trap.
(2) AGRU design. All AGRUs shall be designed and installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications and sized to properly pretreat the measured
or calculated flows for all connected fixtures or drains. Traps shall have a
removable lid on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning and
maintenance.
(3) Flow-control device. AGRUs shall be equipped with a device to control the rate
of flow through the unit and shall not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity.
(4) Cleaning and maintenance. Each FPE shall be solely responsible for the cost
of the AGRU installation, cleaning and maintenance. The AGRU shall include
a skimming device, automatic draw-off, or other mechanical means to
automatically separate fats and oils from the wastewater, using a timer or level
controller. This AGRU shall be connected to the electrical circuit by either
hardwire, or cord and plug. The AGRU shall operate no less than once per day.
Enzymes, solvents or emulsifiers shall not be used.
F. Other approved unit. If the permittee requests the use of a unit other than an
outdoor grease trap or an AGRU, the permittee must demonstrate to the CWPCA
that the proposed unit can reliably meet the effluent limitations established in
this article. Only after receiving approval by the CWPCA will the permittee be
authorized to install the proposed unit.
G. De minimis discharges. At the request of the permittee, the CWPCA may grant a
variance of the treatment requirements of this article, if, in the judgment of the
CWPCA, there is limited potential for grease in the discharge. This judgment shall
§ 193-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-20
1:229
be based on the frequency of operation; the volume of flow; and the potential for
grease, based upon the menu; and similar items. Any change to the conditions of
the variance must be reported to the CWPCA for review within 30 days.
§ 193-21. Fees and billing.
A. The fees provided for in this article are separate and distinct from all
other fees chargeable by the CWPCA. All invoiced fees pursuant to this
article shall become immediately due and owed upon receipt of invoice,
and shall become delinquent if not fully paid within 30 days after receipt.
Any delinquent amount shall be subject to the late fee of $25 per month.
B. A copy of the CWPCA's current fees applicable to all applications,
permits, reinspections, and administrative orders pursuant to this article
shall be kept on file and available for public inspection at the office of
the CWPCA.
§ 193-22. Appeal of permit denial or revocation.
Any denial or revocation of a permit pursuant to this article may be
appealed to the CWPCA. The permit applicant or permittee shall have 15
days from date of notification of the permit denial or revocation to submit
a written request for a hearing before the CWPCA. Failure to file an appeal
constitutes acceptance of the decision to deny or revoke the permit and any
conditions thereof. The CWPCA shall conduct a public hearing and decide
within 60 days from receipt of appeal, whether or not to grant the permit.
The decision of the CWPCA shall be final.
§ 193-23. Legal proceedings; violations and penalties.
A. Search warrant. The CWPCA, through the Town Attorney, may seek to
obtain a search warrant from the appropriate authority to gain access to
a FPE's facility for the purposes of verification of compliance inspection
and monitoring as provided for under § 193-17E if such lawful entry has
previously been denied by the FPE.
B. Citation to Superior Court. Notwithstanding any of the above, the
CWPCA may cite any user to Superior Court for violation of any provision
of this article. A violation of any condition or requirement of a FDP or
FHP, or failure to obtain such a permit shall be deemed to be a violation
of this article.
C. Injunction and other relief. The Town Manager, acting with approval of
the Town Council and through the Town Attorney, may file a petition in
the name of the Town in Superior Court or such other courts as may have
jurisdiction seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages, or other
applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought to recover any and all
damages suffered by the CWPCA as a result of any action or inaction
of any person that causes or suffers damage to occur to the CWPCA
sanitary sewer system. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
D. Violations. Any person found to have violated any provision of this
article, or any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this article,
shall be liable for civil fine or penalty provided by § 22a-430 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Each separate violation shall
§ 193-20 CROMWELL CODE § 193-23
1:230
constitute a separate offense, and for continuing violations, each day's
continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Town may
recover attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found
to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder.
§ 193-24. Administrative enforcement and abatement.
FOG discharge permit enforcement. Enforcement actions against FPEs in
violation of this article shall be according to the following process:
A. Notice of violation. A notice of violation (NOV) shall be issued to a FPE
for any one or more of the following violations.
(1) Failure to properly maintain the grease trap in accordance with the
provisions of the article.
(2) Failure to report changes in operations per § 193-20A and B.
(3) Failure to report an unauthorized grease discharge per § 193-17H.
(4) Failure to maintain grease records including documentation of
pumping activities, keep copies of manifest forms or receipts on site
at all times.
(5) Failure to provide access for trap cleaning, inspection or monitoring
activities.
(6) Failure to obtain or renew a FDP in a timely manner.
(7) Any other failure to comply with the requirements of this article or
conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this article.
B. Notice of violation response.
(1) If the inspector records any deficiencies during an inspection, the
inspector will provide a written notice to the FPE with instructions to
correct the deficiency within 30 days of such notice, and a tentative
date for reinspection.
(2) Any FPE issued a NOV shall respond to the CWPCA in writing within
15 days of receipt of the NOV describing how the noncompliance
occurred and what steps will be taken to prevent the reoccurrence
of the noncompliance.
(3) If a FPE violates or continues to violate the provisions set forth in
this article or fails to initiate/complete corrective action in response
to a NOV, the CWPCA may pursue one or more of the following
options:
(a) Contract with a hauler to pump the grease trap and bill the
appropriate charge to the FPE concerned.
(b) Impose an administrative order fee as per § 193-21 and
Attachment A.48
(c) Refer to other appropriate enforcement agencies for further
action.
C. Permit revocation. Any FDP issued under the provisions of this article is
subject to be modified, suspended or revoked in whole or in part during
48.Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 193-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-24
1:231
its term for cause shown, including, but not limited to, any one of the
following:
(1) Falsification of any information submitted as part of the application
for the FDP.
(2) Failure to comply with the requirements or regulations concerning
discharges to the CWPCA sanitary sewer system.
(3) Failure to comply with the requirements or regulations concerning
grease traps in this article.
(4) Failure to pay required fees, or penalties in a timely manner.
(5) Failure to attend required BMP training courses if required by
CWPCA.
(6) When necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of
the Town of Cromwell.
D. Best management practice training. All FPEs that receive notices of
violation or administrative orders may be required to send both
managerial and other staff to an approved training session regarding
FOG BMPs. All costs associated with the training are the responsibility
of the FPE.
E. Administrative order. The CWPCA may enter into consent agreements,
compliance agreements, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user, or other
person responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include
specific actions to be taken to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall be judicially
enforceable. They include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Required corrective actions including, but not limited to, submittal
of records for trap maintenance, immediate pump-out of the trap, or
establishment of an ongoing contract with a hauler.
(2) Requirements for submittal of plans or upgrade of grease traps,
including time frames for preparation of plans, acquisitions of
necessary equipment, initiation of construction (including time for
permit approval, where required), completion of construction, and
date for achievement of final compliance with the provisions of the
administrative order and of this article.
(3) Payment of the administrative order fee.
F. Recovery of costs. When a discharge causes any obstruction, damage or
any other impairment to the public sanitary sewer system or any expense
of whatever character or nature to the CWPCA, the CWPCA shall assess
the expenses incurred to clear the obstruction, repair damage to the
system, and any other expenses or damage of any kind or nature suffered
by the Town as a result thereof. The CWPCA may file a claim with
the user or other person that caused the obstruction, damage or other
impairment for recovery of such cost including any collection costs. If
the claim is ignored or denied, the CWPCA shall notify the Town Attorney
to take such measures as shall be appropriate to recover any expense or
to correct other damages suffered by the Town.
G. Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies for this article are not exclusive.
The CWPCA may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against any person violating this article.
§ 193-24 CROMWELL CODE § 193-24
1:232
Chapter 200
STORMWATER DISCHARGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 193. Aquifer protection — See Ch. 231.
§ 200-1. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of Cromwell through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Town's storm drainage
system (MS4) in order to comply with the requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drainage system
through stormwater discharges by any user.
B. Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the storm drainage system.
C. Establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, surveillance,
enforcement and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
§ 200-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms below shall have the following
meaning:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Town of Cromwell Town
Manager and/or his or her designee.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance
of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
§ 193-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-2
1:233
FACILITY — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
HEARING OFFICER — The person designated from time to time by the
Town Manager to hear appeals in accordance with § 200-15 herein.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system unless exempt pursuant to § 200-7 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection includes the following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
A provision of the Clean Water Act that prohibits discharge of pollutants into
waters of the United States unless by a stormwater discharge permit.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization partnership, firm,
corporation, or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the
owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything that causes or contributes to pollution of the
environment. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter,
or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations,
so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency; and/or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
§ 200-2 CROMWELL CODE § 200-2
1:234
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure;
and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PZC — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Cromwell,
Connecticut, including its Enforcement Officer, its agents and the Town
Engineer.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned premises by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping premises, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other
drainage structures and includes the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4).
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — Means a permit issued by EPA
[or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)]
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
TOWN MANAGER — The Cromwell Town Manager or his/her authorized
designee.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from premises.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
This includes but is not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, streams and any
other surface water defined as a watercourse by the Town's inland wetland
regulations.
§ 200-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by the Town Manager.
§ 200-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:235
§ 200-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Town Manager shall, in consultation with the Town Engineer,
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Town
Manager may delegate his/her powers and duties under this chapter to an
authorized designee.
§ 200-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
§ 200-6. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply
that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 200-7. Discharge and connection prohibitions.
A. Illegal discharges prohibited. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the storm drainage system any materials, including but
not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause
or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other
than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any
illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing
drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space pumps, air-conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or
wetland flows, swimming pools [if dechlorinated typically less than
one (1) PPM chlorine], firefighting activities, and any other water
source not containing pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Town Manager as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a written
notification to the Town Manager prior to the time of the test. Said
written notification may be in the form of electronic mail, facsimile
transmission or hard copy letter format.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
§ 200-4 CROMWELL CODE § 200-7
1:236
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge
to the storm drain system.
B. Illicit Connections Prohibited.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system, or
allows such a connection to continue.
§ 200-8. Suspension of (MS4) storm drainage system access.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Town
Manager may, without prior notice, suspend storm drainage system
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health
or welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage system or waters of the
United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the Town Manager may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm drainage
system or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the storm drainage system in violation of this chapter
may have his or her storm drainage system access terminated if such
termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Town
Manager will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its storm
drainage system access. The violator may petition the Town Manager for
reconsideration and hearing.
C. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates storm drainage
system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without
the prior approval of the Town Manager.
§ 200-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Town Manager prior to the allowing of discharges to the
storm drainage system.
§ 200-10. Right of entry, evaluation, and monitoring of damages.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial or construction activity, and any
§ 200-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-10
1:237
other commercial or residential facilities that discharge stormwater to
the storm drainage system.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Town Manager shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary
to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives or
designees of the Town Manager.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Town Manager ready access to
all parts of the facility for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of a Town, state or federal NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
(3) The Town Manager shall have the right to install on any NPDES
permitted facilities such devices as are necessary in the opinion of
the Town Manager to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The Town Manager has the right to require the installation of
sampling and monitoring equipment on any NPDES permitted
facility by the discharger at its own expense. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Town
Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town Manager access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit
and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with
a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity commits an offense if the person denies the Town Manager
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
(7) If the Town Manager has been refused access to any part of the
facility from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation
of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to
verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder,
or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the Town Manager may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 200-10 CROMWELL CODE § 200-10
1:238
(8) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in Subsections B(1) through (5) of this section, the Town Manager
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the facility.
§ 200-11. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of best management practices.
The Town Manager will adopt requirements identifying best management
practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage
system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the storm drainage system or watercourses through
the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for a property or facility which is, or may be, the source of an
illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's expense,
additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the storm drainage system as directed by the
Town Manager. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
or construction activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of
a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance
with requirements of the NPDES permit.
§ 200-12. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 200-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage
system, or water of the United States said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
§ 200-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-13
1:239
materials, said person shall notify the Town Manager in person or by phone,
electronic mail or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to the Town Manager within three business days of the phone notice.
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three
years.
§ 200-14. Enforcement.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) Whenever the Town Manager finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, he/
she shall order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of illicit discharges or connections;
(c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property; and
(e) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the Town Manager may order the
work be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor
and the violator fined an amount equal to the expense thereof in
addition to any fines imposed in Subsection B or C of this section.
B. Procedure for issuance of citations.
(1) The Town Manager shall issue a written notice to any person who
violates any provision of this chapter. No written notice may be
issued against the state or any state official or state employee acting
within the scope of his employment. Such written notice shall explain
the nature of the violation and the steps required for compliance,
and shall allow a seventy-two-hour period within which to correct
the violation or within which a written plan for correction shall be
submitted to the Town Manager, setting forth a reasonable time
period for correction of the violation as agreed upon by the Town
Manager. A written notice issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
served by hand delivery, at which time the seventy-two-hour period
shall begin; or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular first class mail. Three business days shall be allowed for mail
delivery of the notice prior to the commencement of the seventy-twohour
period.
§ 200-13 CROMWELL CODE § 200-14
1:240
(2) Within two business days after the period for correction established
in Subsection A expires, the Town Manager shall reinspect the
subject property to determine compliance.
(3) If the violations set forth in the written notice have not been
corrected at the time of reinspection, the Town Manager, in his/her
capacity as chief executive officer, may issue a citation and fine of
up to $100 for each violation by hand, by certified return receipt
requested, by leaving a true and attested copy of the citation at the
usual place of abode or residence of the person in violation, or in
the case of a corporate or business entity, delivery to the business
address or the address of the statutory agent of said entity. No such
fine shall be levied against the state or any state official or state
employee acting within the scope of his employment. All citations
issued pursuant to this section shall state the violation for which
the citation is being issued, the fine imposed for the violation, the
time period within which the fine must be paid, and an address for
remittance of the fine.
C. Compliance periods after citation.
(1) Any violation for which a citation is issued and which is not corrected
within the time period specified in Subsection B of this section
shall be a new violation of this chapter, and every twenty-fourhour
period thereafter in which the violation is not corrected shall
constitute a new violation. The citation shall include a notice to the
alleged violator that each twenty-four-hour period of noncompliance
after the time period specified in § 200-14B shall constitute a new
violation and a new fine of up to $100.
(2) The Town Manager shall not be responsible for a daily reinspection.
Rather, the person to whom the citation has been issued shall be
responsible for reporting subsequent compliance by way of written
report to the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall reinspect
to confirm compliance within one business day of receipt of such
report.
D. Payment of fines.
(1) All fines imposed under this chapter which are uncontested shall be
made payable to the Town of Cromwell and shall be received by the
Town Manager within 14 calendar days from date of notice of the
citation. All fines collected by the Town Manager shall be deposited
into the Town of Cromwell General Fund.
§ 200-15. Appeals.
A. If the Town Manager issues a notice of violation, the Town Manager shall
send written notice of action and a statement of the right to an appeal to
the facility operator or facility owner.
B. The facility operator or facility owner may appeal a notice of violation to
the Town Manager by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal
within 10 calendar days after date of the notice of violation.
C. The facility operator or facility owner may appeal the decision of the
Town Manager to the hearing officer as follows:
§ 200-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-15
1:241
(1) The facility operator or facility owner may file a written request for a
review by paying an appeal fee of $25 and setting forth the reasons
for the appeal within 10 calendar days after the date of notification of
the decision from the Town Manager. Appeal fees shall be returned
to the appealing facility operator or facility owner if the appeal is
upheld.
(2) The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing not less than 15 or more
than 30 calendar days after the receipt of the request. The hearing
shall be informal in nature. The person requesting the hearing may
testify concerning the facts, circumstances and nature of his/her
appeal and may present supporting documentation. The hearing
officer shall render a written decision within 15 calendar days of the
hearing. The decision will affirm or reverse the decision of the Town
Manager.
D. Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the Town Manager
requiring payment of a surcharge until the hearing officer has completed
his review. However, an appeal shall not stay any action by the Town
Manager to halt an illegal discharge that is ongoing. If a request for
appeal is not made within the ten-calendar-day period, the action of the
Town Manager is final.
§ 200-16. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the Town Manager may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 200-17. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the Town Manager may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, watershed cleanup, or other related activities.
§ 200-18. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 200-19. Criminal prosecution of violations.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law.
§ 200-15 CROMWELL CODE § 200-20
1:242
§ 200-20. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the Town Manager to seek cumulative remedies. Moreover,
the Town Manager may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling
and monitoring expenses.
§ 200-21. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect 15 days after publication. All
prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are
hereby repealed.
Chapter 204
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Commission — See Ch. 60.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 130.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
§ 200-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-21
1:243

ARTICLE I
Construction and Acceptance Procedures
[Adopted BOS 4-12-1977]
§ 204-1. Promulgation of standards and specifications; scope.
A. The Town Council of the Town of Cromwell is hereby empowered to
adopt, promulgate and mandate road standards and specifications for
the following: [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
(1) Private roads which are to be submitted to the Town for acceptance
as Town roads.
(2) Private roads which are not submitted to the Town for acceptance as
Town roads but which connect to a Town or state road and are open
to the general public for use.
(3) Parking areas on private property which are open to the general
public for use.
B. Road standards and specifications shall be adopted in accordance with
§ 204-3 hereof and may be amended by the Town Council from time to
time in accordance with the procedures set forth therein. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
C. The term "Town roads," as used herein, shall be deemed to include all
land and pavement within existing street lines; however, in the case of
roads where street lines have not been established, the Town road shall
be deemed to end at the edge of the existing pavement.
§ 204-2. Designation of administrative agent; powers and duties.
The Director of Public Works is hereby designated as administrative agent,
who shall have the powers and duties necessary to administer this article,
which shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
A. Receive and file maps, engineering plans and surveys submitted under
this article.
B. Conduct inspections of street construction, sewers, drains, sidewalks,
materials used therein and any other improvements buried thereunder
or associated therewith to ensure compliance with the terms of this
article.
C. Make recommendations to the Town Manager and the Town Council
regarding the road specifications and standards. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
D. Carry out such other duties as may be required of him by these
regulations, the Town Manager, or the Town Council. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
§ 204-3. Procedure for adoption of standards and specifications.
A. The Town Council shall publish a notice of its intent to act, in a
newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Cromwell, at least
seven days prior to adoption or amendment of road standards and
specifications. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
B. Copies of the road standards and specifications or any amendments
thereto shall be available in the office of the Town Clerk at least seven
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-3
1:245
days prior to a meeting of the Town Council, at which action thereon is
to be taken. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
C. Road standards and specifications adopted hereunder shall be effective
with respect to any road or street to be constructed after the effective
date of this article.
§ 204-4. Construction permit required; fee.
A. Prior to the start of construction of any road or parking area for which
road standards and specifications have been adopted hereunder, the
owner of the property upon which the road or parking area is to be
constructed shall make application to the administrative agent for a road
construction permit.
B. Application for a road construction permit shall be made upon a form
adopted by the administrative agent and shall be accompanied by the
information described in § 204-5 hereof and a permit fee of $25.
C. Prior to issuance of a road construction permit hereunder, the proposed
plans shall be referred by the administrative agent to the Planning
Commission, Zoning Commission, Cromwell Fire District and the Sewer
Commission for written comment and review.
D. The administrative agent shall have the authority to issue a road
construction permit upon review of the proposed plans and the
comments of the organizations to whom the plans have been referred.
E. The Town Council shall have the authority to enjoin construction of any
road for which a road construction permit is required and has not been
issued hereunder and to revoke a road construction permit which has
been issued and enjoin construction of a road upon a determination that
it is not being constructed in accordance with the proposed plans or with
the road standards and specifications applicable thereto. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
F. A road construction permit shall not be required with respect to roads
or parking facilities which are totally within a subdivision, approval of
which has been obtained from the Cromwell Planning Commission.
G. Any person receiving a road construction permit hereunder shall be
responsible for maintaining adequate police protection during
construction.
§ 204-5. Plans required.
Application to the administrative agent for a road construction permit,
pursuant to § 204-4 hereunder, shall be accompanied by engineering and
survey plans which conform to the following requirements:
A. Seven paper prints of the proposed road plans, which have a scale of one
inch equals 40 feet and are sealed by a Connecticut licensed professional
engineer certifying that the proposed plans are in compliance with
the road standards and specifications adopted by the Town Council.
[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
B. Said proposed plans shall show details of road design, including both
horizontal and vertical alignment; utilities; drainage systems, including
the design and location of all structures and pipes; sewage disposal and/
§ 204-3 CROMWELL CODE § 204-5
1:246
or water systems, if applicable; and such other details required by the
road standards and specifications adopted hereunder.
C. Plans shall be adopted to standard plan and/or profile paper, having a
sheet size not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches.
D. The proposed plans shall contain a certification by a Connecticut
licensed surveyor that the boundaries of the property within which
construction is to take place and the street lines have been established.
§ 204-6. Road acceptance procedure; maintenance bond.
A. Upon completion of a road in compliance with road standards and
specifications in effect at the time of its construction or in compliance
with an approval granted by the Cromwell Planning Commission, a
written application may be filed with the Town Manager for acceptance
by the Town Council of the road as a Town road. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
B. Prior to acceptance by the Town of Cromwell of any road, it shall be
the obligation of the owner of the property upon which the road has
been constructed to maintain the road, keep it in passable condition
at all times and provide for the removal of snow, ice and any other
obstructions.
C. Roads which are transferred to the Town of Cromwell, for nominal
consideration recited in the deed, may be accepted as Town roads by
action of the Town Council. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
D. Roads for which more than a nominal consideration is to be paid by the
Town of Cromwell may be accepted as Town roads by action of the Town
Meeting, as required by Section C603(e) of the Charter.49
E. Applications for road acceptance shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) A letter from the administrative agent or the Planning Commission
certifying that the road satisfies the applicable road standards and
specifications and all public improvements have been completed.
(2) A preliminary certificate of title showing any encumbrances on the
property proposed to be conveyed to the Town and showing that all
necessary drainage easements have been obtained.
(3) A draft of the deed by which the applicant proposes to convey title to
the roads to the Town of Cromwell.
(4) A maintenance bond, either in cash or written upon a surety
company licensed to do business in the State of Connecticut, in an
amount determined by the administrative agent sufficient to secure
to the Town the full maintenance of the road, excluding snow
removal service, effective for a term of a minimum of one year from
the date of acceptance.50
§ 204-7. Maintenance of road; release of bond.
49.Editor's Note: See now the current Charter, included at the beginning of the Cromwell
Town Code.
50.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, requiring street and drainage construction and
acceptance before issuance of a building permit, which immediately followed this
subsection, added BOS 9-19-1980, was repealed BOS 5-19-1993.
§ 204-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-7
1:247
A. After acceptance of a road by the Town of Cromwell, the owner of the
property shall, when notified by the administrative agent and within
a time period set by said administrative agent, at the sole expense
of said owner, repair all failures in the construction and operation of
roads, drainage structures, appurtenances, bridges and other public
improvements as may occur during the maintenance period established
by the administrative agent, pursuant to § 204-6E(4) hereof.
B. Said owner shall similarly repair all defects, settlements and
irregularities of the structures and appurtenances of drains, pipes,
mains, conduits, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, road surfacing, turf
establishment or of any other defective conditions in the road or rightof-
way occurring or detected during the maintenance period.
C. In the event that the owner fails to remedy any such defects within the
time period set, the Town Manager may, with approval from the Town
Council and without prejudice to any other remedy, cause the required
repairs to be made and bill the owner for the cost of the work involved.
[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
D. If the owner does not pay said bill, in full, within 30 days from the date
the work is completed, the Town Council may require that the bill be paid
from the maintenance bond, posted in accordance with § 204-6 hereof,
together with any costs of placing said work to bid and attorneys' fees
and other costs of collection. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
E. Upon termination of the maintenance period, the owner may make
application to the Town Council for release of the maintenance bond.
The Town Council may release said bond upon receipt of a letter from
the administrative agent certifying that the roads are in good condition,
reasonable wear and tear excepted. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
§ 204-8. Permit required to alter Town roads; fee.
A. Before any person, company, utility or agency, public or private, shall dig
in the paved surface of a Town road or shall alter, excavate or fill in a
Town road, they shall obtain a digging permit in accordance with this
section. The provisions of this section shall include any activity, including
driveway construction, which takes place within a Town right-of-way.
B. Digging permits may be issued by the Director of Public Works.
C. The fee for a digging permit shall be $10, which shall be waived for any
agency of the Town of Cromwell and for the Cromwell Fire District.
D. Any person receiving a digging permit shall be required, upon
completion of any work therein, to repair and resurface the Town road
in accordance with road standards and specifications currently in force.
E. Before receiving a digging permit, the applicant shall be required to post
a bond in favor of the Town of Cromwell, in an amount and for a term
to be determined by the Director of Public Works, to insure that the
requirements of Subsection D hereof are carried out.
F. In the event of an emergency, activities regulated by this section may
be conducted without a permit so long as the administrative agent is
notified of the activity conducted and the nature of the emergency no
later than the next business day following the activity.
§ 204-7 CROMWELL CODE § 204-9
1:248
§ 204-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more
than $100 for each offense.
§ 204-10. Maintenance of private roads.
All private roads in the Town of Cromwell which are open to use by the
general public shall be maintained by the owner in a passable condition, in
good maintenance and free of ice, snow and debris.
§ 204-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-10
1:249

ARTICLE II
Standards and Specifications
[Adopted STM 3-1-1970]
§ 204-11. Scope. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The following shall be considered a minimum standard. The Town reserves
the right to add to or elaborate on these requirements at the discretion of
its Town Council.
§ 204-12. Submission of plans required before initiation of work.
[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Before initiation of work, the applicant or developer shall submit a suitable
plan of the proposed development showing all proposed roads or streets,
established boundaries and, if dead-end streets, their proposed turnaround
or rotary at the dead end of the street, their proposed finished profile grades
and details of the proposed drainage system, including, all rights necessary
for complete installation of such drainage system, also including proposed
areas for four-foot sidewalks and utility service installations. These plans
shall be of a permanent type, on a size of sheet and drawn to scale approved
by the Town Council, and if such road or street is accepted, all plans or maps
and rights-of-way then become the property of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 204-13. General specifications.
Proposed roads or streets shall conform with the following general
requirements:
A. Right-of-way. A minimum width of 50 linear feet will be required.
B. Boundaries. Merestones, of a type approved by the Town Council, shall
be set at the point of curvature (PC) and at the point of tangency (PT) of
all curves and angle points in street lines. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
C. All roads to be presented to the Town for acceptance must connect with
existing public highways now in use.
D. Width of pavement. A minimum width of 28 linear feet shall be
constructed between the limits of the right-of-way. Banks are to be
sloped 4:1.
E. Construction of new road.
(1) Type of pavement. All new roads to be constructed by any
development group or contractor will be required, after the street or
road has been made ready for surface treatment, to have a binder
course of two inches of bituminous concrete binder and 1 1/2 inches
of surface course material, Grade II, rolled with a five-ton roller of a
minimum weight.
(2) Subgrade. All unsuitable material encountered in cuts shall be
removed to a depth of one foot below subgrade. The area so
excavated shall be backfilled with gravel of a quality satisfactory to
the Town Council. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
(3) Embankments. Embankments shall be constructed of earth or a
mixture of earth and rock deposited in successive layers for the
§ 204-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-13
1:251
full width of the embankment. In no case shall stumps, trees, sod,
wood or material which will not compact be placed in embankments.
Before placing the base material the subgrade shall be shaped so
that it is parallel to and the specified depth below the approved
finished surface.
(4) Base materials used to make ready for surface treatment.
(a) Gravel: coarse processed aggregate broken traprock.
(b) This gravel shall be a minimum of 12 inches in thickness after
compaction, constructed on the prepared subgrade with the
approved lines and grades.
(5) Drainage. A complete drainage system shall be installed to provide
for the natural drainage throughout the area of development and for
drainage conditions created by the construction of the road or street.
All pipes installed shall be of a size that will be sufficient to carry
the volume of water for which it is intended. All drainage pipes and
structures (catch basins, manholes and end walls) shall be of a type
consistent with standards established by the Town and shown in the
proposed plans.
(6) Curbing. Curbing shall be required to be five inches or six inches in
height with an eight-inch or nine-inch base.
(7) Trees and shrubs must be planted far enough back from the curbline
to allow for the construction of sidewalks.
F. Streetlights. Electric lights of 2,500 lumen power shall be placed on
every other pole along a street or road with four-thousand-lumen-power
lights at all intersections.
G. Street signs. All streets must be named and street markers of baked
enamel with letters four inches tall placed at all intersections.
§ 204-13 CROMWELL CODE § 204-13
1:252
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted BOS 6-10-199251]
§ 204-14. Program to repair or replace.
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to establish a program
to repair or replace all sidewalks which, in his opinion, in accordance with
details and specifications prescribed by the Department of Public Works,
are of such a condition that they warrant repair or replacement and to seek
sufficient appropriations to fund said program.
§ 204-15. Notice to property owner; appeals.
Whenever the Director of Public Works determines that any sidewalk is
in need of repair or replacement to make it safe for public travel, and
verifies that sufficient funding is available, he shall notify the adjacent
landowner that the Town will undertake the necessary work and that an
assessment will be made in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
hand-delivered to the owner of any property to be affected thereby at
such owner's address as shown in the last completed Grand List of the
municipality or at any later address of which the Director of Public Works
may have knowledge and shall include a description of the work and an
estimate of the cost of work to be assessed against the landowner. Any
owner of land who is aggrieved by any notice made in accordance with
the above may petition the Town Manager for rescission or modification of
the aforesaid notice. Such appeal shall be in writing and must be received
by the Town Manager within 10 calendar days after the notice has been
mailed by the Director of Public Works. If no such appeal is made or if such
appeal shall be denied, the Director of Public Works shall have the defective
sidewalks corrected.
§ 204-15.1. Assessment of costs.
A. At the conclusion of such installation, the Director of Public Works shall
calculate the total cost of the installation and the cost to be assessed
against each property owner. The cost for sidewalk construction shall
be calculated as the total cost of all work associated with replacing
the sidewalk abutting the property. The cost shall be assessed upon the
adjoining property as follows:
(1) Costs associated with damage by trees located within the Town rightof-
way shall be borne wholly by the Town.
(2) Costs associated with damage caused by surface water runoff within
the public right-of-way shall be borne wholly by the Town.
(3) Costs associated with damage caused by surface water runoff from
the adjoining property shall be borne wholly by the property owner.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Sidewalk Maintenance, adopted
BOS 9-9-1980.
§ 204-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-15.1
1:253
(4) Costs associated with damage which, in the opinion of the Director
of Public Works, are caused by vehicles making deliveries to the
property or by other action of the property owner shall be borne
wholly by the property owner.
(5) Costs associated with the replacement of driveway aprons shall be
borne wholly by the property owner.
(6) Costs associated with the replacement of handicapped ramps shall
be borne wholly by the Town.
(7) Costs associated with the reconstruction of sidewalks in order to
modify or revise the alignment, location, elevation, width or crosssection
of said sidewalks shall be borne wholly by the Town.
B. A lot with frontage on more than one street shall be assessed for the
frontage along only one street. The assessment shall be computed for
that street which results in the greatest assessment.
C. Assessments shall be computed in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1) Total cost less than $200: no assessment.
(2) Total cost more than $200: assessment equal to 1/2 of all costs over
$200.
D. After the Director of Public Works has computed the cost of such
assessment, he shall deliver or mail to the owner of the abutting
property a bill for said assessment.
§ 204-15.2. Payment of costs.
A. The owner of any lands so assessed shall pay such assessment within 30
days from the date of notice of such assessment; provided, however, that
if the assessment shall exceed the sum of $200, he may notify the Tax
Collector within that time of his election to pay the amount so assessed
in installments as follows: in annual payments including interest at the
rate of 9% per annum for a period not exceeding 10 years from the date
of notice of such assessment.
B. All assessments and/or installment payments unpaid after 30 days from
the due date shall be delinquent and shall be subject to interest from
such due date at the interest rate and in the manner provided by the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut for delinquent property
taxes.
C. If the property owner elects to pay the assessment by the installment
plan or otherwise fails to pay said assessment within 30 days from
the date of notice of assessment, then said assessment shall be a lien
upon the premises adjoining such sidewalk, provided that the Director of
Public Works and/or Tax Collector shall cause a certificate of lien to be
recorded in the Town Clerk's office within 60 days from the date of such
notice.
§ 204-15.3. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt
from time to time such reasonable rules, regulations and specifications
for the repair, replacement or construction of sidewalks, driveway aprons,
curbs and handicapped ramps as may be in the best interest of the Town.
§ 204-15.1 CROMWELL CODE § 204-15.4
1:254
§ 204-15.4. Permits required.
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, repair, replace or otherwise
perform any work on any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or handicapped
ramp within the public highways and streets of the Town of Cromwell which
work may be described by the Director of Public Works in accordance with
§ 204-15.3 of this article unless such person, firm or corporation shall have
obtained from the Director of Public Works a permit to do such work.
§ 204-15.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-15.4
1:255

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice on Sidewalks
[Adopted BOS 6-8-1988]
§ 204-16. Adoption of state law provisions.
The provisions of C.G.S. § 7-163a are hereby adopted and are set forth in
§§ 204-17 through 204-19.
§ 204-17. Liability of Town.
Notwithstanding the provisions of C.G.S. § 13a-149 or any other General
Statute or special acts, the Town of Cromwell shall not be liable to any
person injured in person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow
on a public sidewalk unless the Town of Cromwell is the owner or person in
possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used
as a highway or street, provided that the Town of Cromwell shall be liable
for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk.
§ 204-18. Duty and liabilities of adjacent property owners.
The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of
ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting
his property as the municipality had prior to the effective date of this article
adopted pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-163a and shall be liable to
persons injured in person or property where a breach of said duty is the
proximate cause of said injury.
§ 204-19. Limitation on actions.
No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused
by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who
owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk
shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury is first
sustained.
§ 204-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-19
1:257

ARTICLE V
Snow Removal From Sidewalks
[Adopted BOS 5-19-1993; amended in its entirety BOS 10-13-2004]
§ 204-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK — Any gravel, brick, cement, asphalt, or other material
constructed or paved as a path or walkway use for the convenience and
safety of the general public, except for sidewalks located in private
residential and business areas such as condominium complexes, elderly
housing complexes, commercial business complexes, and apartment
buildings. This exception shall not apply to sidewalks that adjoin public
streets and such aforementioned properties.
§ 204-21. Removal of snow from sidewalks required.
A. All owners, entities, or persons in possession and control of property that
adjoins any public sidewalk shall remove the snow and ice accumulated
on it within 24 hours after the cessation of a snow or ice storm. Property
owners, with a business located within the property and which are
located along Main Street from West Street to South Street, may petition
the Director of Public Works for snow and ice to be placed in a location
as determined by the Director of Public Works that is not hazardous or
potentially injurious to motorists or pedestrians. Ice that has formed on
a public sidewalk due to refreezing of standing water or moisture shall
be removed or the slippery condition abated within 24 hours of such
refreezing of water or moisture. Such snow and ice shall be removed the
entire length of the sidewalk to a full width of the sidewalk or four feet,
whichever is less. [Amended BOS 4-14-2010; TC 6-16-2014]
B. The Public Works Department shall ensure that snow and ice is removed
from all sidewalks abutting Town-owned property, except for the Board
of Education properties and highways and streets that abut sidewalks, in
accordance with this article. Where the property owner, entity, or person
in control of property abutting a public sidewalk has failed to remove
snow and ice twenty-four hours after the cessation of a snow or ice
storm, the Police Department shall notify the Director of Public Works
to cause to have such snow and ice removed from said sidewalks, with
the cost of such removal being charged to the property owner, person,
or entity in possession and control of property abutting said public
sidewalk. The Director of Public Works (with respect to the removal of
snow or ice on a sidewalk in violation of this article) shall take into
account department manpower and equipment concerns and may hire
private contractors to facilitate the removal of snow and ice in a timely
manner.
§ 204-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-22
1:259
§ 204-22. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
If the property owner, person, or entity in possession and control of property
abutting a public sidewalk fails to remove or abate the snow or ice 24 hours
after the cessation of a snow or ice storm or the refreezing of standing water
or moisture from such public sidewalk, such person may be fined $50 for
each day the snow or ice is not removed. If the Department of Public Works
removes the snow or ice, as provided in § 204-21, the adjoining property
owner shall be billed for the expense of said removal in addition to the
penalties provided in this section.
§ 204-22 CROMWELL CODE § 204-22
1:260
ARTICLE VI
Depositing Snow and Ice on Public Highways
[Adopted BOS 11-9-1994]
§ 204-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any public streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
drives, lanes, parkways, alleys and other travel ways within the Town.
§ 204-24. Prohibited acts. [Amended BOS 6-12-1997]
A. No person shall plow, throw, put or cause to be thrown or put any snow
or ice from any private property or from any area in the rear of said
private property or in the area between a private dwelling house or
structure and the legally laid-out sidewalk into any public highway in the
Town.
B. No person shall lay, construct, open or maintain any drainage pipe,
channel or other surface or subsurface conduit which collects or
transports water in such a manner that such water is discharged, either
directly or via other intervening properties, upon the surface of any
sidewalk or public highway or upon other public property of the Town.
All such waters shall be discharged into preexisting natural
watercourses having sufficient capacity to accept such discharge or
directly into public drainage systems in compliance with the procedure
set forth in applicable state regulations for public highways of the State
of Connecticut, and with § 204-8 of this Code for highways of the Town.
Pursuant to § 204-8 of this Code, the Director of Public Works may
prescribe specifications, conditions or evaluation procedures prior to the
issuance of any permit for discharge of waters into the drainage systems
within or appurtenant to Town highways.
§ 204-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be an infraction and shall be
enforced by the Cromwell Police Department. Any violation of this article
shall be subject to a maximum penalty of $90 for each violation.
§ 204-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-25
1:261

ARTICLE VII
Removal of Obstructions on Highways
[Adopted BOS 10-13-2004]
§ 204-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSTRUCTION — Any impediment on a public highway that interferes with
the removal of snow and ice from a public highway or interferes with the
safe and orderly flow or passage of motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic. Such
impediments may include, but are not limited to, grass clippings, brush,
leaves, sand, gravel, stones, litter, vegetable and animal matter, refuse and
rubbish.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association or other aggregation of
individuals.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any public streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
drives, parkways, alleys and other travel ways within the Town.
§ 204-27. Obstructions restricted; removal procedure; placement of
leaves on public property.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place an obstruction on a public
highway in the Town. The Police Department shall be responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this article. Upon notification of a police
officer, the property owner or occupant of the property that adjoins
a public highway must remove the obstruction. If the obstruction is
deemed by the police officer as an immediate public highway hazard,
such police officer shall immediately notify the Department of Public
Works for its prompt removal. If the obstruction interferes with or
obstructs any public works project or operation, any public works
employee may remove such obstruction or interference from the
highway. The Town, for the cost of such removal, may bill the owner or
occupant of the property. This billing will also apply to any unscheduled
leaf collection provided to Town residents as a result of the placement of
leaves that are determined to be an obstruction on a public highway.
B. Placement of leaves on public property. Nothing contained in this article
shall prohibit a person who owns or occupies property along a public
highway from placing leaves on public property adjacent to or in front
of their own property for the purposes of collection only. However, no
person shall be permitted to place leaves or other material on public
property that is not in front of or along side of the property he or she
owns or occupies. At no time shall leaves or other materials be placed
upon the paved portion of a public highway. [Added BOS 12-14-2005]
§ 204-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-28
1:263
§ 204-28. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended BOS
12-14-2005]
Any person observed placing an obstruction on a public highway or any
person who places leaves on public property in violation of § 204-27B shall
be subject to a fine of $50. Any property owner adjoining a public highway
on which an obstruction is placed shall be subject to a fine of $50 for
failure to remove such obstruction within 48 hours of notification by a police
officer, and may be subject to a fine of $50 per day thereafter for every
day the obstruction is on the public highway in violation of this article. If
the Department of Public Works removes the obstruction, as provided in
§ 204-27, the adjoining property owner shall be billed for the expense of
said removal in addition to the penalties provided in this section.
§ 204-28 CROMWELL CODE § 204-28
1:264
Chapter 206
TRANSFER STATION
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Maintenance of nonresidential
property — See Ch. 162, Art. I.
Recycling — See Ch. 147.
§ 206-1. Findings and policy.
There exists in the Town of Cromwell a facility known as a "transfer station"
that is open to all residents of the Town for the purpose of transferring
acceptable, burnable, non-burnable, and recyclable wastes generated in the
Town to acceptable treatment and disposal sites. It is found that the proper
safe and sanitary operation of the transfer station is essential to the health
and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Cromwell.
§ 206-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, condition and operation of the transfer station.
The use of the transfer station is intended to be limited to Cromwell
residents and for residential noncommercial uses.
§ 206-3. Prohibited practices.
A. The dumping of hazardous, volatile, highly flammable or explosive
wastes shall not be permitted.
B. Commercial wastes shall not be accepted.
§ 206-4. Permit required.
Waste shall not be accepted at the transfer station without a permit. Annual
permits shall be provided to Cromwell residents upon application to the
Director of the Department of Public Works and upon satisfactory proof
of residency. Proof of residency shall be verified by a Connecticut motor
vehicle operator's license, through the Registrar of Voters' list of electors,
by the most recent Grand List or other valid documentation.
§ 204-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-5
1:265
§ 206-5. Transfer station operator.
The Director of Public Works shall designate a transfer station operator,
who shall have the authority to control the placement of acceptable wastes
within the limits of the transfer station. The transfer station operator shall
have the authority to refuse to accept any and all wastes delivered to the
transfer station that he deems unsuitable.
§ 206-6. Use rules. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to promulgate, subject
to the approval of the Town Council, additional rules that he may deem
necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.
§ 206-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who shall aid, abet,
or conspire to violate any provision of this chapter shall be fined $100 and
shall have his permit revoked.
Chapter 207
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Chapter 211
TAXATION
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax collection procedures — See Ch. 212. Delinquent taxes and assessments — See Ch.
213.
§ 206-5 CROMWELL CODE § 206-7
1:266
ARTICLE I
Abatement for Low- and Moderate-Income Housing
[Adopted BOS 8-9-1977]
§ 211-1. Statutory authority.
This article is hereby adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Section
8-215 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 211-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing, the construction
or rehabilitation of which is aided or assisted in any way by any federal
or state statute, which housing is subject to regulation or supervision of
rents, charges or sale prices and methods of operation by a governmental
agency under a regulatory agreement or other instrument, which restricts
occupancy of such housing to persons or families whose incomes do not
exceed prescribed limits.
OWNER — A person or persons, partnership, joint venture or corporation,
who or which has executed or will execute a regulatory agreement or other
instrument with a governmental agency, either federal, state or local, which
limits occupancy of the low- and moderate-income housing owned or to be
owned by such person or persons, partnership, joint venture or corporation
to persons or families whose incomes do not exceed prescribed limits.
§ 211-3. Contracts for abatement authorized; purpose of
abatement.
A. The Town Manager, with approval of the Town Council, may enter into
contracts for the Town of Cromwell with owners of low- and moderateincome
housing, granting abatement, in whole or in part, of the taxes
on the real estate used for such low- and moderate-income housing.
[Amended TC 6-16-2014]
B. The amount of such abatement shall be established in each such
contract, giving due consideration to the purpose or purposes to which
the money equivalent of the taxes so abated is to be applied. Each such
contract shall require that the owner apply the money equivalent of the
taxes so abated to one or more of the following specified purposes:
(1) To reduce rents below the levels which would be achieved in the
absence of abatement.
(2) To improve housing quality and design.
(3) To affect occupancy by persons and families of varying income levels,
within prescribed limits. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
(4) To provide necessary related facilities or services.
§ 211-4. Effective date and duration of abatement.
§ 211-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-4
1:267
A. The abatement shall become effective on the date specified in the
contract between the Town and an owner of low- and moderate-income
housing. The term of abatement shall extend for the remainder of the
fiscal year in which abatement becomes effective and may continue for
a period not to exceed 39 consecutive fiscal years thereafter, provided
that such abatement shall terminate at any time when the property for
which tax abatement has been granted is not used solely for low- and
moderate-income housing, and provided further that the continuation
of such abatement may be conditioned upon the continuation of state
reimbursement to the Town for such abatement.
B. The abatement authorized herein shall be granted only for low- and
moderate-income housing upon which construction or rehabilitation
commenced after July 1, 1967.
§ 211-5. Contracts with state for financial assistance. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
The Town Manager shall, with the approval of the Town Council, execute
on behalf of the Town of Cromwell contracts with the state for financial
assistance by the state in the form of reimbursement for the tax abatement
granted to an owner of low-and moderate-income housing in accordance
with this article.
§ 211-4 CROMWELL CODE § 211-5
1:268
ARTICLE II
Exemption for Solar Energy Systems for Private Residences
[Adopted BOS 9-9-1980]
§ 211-6. Exemption authorized.
Pursuant to Section 12-81(57) of the Connecticut General Statutes,52 any
solar energy generating system installed for the generation of energy for
private residential use, provided that such installation occurs on or after
October 1, 1977, and before October 1, 1991, shall be exempt from taxation
to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of such real
property equipped with such solar energy generating system exceeds the
assessed valuation of such real property equipped with a conventional
system, exclusive of any portion of such system related to such solar system.
This exemption shall only be applicable in the first 15 assessment years
following the installation of such system.
§ 211-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLAR ENERGY GENERATING SYSTEM — Equipment which is designed,
operated and installed as a system at any private residential location, which
utilizes solar energy to replace oil, gas or electricity for consumption at
such location and which meets standards established by regulation by the
Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management.
§ 211-8. Application for exemption.
Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this article shall
file with the Assessor in the Town of Cromwell, within 30 days following the
annual assessment date, written application claiming such exemption on a
form as prescribed by the Commissioner of Revenue Services. Failure to file
such application in said manner and form within the time limit prescribed
shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for the assessment
year.
52.Editor's Note: See now C.G.S. § 12-81, Subdivision (56), Active solar energy heating or
cooling systems.
§ 211-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-8
1:269

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Passive Solar Energy Systems
[Adopted BOS 9-9-1980]
§ 211-9. Exemption authorized.
Pursuant to Section 12-81(62) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any
building, the construction of which is commenced on or after April 20,
1977, and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped with a passive or
hybrid solar energy heating or cooling system or any building to which
such a system is added on or after April 20, 1977, and before October 1,
1991, shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any amount by which
the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such a system
exceeds the valuation at which such real property would be assessed if built
using conventional construction techniques in lieu of construction related
to such a system as determined by the assessing officer of the municipality,
provided that this exemption shall only apply to the first 15 assessment
years following construction of such building or addition of any such system
to a building. Any portion of a hybrid solar energy heating or cooling system
which is allowed an exemption under the solar energy heating or cooling
ordinance53 shall not be eligible for exemption under this article.
§ 211-10. Promulgation of regulations.
On or before October 1, 1980, the Secretary of the Office of Policy and
Management of the State of Connecticut shall adopt regulations, in
accordance with Chapter 54 of the General Statutes, to define and set
standards for passive and hybrid solar energy heating or cooling systems.
Any such passive system shall include a solar energy heating or cooling
system which utilizes the structural elements of a building to provide for
the collection, storage or distribution of energy for water heating or space
heating or cooling system which consists of both active and passive
elements. These regulations shall be applicable to a claim for this
exemption.
§ 211-11. Application for exemption.
Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this article shall
file with the Assessor in the Town of Cromwell, within 30 days following the
annual assessment date, written application claiming such exemption on a
form as prescribed by the Commissioner of Revenue Services. Failure to file
such application in such manner and form within the time limit prescribed
shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for the assessment
year.
53.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 211-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-11
1:271

ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Certain Motor Vehicles Equipped for the
Handicapped
[Adopted BOS 5-8-1985]
§ 211-12. Exemption authorized.
Pursuant to Section 12-81c of the Connecticut General Statutes, privately
owned ambulance-type motor vehicles, vehicles equipped with special hand
controls or other adaptations for physically disabled drivers or passengers
and vans equipped with a wheelchair lift for physically disabled drivers
or passengers are exempt from personal property taxation in the Town of
Cromwell. This exemption shall not apply to any vehicle used to transport
any such individual for payment.
§ 211-13. Application for exemption.
Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this article shall
file with the Assessor in the Town of Cromwell, within 30 days following
the annual assessment dates, written application claiming such exemption.
Failure to file such application in such manner and form within the time
limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for
the assessment year.
§ 211-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-13
1:273

ARTICLE V
Effective Date of Exemptions for Tax-Exempt Organizations
[Adopted BOS 4-10-1996]
§ 211-14. Statutory authority.
This article is hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12-81b
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 211-15. Determination of effective date.
The property tax exemption authorized by any of Subsections (7) through
(16), inclusive, of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be
effective as of the date of acquisition of the property to which the exemption
applies, and the provisions of this article shall apply to all such properties
acquired by tax-exempt organizations subsequent to July 1, 1995.
§ 211-16. Application procedures. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
Any tax-exempt organization eligible under this article shall file an
application with the Town Council for the appropriate abatement and
reimbursement for any tax paid by it for a period subsequent to the date of
acquisition and for any tax paid by the prior owner for a period subsequent
to said date for which such organization reimbursed such owner on the
transfer of title to such property, which reimbursement shall be based on an
adjustment on a fiscal-year basis. In the event that taxes have not been paid
for a payment period subsequent to the date of adjustment, such taxes shall
be abated upon appropriate application. The Town Council shall authorize
the appropriate refund or abatement of taxes and shall give notice of such
action to the Tax Collector.
§ 211-17. Recording of deed.
Such tax-exempt organization shall place the deed or other instrument by
which such property was conveyed on the Cromwell records within 10 days
after such instrument is delivered to it, in which event said organization
shall be entitled to the benefits of this article from the date of acquisition of
the property. If such tax-exempt organization fails to so record the deed or
instrument, it shall be entitled to the benefits of this article only from the
date on which such deed or other instrument shall have been recorded on
the land records.
§ 211-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-17
1:275

ARTICLE VI
Tax Relief for Elderly and Disabled Homeowners
[Adopted BOS 3-13-2007, effective 4-6-2007; amended in its
entirety TC 6-16-2014]
§ 211-18. Statutory authority; purpose.
The Town of Cromwell hereby enacts a tax deferral program for elderly
and disabled homeowners pursuant to Section 12-129n of the Connecticut
General Statutes for eligible residents of the Town of Cromwell on the terms
and conditions provided herein. The program is enacted for the purpose of
preventing eligible homeowners from having to sell or transfer their homes
as a result of tax liability. This program shall be known as the “Cromwell
Senior and Disabled Tax Deferral Program."
§ 211-19. Eligibility.
An applicant shall meet the following criteria to be eligible for this program:
A. Taxpayer qualifications.
(1) Tax deferrals shall be granted in connection with real property
owned and occupied as a principal residence by taxpayers of the
Town of Cromwell who are, at the time of application:
(a) Sixty-five years of age and over, or whose spouses, living with
them, are 65 years of age or over, or 60 years of age or over
and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer qualified in the Town of
Cromwell under this section at the time of his or her death, or
with respect to real property on which such residents or their
spouses are liable for taxes under C.G.S. § 12-48; or
(b) Under age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable federal
regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits under
social security, or who have not been engaged in employment
covered by social security and accordingly have not been
qualified for those benefits, but have become qualified for
permanent total disability benefits under any federal, state or
local government retirement or disability plan, including the
Railroad Retirement Act and any government-related teacher’s
retirement plan, in which requirements with respect to
qualifications for such permanent total disability benefits are
comparable to such requirements under social security, provided
such residents or their spouses under Subsection A(1)(a) or (b)
above have been taxpayers of Cromwell for one year immediately
preceding the receipt of tax benefits under this section.
(2) Taxpayers otherwise eligible under this section who are unit owners
of a cooperative shall also be eligible for a tax deferral in accordance
with C.G.S. § 12-129n, as amended from time to time.
(3) Taxpayers with only a life use interest in real property who use the
property as their principal residence and pay property taxes may
qualify for a tax deferral, provided that the record owner(s) consent
to the deferral and the filing of a lien on the land records.
§ 211-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-19
1:277
(4) Upon the death of a beneficiary of a tax deferral, the surviving
spouse may continue to be eligible if he or she is 60 years of age or
older as of the date of the qualifying taxpayer’s death. The surviving
spouse will be required to file for a deferral with the Town Assessor
annually and meet all other program eligibility guidelines. The
surviving spouse may apply as a primary applicant if totally disabled
prior to reaching the qualifying age as specified in Subsection
A(1)(b) of this section.
(5) Principal residence shall be defined as full-time residence at the
property for which deferral is sought for at least one year preceding
the date of application. "Full-time" shall mean occupancy as the
qualifying taxpayer(s)’ residence for more than 183 days of each
calendar year.
(6) All real estate taxes for the property must be current by May 1 next
following the date of application for tax deferral.
B. Income qualifications.
(1) Residents must meet the requirements with respect to maximum
income allowable during the calendar year preceding the year in
which a deferral application is made. Maximum qualifying income
limits for each applicant shall not exceed those set forth in C.G.S.
§ 12-170aa plus $5,000. Because the income ceilings for program
qualification are based on the guidelines used by the state Office
of Policy and Management (OPM) in connection with its tax relief
program for the elderly and disabled, they shall be adjusted annually
to reflect each year's current income standards.
(2) Upon recommendation of the Board of Finance, the maximum
allowable income levels may be modified by the Town Council. Such
changes, if any, are to be implemented prior to the beginning of the
next ensuing application period.
(3) The applicant's qualifying income is the total income of the applicant
and all record owner(s) or, in the case of a tenant in common or
a qualifying taxpayer with life use who pays the property taxes,
his or her total income, each together with the applicant's spouse,
as applicable or as defined in the State Guidelines for Elderly and
Totally Disabled Tax Relief Programs. In addition, qualifying income
shall include adjusted gross income as defined in the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954 as amended, social security benefits, railroad
retirement benefits, income from other tax-exempt retirement and
annuity sources, as well as any other taxable and nontaxable income.
(4) Specifically excluded from qualifying income are social security
payments made on behalf of a dependent person, casualty loss
reimbursement by insurance companies, grants for disaster relief
and life insurance proceeds.
§ 211-20. Application.
A. Application for benefits under this program shall:
(1) Be made on forms provided by the Town Assessor or the Town of
Cromwell; and
§ 211-19 CROMWELL CODE § 211-20
1:278
(2) Be accompanied by proof of all income from the prior calendar
year, including a copy of the applicant's SSA-1099 and federal tax
returns for the preceding calendar year and any other income
documentation as may be requested by the Assessor to determine
eligibility hereunder. If a tax return is not filed, a SSA-1099 and
all other 1099 forms received shall be provided along with any
other income documentation as may be requested by the Assessor to
determine eligibility hereunder. The applicant shall sign an affidavit
verifying that all income has been reported; and
(3) If applicable, be accompanied by proof of disability such as a
SSA-1099 showing Medicare deduction, a properly identifiable
writing from the Department of Social Security stating that the
applicant is disabled and indicating the amount of social security
benefits received, such as a TPQY, or proof of permanent and total
disability from a federal, state, municipal, or other governmentrelated
program deemed comparable; and
(4) Be filed with the Assessor of the Town of Cromwell any time between
February 1 and April 15 of any year that benefits are first claimed.
There is no exception to this filing period. All qualifying taxpayers
will be required to file a new application annually with the Town
Assessor to maintain their eligibility; and
(5) Be signed and notarized by all record owner(s) and persons with life
use of the property.
B. Applications and other documentation presented in support of the
application for tax relief shall not be open for public inspection except as
required by law.
C. Any resident deemed eligible for tax deferral benefits shall be a
"qualifying taxpayer" for purposes of this article.
§ 211-21. Administration; computation of benefits.
A. General authority of administration:
(1) The Assessor is hereby authorized to implement this program, and
to adopt such rules and regulations and procedures, consistent with
C.G.S. § 12-129n, as may be necessary for the proper administration
of this program.
(2) The Assessor of the Town of Cromwell shall determine whether each
applying taxpayer is eligible for a tax deferral under this program
and shall notify the Tax Collector and each applicant, in writing, of
his or her eligibility and the amount of deferred tax by June 1 or
within two weeks following establishment of that year's mill rate,
whichever occurs later.
B. Benefits:
(1) Any property tax deferral benefits received by any resident in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall not disqualify
such resident from receiving any benefits described in C.G.S.
§§ 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, and C.G.S. § 12-170aa, and any
such property tax relief provided under this section shall be in
addition to any benefits for which a resident is eligible under those
sections.
§ 211-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-21
1:279
(2) In cases where a qualifying taxpayer holds title to real property
jointly with non-qualified persons, the qualifying taxpayer will
receive a deferral benefit in an amount proportional to his or her
ownership interest, and the non-qualified persons shall not receive
any tax deferral.
(3) The tax deferral shall be granted in connection with principal
residences, including the improvements and the minimum lot size
required for the zone in which the principal residence is situated,
but shall not include excess acreage as determined by the Town
Assessor.
C. Limitation on tax deferrals:
(1) The Town's total deferred property tax revenue that may be granted
annually by Cromwell shall be determined by the Board of Finance
and shall not exceed an amount equal to 10% of the total real
property tax assessed in Cromwell in the preceding tax year. If
the qualified applications for deferred tax exceed the total deferred
property tax revenue set by the Board of Finance for that year, the
amount of deferred tax allowed for each qualifying taxpayer shall
be equitably prorated in accordance with each qualifying taxpayer's
share of the total deferred tax requested by all qualifying taxpayers.
(2) The tax deferral amount for each taxpayer shall be based on the
tax assessment for the year preceding the application, and, upon
approval of benefits, shall remain in effect for one year, unless one of
the following occurs:
(a) A revaluation results in less tax owed on a property than the
deferred tax amount, which would require that the deferred tax
amount be reduced;
(b) The property has a significant increase or decrease in value; or
(c) The Town’s total deferred property tax revenue exceeds the
maximum amount established in Subsection C(1) above,
requiring a pro-rata decrease in the deferral amount for all
eligible residents.
(3) The property tax deferral amount, together with any other relief
received by a qualifying taxpayer under the provisions of C.G.S.
§§ 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, and C.G.S. § 12-170aa, shall not
exceed 75% of the total amount of annual tax due for any eligible
real property.
(4) The total amount of all liens and accrued interest, if any, shall not
exceed the assessed value of the property. Qualifying taxpayers or
their designees will receive an annual statement from the Collector
indicating total amounts deferred to date.
(5) While both are in effect, qualifying taxpayers shall only be eligible
for benefits from one of the senior and/or disabled tax relief
programs offered by the Town of Cromwell pursuant to either Article
VI, Cromwell Senior Citizen Tax Abatement Program, or this Article
VII, Cromwell Senior and Disabled Tax Deferral Program.
D. Deferred tax liens:
(1) The Tax Collector shall cause an interest-free lien in the amount of
the tax deferred to be filed with the Town Clerk and recorded on
§ 211-21 CROMWELL CODE § 211-21
1:280
the land records annually. All liens filed pursuant hereto may be
foreclosed in the same manner and according to the same provisions
provided in the general statutes for foreclosure of a municipal
property tax lien.
(2) Any such lien shall have a priority in the settlement of the qualifying
taxpayer's estate, and shall be valid without any limitation of time.
All deferred taxes shall be reimbursed to the Town within 180 days of
the death of the qualifying taxpayer(s) or the sale, transfer or other
conveyance of the real property, whichever occurs first. Taxes not
paid within 180 days shall accrue interest commencing on day 181 at
the same rate and shall be subject to the same rules provided for by
state law with respect to payment and collection of delinquent real
property taxes.
§ 211-22. Appeal procedures.
A. Any taxpayer claiming to be aggrieved by the decision of the Town
Assessor in determining tax deferral benefits may appeal to the Town
Council within 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice of such
decision, by filing a written appeal with the Senior Services Director.
B. The appeal shall include the taxpayer's name and address, reason for
the appeal, appellant’s estimate of the value of his or her property and
the signature of the taxpayer. The Senior Services Director shall report
the notice of appeal to the Town Council for their consideration and
may make a recommendation to the Town Council as to a decision on
the appeal. The Town Council shall hear the appeal within 45 days of
the date upon which the appeal is filed and shall render a decision
on the appeal within 30 days of the date of hearing the appeal. The
Senior Services Director shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the Town
Council’s decision within 15 days hereafter.
§ 211-23. Applicability.
This article shall apply to real property taxes on the Grand List of October
1, 2013, becoming due and payable in the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2014.
§ 211-24. Periodic program review.
This tax relief program shall be reviewed by the Town Council and by the
Board of Finance the first and second year after implementation and then
every two years thereafter or as deemed necessary. The Board of Finance
will make recommendations for continuation, modification or termination of
this program to the Town Council.
§ 211-25. Effective date.
This article is effective as of January 31, 2014.
§ 211-26. through § 211-28. (Reserved)
§ 211-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-26
1:281

ARTICLE VIA
Tax Relief Deferral Program for Elderly and Disabled Homeowners
[Adopted TC 11-20-2013; amended in its entirety TC 4-29-2015]
§ 211-28.1. Statutory authority; purpose.
The Town of Cromwell hereby enacts a tax deferral program for elderly
and disabled homeowners pursuant to Section 12-129n of the Connecticut
General Statutes for eligible residents of the Town of Cromwell on the terms
and conditions provided herein. The program is enacted for the purpose of
preventing eligible homeowners from having to sell or transfer their homes
as a result of tax liability. This program shall be known as the "Cromwell
Senior and Disabled Tax Deferral Program."
§ 211-28.2. Eligibility.
An applicant shall meet the following criteria to be eligible for this program:
A. Taxpayer qualifications.
(1) Tax deferrals shall be granted in connection with real property
owned and occupied as a principal residence by taxpayers of the
Town of Cromwell who are, at the time of application:
(a) Sixty-five years of age and over, or whose spouses, living with
them, are 65 years of age or over, or 60 years of age or over
and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer qualified in the Town of
Cromwell under this section at the time of his or her death, or
with respect to real property on which such residents or their
spouses are liable for taxes under C.G.S. § 12-48; or
(b) Under age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable federal
regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits under
Social Security, or who have not been engaged in employment
covered by Social Security and accordingly have not been
qualified for those benefits, but have become qualified for
permanent total disability benefits under any federal, state or
local government retirement or disability plan, including the
Railroad Retirement Act and any government-related teacher's
retirement plan, in which requirements with respect to
qualifications for such permanent total disability benefits are
comparable to such requirements under Social Security,
provided such residents or their spouses under Subsection
A(1)(a) or (b) above, have been taxpayers of Cromwell for one
year immediately preceding the receipt of tax benefits under this
section.
(2) Taxpayers otherwise eligible under this section who are unit owners
of a cooperative shall also be eligible for a tax deferral in accordance
with C.G.S. § 12-129n, as amended from time to time.
(3) Taxpayers with only a life use interest in real property who use the
property as their principal residence and pay property taxes may
qualify for a tax deferral, provided that the record owner(s) consent
to the deferral and the filing of a lien on the land records.
§ 211-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-28.2
1:283
(4) Upon the death of a beneficiary of a tax deferral, the surviving
spouse may continue to be eligible if he or she is 60 years of age or
older as of the date of the qualifying taxpayer's death. The surviving
spouse will be required to file for a deferral with the Town Assessor
annually and meet all other program eligibility guidelines. The
surviving spouse may apply as a primary applicant if totally disabled
prior to reaching the qualifying age as specified in (A)(1)(b) of this
section.
(5) Principal residence shall be defined as full-time residence at the
property for which deferral is sought for at least one year preceding
the date of application. "Full-time" shall mean occupancy as the
qualifying taxpayer's(s') residence for more than 183 days of each
calendar year.
(6) All real estate taxes for the property must be current by May 1 next
following the date of application for tax deferral.
B. Income qualifications.
(1) Residents must meet the requirements with respect to maximum
income allowable during the calendar year preceding the year in
which a deferral application is made. Maximum qualifying income
limits for each applicant shall not exceed those set forth in C.G.S.
§ 12-170aa plus $5,000. Because the income ceilings for program
qualification are based on the guidelines used by the state Office
of Policy and Management (OPM) in connection with its tax relief
program for the elderly and disabled, they shall be adjusted annually
to reflect each year's current income standards.
(2) Upon recommendation of the Board of Finance, the maximum
allowable income levels may be modified by the Board of Selectmen.
Such changes, if any, are to be implemented prior to the beginning
of the next ensuing application period.
(3) The applicant's qualifying income is the total income of the applicant
and all record owner(s) or, in the case of a tenant in common or
a qualifying taxpayer with life use who pays the property taxes,
his or her total income, each together with the applicant's spouse,
as applicable or as defined in the State Guidelines for Elderly and
Totally Disabled Tax Relief Programs. In addition, qualifying income
shall include adjusted gross income as defined in the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954 as amended, Social Security benefits, railroad
retirement benefits, income from other tax-exempt retirement and
annuity sources, as well as any other taxable and nontaxable income.
(4) Specifically excluded from qualifying income are Social Security
payments made on behalf of a dependent person, casualty loss
reimbursement by insurance companies, grants for disaster relief
and life insurance proceeds.
§ 211-28.3. Application.
A. Application for benefits under this program shall:
(1) Be made on forms provided by the Town Assessor or the Town of
Cromwell; and
§ 211-28.2 CROMWELL CODE § 211-28.3
1:284
(2) Be accompanied by proof of all income from the prior calendar
year including a copy of the applicant's SSA-1099 and federal tax
returns for the preceding calendar year and any other income
documentation as may be requested by the Assessor to determine
eligibility hereunder. If a tax return is not filed, an SSA-1099 and
all other 1099 forms received shall be provided along with any
other income documentation as may be requested by the Assessor to
determine eligibility hereunder. The applicant shall sign an affidavit
verifying that all income has been reported; and
(3) If applicable, be accompanied by proof of disability such as an
SSA-1099 showing Medicare deduction, a properly identifiable
writing from the Department of Social Security stating that the
applicant is disabled and indicating the amount of social security
benefits received, such as a TPQY, or proof of permanent and total
disability from a federal, state, municipal, or other government
related program deemed comparable; and
(4) Be filed with the Assessor of the Town of Cromwell any time between
February 1 and April 15 of any year that benefits are first claimed.
There is no exception to this filing period. All qualifying taxpayers
will be required to file a new application annually with the Town
Assessor to maintain their eligibility; and
(5) Be signed and notarized by all record owner(s) and persons with life
use of the property.
B. Applications and other documentation presented in support of the
application for tax relief shall not be open for public inspection except as
required by law.
C. Any resident deemed eligible for tax deferral benefits shall be a
"qualifying taxpayer" for purposes of this article.
§ 211-28.4. Administration; computation of benefits.
A. General authority of administration:
(1) The Assessor is hereby authorized to implement this program, and
to adopt such rules and regulations and procedures, consistent with
Section 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be
necessary for the proper administration of this program.
(2) The Assessor of the Town of Cromwell shall determine whether each
applying taxpayer is eligible for a tax deferral under this program
and shall notify the Tax Collector and each applicant, in writing, of
his or her eligibility and the amount of deferred tax by June 1 or
within two weeks following establishment of that year's mill rate,
whichever occurs later.
B. Benefits.
(1) Any property tax deferral benefits received by any resident in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall not disqualify
such resident from receiving any benefits described in §§ 12-129b to
12-129d, inclusive, and § 12-170aa, and any such property tax relief
provided under this section shall be in addition to any benefits for
which a resident is eligible under those sections.
§ 211-28.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-28.4
1:285
(2) In cases where a qualifying taxpayer holds title to real property
jointly with nonqualified persons, the qualifying taxpayer will receive
a deferral benefit in an amount proportional to his or her ownership
interest, and the nonqualified persons shall not receive any tax
deferral.
(3) The tax deferral shall be granted in connection with principal
residences, including the improvements and the minimum lot size
required for the zone in which the principal residence is situated,
but shall not include excess acreage as determined by the Town
Assessor.
C. Limitation on tax deferrals.
(1) The Town's total deferred property tax revenue that may be granted
annually by Cromwell shall be determined by the Board of Finance
and shall not exceed an amount equal to 10% of the total real
property tax assessed in Cromwell in the preceding tax year. If
the qualified applications for deferred tax exceed the total deferred
property tax revenue set by the Board of Finance for that year, the
amount of deferred tax allowed for each qualifying taxpayer shall
be equitably prorated in accordance with each qualifying taxpayer's
share of the total deferred tax requested by all qualifying taxpayers.
(2) The tax deferral amount for each taxpayer shall be based on the
tax assessment for the year preceding the application, and, upon
approval of benefits, shall remain in effect for one year, unless one of
the following occurs:
(a) A revaluation results in less tax owed on a property than the
deferred tax amount, which would require that the deferred tax
amount be reduced;
(b) The property has a significant increase or decrease in value; or
(c) The Town's total deferred property tax revenue exceeds the
maximum amount established in Subsection C(1) above,
requiring a pro-rata decrease in the deferral amount for all
eligible residents.
(3) The property tax deferral amount, together with any other relief
received by a qualifying taxpayer under the provisions of §§ 12-129b
to 12-129d, inclusive, and 12-170aa, shall not exceed 75% of the total
amount of annual tax due for any eligible real property.
(4) The total amount of all liens and accrued interest, if any, shall not
exceed the assessed value of the property. Qualifying taxpayers or
their designees will receive an annual statement from the Collector
indicating total amounts deferred to date.
(5) While both are in effect, qualifying taxpayers shall only be eligible
for benefits from one of the senior and/or disabled tax relief
programs offered by the Town of Cromwell pursuant to either Article
VI, Cromwell Senior Citizen Tax Abatement Program, or this Article
VIA, Cromwell Senior and Disabled Tax Deferral Program.
D. Deferred tax liens.
(1) The Tax Collector shall cause an interest-free lien in the amount of
the tax deferred to be filed with the Town Clerk and recorded on
the land records annually. All liens filed pursuant hereto may be
§ 211-28.4 CROMWELL CODE § 211-28.4
1:286
foreclosed in the same manner and according to the same provisions
provided in the general statutes for foreclosure of a municipal
property tax lien.
(2) Any such lien shall have a priority in the settlement of the qualifying
taxpayer's estate, and shall be valid without any limitation of time.
All deferred taxes shall be reimbursed to the Town no later than
the actual date of a sale, transfer or other conveyance of the real
property, or within 180 days of the death of the qualifying
taxpayer(s). Deferred taxes not paid when due shall accrue interest
at the same rate and shall be subject to the same rules provided for
by state law with respect to payment and collection of delinquent
real property taxes.
§ 211-28.5. Appeal procedures.
A. Any taxpayer claiming to be aggrieved by the decision of the Town
Assessor in determining tax deferral benefits may appeal to the Board of
Selectmen within 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice of such
decision, by filing a written appeal with the Senior Services Director.
B. The appeal shall include the taxpayer's name and address, reason for
the appeal, appellant's estimate of the value of his or her property and
the signature of the taxpayer. The Senior Services Director shall report
the notice of appeal to the Board of Selectmen for their consideration
and may make a recommendation to the Board of Selectman as to a
decision on the appeal. The Board of Selectman shall hear the appeal
within 45 days of the date upon which the appeal is filed and shall render
a decision on the appeal within 30 days of the date of hearing the appeal.
The Senior Services Director shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
Board of Selectmen's decision within 15 days hereafter.
§ 211-28.6. Applicability.
This article shall apply to real property taxes on the grand list of October 1,
2012, becoming due and payable in the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2014.
§ 211-28.7. Periodic program review.
This tax relief program shall be reviewed by the Board of Selectmen and
by the Board of Finance the first and second year after implementation
and then every two years thereafter or as deemed necessary. The Board
of Finance will make recommendations for continuation, modification or
termination of this program to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 211-28.8. Effective date.
This article is effective as of January 31, 2014.
§ 211-28.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-28.8
1:287

ARTICLE VII
Waiver of Penalty Provisions
[Adopted BOS 7-14-2010]
§ 211-29. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 09-196.54
§ 211-30. Waiver of penalty.
A. The Assessor, or the Board of Assessment Appeals, shall have the
authority to waive any penalty imposed pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-63c(d),
as may be amended from time to time, provided:
(1) The owner of the real property required to submit the income and
expense information pursuant to C.G.S. § 12-63c(a) is not the owner
of such property on the assessment date for the grand list to which
such penalty is added; and
(2) The Town Assessor, or the Town Board of Assessment Appeals,
receives information proving such change in ownership.
B. In addition, the Assessor, or the Board of Assessment Appeals, may
also waive such penalty, provided the Assessor or Board of Assessment
Appeals receives the income and expense information, in full compliance
with C.G.S. § 12-63c, on or before September 30 of said assessment year.
§ 211-31. Severability.
If any provision of this article or the application thereof is held to be invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of any other
part of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions
or applications; and to this end the provisions of this article and the various
applications thereof are declared to be severable.
54.Editor's Note: P.A. 09-196 was approved 7-8-2009 and amended C.G.S. §§ 12-62, 12-63b,
12-63c and 12-111.
§ 211-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-31
1:289

ARTICLE VIII
Tax Exemption for Veterans and Surviving Spouses
[Adopted BOS 2-5-2008]
§ 211-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to authorize the additional property tax
exemption permitted by C.G.S. § 12-81f for qualifying veterans and their
surviving spouses.
§ 211-33. Exemption authorized.
The additional property tax exemption permitted by C.G.S. § 12-81f is
hereby authorized for veterans and their spouses described herein. Any
veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with
C.G.S. § 12-81(19) or any veteran’s surviving spouse entitled to an
exemption from property tax in accordance with C.G.S. § 2-81(22) shall
be entitled to an additional exemption applicable to the assessed value
of property up to the amount of $5,000, provided such veteran or such
surviving spouse meets all of the requirements of C.G.S. §§ 12-81f and
12-81.
§ 211-34. Effective date.
The additional property tax exemption described in the above section shall
be applicable with respect to the assessment year commencing October 1,
2008, and each assessment year thereafter.
§ 211-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-34
1:291

ARTICLE IX
Tax Exemption for Farm Buildings
[Adopted BOS 10-14-2009]
§ 211-35. Statutory authority.
The Town of Cromwell hereby enacts the tax exemption authorized by
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-91(c).
§ 211-36. Farm building exemption; limitations.
A. A property tax exemption from the amount of the assessed value is
provided for each building used actually and exclusively in farming as
defined in Connecticut General Statutes § 1-1 subject to the limitations
contained herein.
B. The total exemption available to any one taxpayer, including any related
corporation or other entity, under this program is limited to $100,000
regardless of the number of eligible buildings, and no taxpayer shall be
eligible to receive any additional exemption for any building that might
otherwise qualify for the farm building exemption beyond said amount.
C. Each individual farmer, group of farmers, partnership, cooperative, joint
venture, corporation or other entity, including any parent, subsidiary or
affiliate, having any interest in a building eligible for the farm building
exemption shall be subject to the limitation stated in Subsection B.
§ 211-37. Farmer's residence.
The exemption provided by this article shall not apply to the residence of
such farmer.
§ 211-38. Application for exemption; waiver; appeal.
A. Annually, within 30 days after the assessment date, each individual
farmer, group of farmers, partnership or corporation shall make written
application for the exemption provided for in this article to the Assessor.
Said application must include a notarized affidavit certifying that such
farmer, individually or as part of a group, partnership or corporation,
derived at least $15,000 in gross sales from such farming operation, or
incurred at least $15,000 in expenses related to such farming operation,
with respect to the most recently completed taxable year of such farmer
prior to the commencement of the assessment year for which such
application is made, on forms to be prescribed by the Commissioner of
Agriculture.
B. Failure to file such application in said manner and form within the
time limit prescribed shall be considered a waiver of the right to such
exemption for the assessment year.
C. Any person aggrieved by any action by the Assessor shall have the same
rights and remedies for appeal and relief as are provided in the general
statutes for taxpayers claiming to be aggrieved by the doings of the
Assessors or Board of Assessment Appeals.
§ 211-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-38
1:293
Chapter 212
TAX COLLECTION PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 211. Delinquent taxes and assessments — See Ch.
213.
§ 212-1. Purpose.
The Town incurs substantial administrative costs in processing and
collecting small tax bills and in processing small tax refunds. This chapter
is intended to alleviate such administrative costs.
§ 212-2. Waiver of certain small tax payments.
For assessment years commencing on and after October 1, 2002, all motor
vehicle and personal property taxes due to the Town of Cromwell in an
amount less than $5 are hereby waived.
§ 212-3. Single payment of tax.
Any property tax due in an amount not in excess of $100 shall be due and
payable in a single payment.
§ 212-4. Overpayment of tax.
In the event of an overpayment of tax, the Tax Collector is authorized to
retain payments in excess of the amount due, provided the amount of the
excess payment is less than $5.
§ 212-5. When effective.
This chapter shall apply to taxes that become due after the effective date of
this chapter.
Chapter 213
TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS, DELINQUENT
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 211-38 CROMWELL CODE § 212-5
1:294
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Excavations — See Ch. 125.
Taxation — See Ch. 211.
Tax collection procedures — See Ch. 212.
§ 213-1. Withholding permits when taxes are delinquent.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(2)(B), no application for a building permit,
certificate of occupancy or permit for excavation in a street or highway
for the purpose of installing a driveway shall be granted or issued when
municipal taxes are delinquent for the premises for which the application is
made.
§ 213-2. Determination of delinquency; scope.
A. For purposes of this chapter, a tax is deemed delinquent if it remains
unpaid, in whole or in part, for six months past the date upon which such
tax was due, together with any accrued interest and penalties.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, "premises" shall be that lot, commoninterest
community unit, or other applicable interest in real property for
which a separate real property tax or assessment bill is issued.
C. The foregoing prohibition on the issuance of building permits and
certificates shall apply only to improvements or expansion of the
premises, and shall not apply to any such permit or certificate for which
the Building Official determines in his or her discretion is being sought
for the purposes of repairing damage caused by storm, flood or other
events outside the control of the taxpayer(s); or for an emergency or
safety issue; or for the purpose of complying with any order issued by
any government agency having the legal authority to issue such orders.
§ 213-3. Denial of permit; hearings and appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a building permit pursuant to this
chapter may appeal such decision by filing a notice of appeal with the
Town Manager within 10 days of the denial. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
B. All hearings and appeals under this chapter shall be conducted in
accordance with C.G.S. § 7-152c, as the same may be amended from time
to time. The Town Manager shall appoint not more than two persons
to serve as hearing officers. No such hearing officer shall be a police
officer or employee or person who issues citations. The compensation
of the hearing officers shall be set by the Town Council. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
C. In addition to the requirements of C.G.S. § 7-152c, all hearings under
this chapter shall conform to the requirements for fundamental fairness,
rules of evidence and other procedures required by law for
administrative hearings involving the denial or revocation of licenses.
§ 212-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-4
1:295
§ 213-4. Fee for delinquent motor vehicle taxes. [Added TC
3-12-2014]
This section allows the Tax Collector to impose a fee of $5 on anyone who
has delinquent property tax on a motor vehicle if Cromwell notified the
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) of the delinquency under the program
in which the registration for such vehicles can be denied.
Chapter 221
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 130.
Noise — See Ch. 168.
Parking for the handicapped — See Ch. 172.
Snow removal — See Ch. 204.
§ 221-1. Notice of violation.
Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or any ordinances or rule or regulation of the Town of Cromwell
which relates to parking, a police officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice
to the owner or operator thereof stating such vehicle has been parked
unlawfully and advising such owner or operator of the amount of fine or
penalty. Said notice shall advise such owner or operator of his right to mail
or pay to the Town Clerk of the Town of Cromwell within five days of the
date when such notice is attached to such vehicle, the fine or fines for the
designated violation or violations in accordance with the fines or penalties
set forth in § 221-4.
§ 221-2. All-night parking restrictions. [Amended BOS 7-23-1997]
A. No person shall park any vehicle on any public street or highway for a
period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., November 15 through April 15. This section shall not apply to
a professional call nor to the operators of police, fire or other emergency
vehicles. The Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative may
grant permission for all-night parking for a specific vehicle for a limited
period, provided that the owner or operator of such vehicle has a good
and compelling reason of a temporary and/or emergency nature to park
for a longer period.
§ 213-4 CROMWELL CODE § 221-2
1:296
B. No person shall park any vehicle on any public street or highway from
April 16 through November 14 for a period longer than 72 hours. The
Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative may grant
permission for an exemption for parking for a specific vehicle for a
limited period, provided that the owner or operator of such vehicle has a
good and compelling reason of a temporary and/or emergency nature to
park for a longer period.
C. The penalty for each offense in violation of this section shall be as
provided for in § 221-4.
§ 221-3. Parking during snowstorms restricted; penalty;
impoundment.
A. Speedy and efficient removal of snow from the streets and public ways
of the Town is hereby declared to be vital to the public health and safety.
B. It is hereby ordained that no vehicle shall be allowed to remain standing
or parked on any street, highway or public way in the Town of Cromwell
during any ice, snow-, sleet or hail storm which shall have been in
progress one hour.
C. The registered owner of such vehicle shall be fined the sum of $25, plus
towing and storage charges. The owner of any vehicle which cannot, for
whatever reason, be removed under its own power may notify the Police
Department of such fact and request its removal, in which case no fine
shall be imposed. Such owner shall, however, be liable for the cost of
such removal. [Amended BOS 5-10-2006]
D. Any vehicle left so unattended may be impounded and taken by or at
the discretion of a policeman to a suitable pound, to be determined by
the Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative. The operator
or owner of such a pound shall furnish to the Chief of Police or his duly
authorized representative satisfactory evidence of insurance coverage
and shall sign an agreement with the Town, absolving the Town of
any and all liability and claims for damages arising from the towing or
storage or any impounded vehicle(s).
E. The Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative shall cause a
record to be kept of all cars so impounded, together with the name of the
registered owner thereof, the location from which taken, the name of the
office directing its removal and the location to which taken.
F. The owner of such vehicle may reclaim such vehicle upon showing
proper evidence of ownership and upon paying both the fine referred to
in Subsection C hereof and all towing and storage charges.
§ 221-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended BOS 5-19-1993; BOS
5-10-2006]
A. The penalty for overtime parking, parking double, improper position,
parking in a loading or unloading zone, parking within 10 feet of a
hydrant, parking in a no-parking zone, parking within 25 feet of an
intersection, parking within 25 feet of a stop sign, parking on a sidewalk,
obstructing a driveway, parking in an area more than 12 inches from a
curb, parking in an area marked “bus stop” or impeding traffic shall be
a fine of $25.
§ 221-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-4
1:297
B. The penalty for violation of § 221-2, All-night parking restrictions, shall
be $25 for each offense. The penalty for violation of § 221-3, Parking
during snowstorms restricted, shall be $25 for each offense.
C. It shall be illegal to park a car on private property without the owner’s
permission, and the fine shall be $75 for such offense.
D. If any fine is not paid within seven days, a penalty in the amount equal
to the fine shall immediately become due and payable in addition to the
original fine.
§ 221-5. Special regulations during emergencies. [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
The Town Council, Town Manager, or Chief of Police or his duly authorized
representative is authorized to suspend permitted parking under parking
regulations and to prohibit parking temporarily in any areas where, in the
opinion of any of the above, it is necessary in order to facilitate the removal
of snow, the construction of public works improvements or for other good
and sufficient purposes; and shall give notice of such temporary prohibition
by causing to be placed suitable signs indicating that parking is prohibited
and also, if practicable, by radio and newspaper. The provisions of § 221-1,
concerning method of payment of penalties, and § 221-4, concerning
penalties, shall apply for violations of this section.
§ 221-6. Repealer.
The prior ordinance entitled "All-Night Parking," dated December 10, 1957,
in the Book of Ordinances on page 47, is hereby repealed as of the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 221-7. Hearing officers and hearings. [Added BOS 5-8-1985;
amended TC 6-16-2014]
A. The Town Manager shall appoint not more than two persons to serve
as hearing officers in all matters described in C.G.S. §§ 7-152b and
14-150, as amended, or as may be amended. Any such hearing officer
shall have the minimum qualifications as established by regulations of
the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles. The compensation of the hearing
officers shall be set by the Town Council.
B. All hearings held by the hearing officers pursuant to the Connecticut
General Statutes shall comply with the procedural requirements of said
statutes and any regulations adopted thereunder.
§ 221-8. Vehicles prohibited from public streets: definitions and
interpretation. [Added BOS 12-8-2004]
All terms used in this chapter shall be interpreted in accord with the
definitions thereof set forth in Title 14 of the Connecticut General Statutes
as that title may be amended or recodified from time to time, except that
the following defined terms shall have the meaning indicated herein:
MOTORIZED SCOOTER — A wheeled device other than a motor vehicle
consisting of a platform of metal, wood, plastic or any other material
§ 221-4 CROMWELL CODE § 221-8
1:298
designed for recreational purposes to carry its user in an erect position
and which is propelled by the use of a small motor. The term "motorized
scooter" shall not be construed to include either meanings: a wheelchair or
any similar device used to provide transportation for any disabled person;
or a "Segway" or any similar device used to provide transportation for any
person who possesses a valid motor vehicle operator's license.
POCKET MOTORCYCLE — A two-wheeled vehicle other than a motor
vehicle, bicycle with a helper motor or a motorized scooter and which
is propelled by an internal combustion engine, electric motor or other
mechanical means; is capable of carrying a rider and/or passenger at a
speed in excess of five miles per hour; and is designed to replicate the
general appearance of a motorcycle, regardless of the scale of the
replication.
§ 221-9. Vehicles prohibited from public streets: use of motorized
scooters or pocket motorcycles on public streets prohibited. [Added
BOS 12-8-2004]
A. No person may operate any motorized scooter or pocket motorcycle on
any public street or sidewalk.
B. No person may ride as a passenger in or upon a motorized scooter or
pocket motorcycle on any public street or sidewalk.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall receive a
citation and be fined $90. In addition to the issuance of a citation,
any police officer who observes a violation of this section may take the
pocket motorcycle or motorized scooter in question into the custody of
the Cromwell Police Department or have it towed to a storage facility
at the owner's expense, to be held until such time as adequate
arrangements are made by a responsible adult for it to be transported
to an appropriate location. If no such arrangements are made within 72
hours, said pocket motorcycle or motorized scooter shall be deemed to
be abandoned.
Chapter 230
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
§ 221-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-9
1:299
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Agency — See Charter § 4.17(a)2 and Ch. 25.
Regional Planning Agency — See Ch. 51.
Sewer Commission — See Ch. 60.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Health standards — See Ch. 146.
Sanitation — See Ch. 189.
Sewers — See Ch. 193.
§ 221-9 CROMWELL CODE § 221-9
1:300
ARTICLE I
Citations and Fines
[Adopted BOS 2-11-1998]
§ 230-1. Authorization to issue citations.
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer/Development
Compliance Officer designated in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes § 22a-44, and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of
the Town of Cromwell or any police officer of the Town of Cromwell (Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer) is authorized to issue
citations for violations of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
of the Town of Cromwell (Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations)
to the extent and in the manner provided by this Article I. Any such citation
may be served either by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the person named in such citation. If the person named in
a citation sent by certified mail refuses to accept such mail, the citation
may be sent by regular United States mail. The Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Enforcement Officer shall file and retain an original or
certified copy of the citation. A citation may be issued for those types of
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses violations specified in § 230-2 of this
article. The fines set forth in this article shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any penalties or remedies set forth in Connecticut General Statutes
§ 22a-44, as amended.
§ 230-2. Schedule of fines and violations.
All of the terms used in this section shall have the definitions set forth in
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. The fine for each such
citation shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Nature of Violation Amount of Fine
Clear-cutting $500
Placement of material in a regulated area $500
Violation of plans, conditions or other elements of
an approved inland wetlands and watercourses
permit
$500
Violation of any element of an approved erosion
and sedimentation control plan
$150
Conduct, without the issuance of an inland
wetlands and watercourses permit, of any other
regulated activity in a regulated area not listed
above
$150
§ 230-3. Uncontested payment of citation.
Any person receiving such a citation shall be allowed a period of 60 days
from his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment of
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:301
the fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer. If the citation has been
sent by regular mail pursuant to the provisions of § 230-1 of this article, the
day of receipt of the citation shall be deemed to be three business days after
the day of mailing of the citation.
§ 230-4. Procedure to contest citations.
A. If a person who has been issued a citation does not make uncontested
payment of the fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer within
the time allowed under § 230-3 of this article, the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Enforcement Officer shall send a notice to the person
cited, informing such person:
(1) Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines;
(2) That the person cited may contest liability before a hearing officer
appointed by the Town Manager, as provided in § 230-5 of this
article, by delivering, in person or by mail, within 10 days of the
date of the notice, a written demand for a hearing; [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
(3) That if the person cited does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
B. If the person who is sent notice pursuant to the preceding subsection
wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he or she may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine, either in person
or by mail, to the Town Clerk. All fines shall be made payable to the
Treasurer of the Town of Cromwell. Such payment shall be inadmissible
in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such
person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not
deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date
of the notice described in Subsection A of this § 230-4 shall be deemed
to have admitted liability, and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Enforcement Officer shall certify to the hearing officer that such person
has failed to respond. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and
assess the fines provided for by this article and shall follow the
procedures set forth in Subsection E of this § 230-4.
C. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of
notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant, upon good cause
shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement
or continuance. The presence of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Enforcement Officer shall be required at the hearing if requested by
the person who was issued the citation. A person wishing to contest
liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his or
her behalf. The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Enforcement Officer
may present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If the person who
received the citation fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an
assessment by default against him or her upon a finding of proper notice
and liability under the applicable provisions of the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Regulations. The hearing officer may accept written
§ 230-3 CROMWELL CODE § 230-4
1:302
information by mail from the person who received the citation and may
determine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary.
The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and
with such methods of proof as he or she deems fair and appropriate. The
rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied,
but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing
officer shall announce his or her decision at the end of the hearing. If
the hearing officer determines that the person who received the citation
is not liable, the hearing officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that
determination in writing accordingly. If the hearing officer determines
that the person who received the citation is liable for the violation, the
hearing officer shall forthwith enter and assess the fines against such
person as provided by this article.
D. Any fines collected pursuant to this Chapter 230 shall be deposited in
the general fund of the Town of Cromwell.
E. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer
shall send, by first-class mail, a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the
Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 9, together with
an entry fee of $8. Further proceedings may then be held pursuant to
the applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 230-5. Appointment of hearing officers. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
In accordance with § 1-1B of the Cromwell Town Code, the Town Manager
shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers to conduct the hearings
provided by this article. Neither the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Enforcement Officer nor any employee of the Town of Cromwell exercising
inland wetlands and watercourses authority may be appointed as a hearing
officer pursuant to this article.
§ 230-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:303

ARTICLE II
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
[The current Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations, as revised by
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency, are on file in the
office of the Town Clerk and are available from the Town Planner.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:305
Chapter 231
AQUIFER PROTECTION AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 230.
§ 231-1. Designation.
The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer
Protection Agency of the Town of Cromwell in accordance with the
provisions of C.G.S. § 22a-354o and shall have all of the rights, powers and
duties allowed by law.
§ 231-2. Regulations.
The Aquifer Protection Agency shall adopt regulations for aquifer protection
in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-354p and other applicable laws.
Chapter 236
ZONING
CHARTER REVISION
Effective with the general election held in
November 2013, the Town changed to a Town
Council/Town Manager form of government.
According to Charter § 11.04, any references
in Town ordinances to the "First Selectman"
or to the "Board of Selectmen" shall now be
deemed to refer to the "Town Manager" or the
"Town Council," as appropriate.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Agency — See Ch. 51.
Sewer Commission — See Ch. 60.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Condominium conversion — See Ch. 112.
Housing standards — See Ch. 151.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 230.
§ 230-5 CROMWELL CODE § 231-2
1:306
ARTICLE I
Procedures for Violations
[Adopted BOS 2-11-1998]
§ 236-1. Authorization to issue citations.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer/Development Compliance Officer
designated in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 8-12, and the
Zoning Regulations of the Town of Cromwell (Zoning Enforcement Officer)
is authorized to issue citations for violations of the Zoning Regulations of
the Town of Cromwell (Zoning Regulations) to the extent and in the manner
provided by this article. Any such citation may be served either by hand
delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person named
in such citation. If the person named in a citation sent by certified mail
refuses to accept such mail, the citation may be sent by regular United
States mail. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall file and retain an original
or certified copy of the citation. A citation may be issued for those types of
zoning violations specified in § 236-2 of this article. The fines set forth in
this article shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties or remedies
set forth in Connecticut General Statutes § 8-12, as amended.
§ 236-2. Schedule of fines and violations.
The fines for each such citation shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
Nature of Violation Amount of Fine
Construction of any principal building or structure
without a use permit or a zoning permit, as the case
may be
$150
Alteration of any principal building or structure
without a use permit or a zoning permit, as the case
may be
$150
Construction of any accessory building without a
use permit or zoning permit, as the case may be
$150
Construction of any accessory structure, other than
a building, without a zoning permit
$150
Alteration of any accessory building or use without a
use permit or zoning permit, as the case may be
$150
Alteration of any accessory structure, other than a
building, without a use permit
$150
Conducting an unauthorized use in any zone $150
Violation of plans, conditions or other elements of
an approved special permit/special exception, as
applicable
$150
§ 236-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-2
1:307
Nature of Violation Amount of Fine
Violation of plans, conditions or other elements of
an approved use permit or zoning permit, as the
case may be
$150
Violation of plans, conditions or other elements of
an approved variance
$150
Violation of plans, conditions or other elements of
an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan
$150
Any other violation not listed above $150
§ 236-3. Uncontested payment of citation.
Any person receiving such a citation shall be allowed a period of 60 days
from his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment of
the fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer. If the citation has been
sent by regular mail pursuant to the provisions of § 236-1 of this article, the
day of receipt of the citation shall be deemed to be three business days after
the day of mailing of the citation.
§ 236-4. Procedure to contest citations.
A. If a person who has been issued a citation does not make uncontested
payment of the fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer within
the time allowed under § 236-3 of this article, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall send a notice to the person cited, informing such person:
(1) Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines;
(2) That the person cited may contest liability before a hearing officer
appointed by the Town Manager, as provided in § 236-5 of this
article, by delivering, in person or by mail, within 10 days of the
date of the notice, a written demand for a hearing; [Amended TC
6-16-2014]
(3) That if the person cited does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and
(4) That such judgment may issue without further notice.
B. If the person who is sent notice pursuant to the preceding subsection
wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he or she may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine, either in person
or by mail, to the Town Clerk. All fines shall be made payable to the
Treasurer of the Town of Cromwell. Such payment shall be inadmissible
in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such
person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not
deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date
of the notice described in Subsection A of this § 236-4 shall be deemed to
have admitted liability, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall certify
to the hearing officer that such person has failed to respond. The hearing
officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines provided for by this
article and shall follow the procedures set forth in Subsection E of this
§ 236-4.
§ 236-2 CROMWELL CODE § 236-4
1:308
C. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of
notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant, upon good cause
shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement
or continuance. The presence of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
be required at the hearing if requested by the person who was issued
the citation. A person wishing to contest liability shall appear at the
hearing and may present evidence in his or her behalf. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer may present evidence on behalf of the municipality.
If the person who received the citation fails to appear, the hearing officer
may enter an assessment by default against him or her upon a finding
of proper notice and liability under the applicable provisions of the
Zoning Regulations. The hearing officer may accept written information
by mail from the person who received the citation and may determine
thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing
officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such
methods of proof as he or she deems fair and appropriate. The rules
regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied,
but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing
officer shall announce his or her decision at the end of the hearing. If
the hearing officer determines that the person who received the citation
is not liable, the hearing officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that
determination in writing accordingly. If the hearing officer determines
that the person who received the citation is liable for the violation, the
hearing officer shall forthwith enter and assess the fines against such
person as provided by this article.
D. Any person who files an appeal to the Cromwell Zoning Board of Appeals
pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 8-6, which appeal contests
the interpretation of the Zoning Regulations employed by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer in the subject citation, shall not be excused from
requesting a hearing in accordance with Subsection C hereinabove. The
filing of an appeal to the said Board without also requesting a hearing
hereunder shall not stay, defeat or negate the procedures and penalties
prescribed by this article, except as provided in this subsection. The
hearing set forth in the preceding subsection shall proceed, and the
hearing officer shall make a determination as to liability of the person
who received the citation, based upon the facts as determined at that
hearing, and assuming the validity of the interpretation of the Zoning
Regulations as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. However,
the hearing officer shall not enter and assess the fines provided by this
article unless and until a final, unappealable decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals has been rendered upholding the interpretation of the
Zoning Regulations as employed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. In
the event that such a final, unappealable decision of said Zoning Board of
Appeals has been rendered overturning the interpretation of the Zoning
Regulations as employed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the hearing
officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that determination accordingly.
§ 236-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-4
1:309
E. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer
shall send, by first class mail, a notice of the assessment to the person
found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months
after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the
Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 9, together with
an entry fee of $8. Further proceedings may then be held pursuant to
the applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 236-5. Appointment of hearing officers. [Amended TC 6-16-2014]
In accordance with § 1-1B of the Cromwell Town Code, the Town Manager
shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers to conduct the hearings
provided by this article. Neither the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the
Building Inspector nor any employee of the Town of Cromwell exercising
zoning authority may be appointed as a hearing officer pursuant to this
article.
§ 236-4 CROMWELL CODE § 236-5
1:310
ARTICLE II
Zoning Regulations
[The current Zoning Regulations, as revised by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, are on file in the Office of the Town Clerk and
are available from the Town Planner.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-5
1:311

INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
of the
TOWN OF CROMWELL, CONNECTICUT
Date Adopted: September 7, 1988
Date Effective: October 1, 1988
Amended: June 6, 1990
November 1, 1992
May 4, 1994
October 7, 1998
November 13, 2000
September 15, 2001
April 28, 2004 (effective June 18, 2004)
December 19, 2006 (effective December 28, 2006)
April 25, 2007 (effective May 5, 2007)
August 5, 2009 (effective August 11, 2009)
January 6, 2010 (effective January 13, 2010)
April 6, 2011 (effective April 12, 2011)
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
Section 1: Title and Authority 3
Section 2: Definitions 4
Section 3: Inventory of Regulated Areas 9
Section 4: Permitted Uses As of Right and Nonregulated Uses 10
Section 5: Activities Regulated Exclusively by Commissioner 11
Section 6: Regulated Activities to be Licensed 12
Section 7: Application Requirements 12
Section 8: Application Procedures 19
Section 9: Public Hearings 20
Section 10: Considerations for Decision 21
Section 11: Decision Process and Permit 24
Section 12: Action by Duly Authorized Agent 27
Section 13: Bond and Insurance 28
Section 14: Enforcement 28
Section 15: Amendments 29
Section 16: Appeals 32
Section 17: Conflict and Severance 32
Section 18 Other Permits 32
Section 19: Records Retention and Disposition 32
Section 20: Fee Schedule 32
Section 21: Effective Date of Regulations 34
3
SECTION 1
TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the state of Connecticut are an indispensable
and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have
been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential
to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and
control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to
the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and
watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated
use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or
obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have
despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity
has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and
ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the
environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational
values and benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation
and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable
and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to
the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of
these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the
protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by
minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in
accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing
damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial
aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats
thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality
of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and
other public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water
supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by
providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and
the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever
guarantee to the people of the state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit
and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetland and Watercourses Regulations
of the Town of Cromwell". They shall be administered by the Inland Wetland and
Watercourses Agency of the Town of Cromwell.
1.3 The Inland Wetland and Watercourses Agency of the Town of Cromwell was established
in accordance with an ordinance adopted January 17, 1974 and is empowered to
implement the purposes and provisions of the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Act in
the Town of Cromwell.
4
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in
accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these
regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue,
issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all
regulated activities in the Town of Cromwell pursuant to Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
SECTION 2
DEFINITIONS
2.1 As used in these regulations:
a. "Act" means the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 through
22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. "Agency" means the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Agency of the Town of
Cromwell.
c. "Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by
peat deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
d. "Buffer Area": See "Upland Review Area".
e. "Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber products in a fashion which removes all
trees down to a 2" diameter at breast height.
f. "Commission member" means a member of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Agency of the Town of Cromwell.
g. "Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the Commissioner of the State
of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
h. "Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of
time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow
period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in
prolonged succession.
i. "Date of Receipt" means the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting
immediately following the day of submission or thirty-five days after such
submission, whichever is sooner
5
j. "Designated agent" means an individual(s) designated by the agency to carry out its
functions and purposes.
k. "Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to, fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or
emit.
l. "Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of the
state whether or not such substance causes pollution.
m. "Disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse" means
alter the inland wetland and watercourses by reason of removal or deposition of
material, clearing the land, altering or obstructing water flow, or pollution.
n. "Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary
and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
o. "Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1(q) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
p. “Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound
engineering principles.
q. "Gardening" means the tilling of soil, planting, cultivating, and harvesting of
vegetable matter.
r. “License” means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or
similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions
of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive.
s. “Management practice" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility
designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to
maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices
include, but are not limited to: stormwater quality and quantity treatment; erosion
and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction
setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials;
procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction
methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses;
procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining construction that
must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and
wildlife will not be adversely affected.
t. "Marshes" are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs
and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes
is at or above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six
6
inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are
encountered.
u. "Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but
not limited to soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand,
refuse, or waste.
v. "Nurseries" means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or
experimentation.
w. "Permit" see license.
x. "Permittee" means the person to whom such permit has been issued.
y. "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including
municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
z. “Pollution” means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean
or impure of any waters of the Town by reason of any waste or other materials
discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as
directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not
limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, land clearing or
excavation activity.
aa. “Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social
benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be
considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of
expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
bb. "Regulated Activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or
watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction,
construction, alteration or pollution, of such wetland or watercourse, but shall not
include the specified activities in Section 4 of these regulations. Furthermore, any
clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating, constructing, depositing or
removing of material and discharging of stormwater in an upland review area is a
regulated activity.
cc. "Regulated Area" means any inland wetland or watercourse as defined in these
regulations.
dd. "Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge,
suck, grub, cutting trees, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
7
ee. "Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical, or
biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change
in odor, color, turbidity, or taste.
ff. "Significant impact" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the following
activities which may have a major effect on a wetland or watercourse:
1. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may
have a substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or
watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed.
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit
the natural dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland
wetland or watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats;
prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide
recreation or open space; or to perform other functions.
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial
turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural
watercourse or groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse.
6. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of
a wetland or watercourse.
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas
having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
gg. "Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set
by the federal Office of Personnel Management (formerly the U.S. Civil Service
Commission).
hh. "Submerged lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal
or more frequent basis.
ii. "Swamps" are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland
trees and shrubs.
jj. "Town" means the Town of Cromwell, in the State of Connecticut.
8
kk. "Upland Review Area" means:
1. land within one hundred feet of the boundary of any wetland;
2. land within one hundred feet of the centerline of any unnamed watercourse;
3. land within two hundred feet of the centerline of any named watercourse
including Chestnut Brook, Willow Brook, Wilcox Brook/Cromwell Creek,
North Brook, Coles Brook and the Mattabasset River;
4. land within two hundred feet of the ordinary high water mark of the
Connecticut River;
5. land within two hundred feet of any vernal pool;
6. land within two hundred feet of any wetlands or watercourse in the area
located east of the railroad track, south of Nooks Hill Road and north of Wall
Street ("Dead man's Swamp");
7. land within two hundred feet of any wetlands or watercourse in the area
located west of Route 9, south of West Street and east of Shunpike Road
("Round Meadows"); or
8. any other area of town with a significant likelihood to cause damage to
wetland and regulated area.
ll. "Vernal Pool" means a watercourse consisting of a confined basin depression which
contains a small body of standing water, usually drying out for part of the year
during warm weather. It can be natural or man-made, and usually lacks a permanent
outlet or any fish population. Further, the occurrence of one or more of the
obligatory species which include the fairy shrimp, spotted salamander, Jefferson
salamander, marbled salamander, wood frog and eastern spade foot toad are
necessary to conclusively define the vernal pool.
mm. "Waste" means sewage or any natural or man-made substance, liquid, gaseous, solid
or radioactive, which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the waters of the Town.
nn. "Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes,
swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or
intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border
upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to Section 22a-28
through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. Intermittent
watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the
occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or
9
deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water
for longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic
vegetation.
oo. "Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not
regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly
drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and flood plain by the National Cooperative
Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resource Soil
Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas
may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated)
soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
SECTION 3
INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS
3.1 The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Town of Cromwell Department of Public
Works Wetlands Base Map" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland
wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for
inspection at the office of the Town Clerk or the Agency. In all cases, the precise location
of wetlands and watercourses shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the
distribution of wetland soil types and location of watercourses. The Agency may use
aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site
inspection observations or other information in determining the location of the boundaries
of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any person may petition the Agency for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a
map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and
circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof
regarding the proposed map amendment. Such proof may include, but not be limited to
aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping or other available
information. The Agency may require such person to provide an accurate delineation of
regulated areas in accordance with section 15 of these regulations.
3.3 The Agency shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the town. The
Agency may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available.
3.4 All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of
these regulations.
10
SECTION 4
PERMITTED USES AS OF RIGHT AND NONREGULATED USES
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in regulated areas, as of right:
a. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops, and farm ponds of
three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or
under the authority of, the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes
of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The
provisions of this section shall not be construed to include road construction or the
erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of
watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses
with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural
crop land, or the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel, or similar material from
wetlands or watercourses for purposes of sale;
b. A residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued or (ii) on a
subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been
approved by the Cromwell Planning and Zoning Commission as of June 26, 1974,
and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to
this subdivision unless the building permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987.
c. Boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction;
d. Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such
property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site
permitted anywhere in the Town (currently 40,000 sf) and containing a residence.
Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and
landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of material from or into a
wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse;
e. Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by Section 16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for
in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs, and other
facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in
connection with public water supplies except as provided in Sections 22a-401 and
22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before July 1, 1974,
provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not
contain hydrophytic vegetation. For the purposes of this section, "maintenance"
means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or
machine while the pipe remains in place.
11
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted as nonregulated uses in wetlands
and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the
wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of
water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, and wildlife.
b. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials,
nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin and scuba diving, camping,
boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing, and cross-country
skiing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear
cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not
specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by
these regulations shall require a permit from the Agency in accordance with Section 6 of
these regulations or, for certain regulated activities located outside of wetlands and
watercourses, from the duly authorized agent in accordance with Section 12 of these
regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person (including a homeowner) proposing
a permitted operation and use or nonregulated operation and use shall, prior to
commencement of such operation and use, notify the Agency on a form provided by it,
and provide the Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that
the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use of the wetland or
watercourse. The person claiming a use of wetlands permitted as of right under this
subdivision shall document the validity of said right by providing a certified copy of the
building permit and a site plan showing proposed and existing topographic contours,
house and well locations, septic system, driveway, approval dates or other necessary
information to document his entitlement. The Agency shall rule that the proposed
operation and use or portion of it is a permitted or nonregulated operation and use, or that
the proposed operation and use is a regulated activity and a permit is required.
SECTION 5
ACTIVITIES REGULATED EXCLUSIVELY BY THE COMMISSIONER OF
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
5.1 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any
department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or
regional board of education, pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut
General Statues.
12
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection under section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a
permit issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403
of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal
order or permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency
for any action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities
authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the
discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state
pursuant to section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities
regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean
Water Act.
SECTION 6
REGULATED ACTIVITIES TO BE LICENSED
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit
for such activity from the Agency.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior
authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be
subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 13 of these
regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.
SECTION 7
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
7.1 Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or renew or amend a permit to
conduct such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The
application shall contain the information described in this section and any other
information the Agency may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in
the office of the Town Planner or the Agency.
7.2 If an application to the Town of Cromwell Planning and Zoning Commission for
subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse,
the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the
13
Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in
accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
7.3 All applications shall contain such information that is necessary for a fair and informed
determination thereon by the Agency.
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a proposed
activity involves a significant impact activity.
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or
drawings:
a. The applicant's name, home and business mailing address and telephone numbers; if
the applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation the managing
member’s or responsible corporate officer’s name, address, and telephone number;
b. The owner's name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of
the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject
activity is proposed;
c. The applicant's interest in the land;
d. The geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity
and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland
wetlands and watercourses, the area (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or
watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), wetland vegetation, and known or
possible vernal pools;
e. The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures
which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed
regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize
pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing
environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. Alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or
watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all
such alternatives shall be diagrammed on a site plan or drawing or otherwise
described in writing;
g. A site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in
relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities
14
associated with, or reasonable related to, the proposed regulated activity which are
made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact
on wetlands or watercourses;
h. Names and mailing addresses of adjacent property owners;
i. Statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information
provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit
through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information;
j. Authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject land,
at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the
permit;
k. A completed DEP reporting form; the agency shall revise or correct the information
provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection in accordance with Section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies;
l. Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what
the applicant is proposing; and
m. Submission of the appropriate filing fee as established by the Agency.
7.6 At the discretion of the Agency or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a
significant impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of
the activity, including but not limited to the following, is required:
a. Site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby
which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries,
land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of
wetlands and watercourses, and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed
activity, prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect and landscape
architect licensed by the state, or by such other qualified person;
b. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the
proposed activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic
modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control
plan;
c. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Department of Agriculture; the wetlands shall
be delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist's field delineation
be depicted on the site plans;
15
d. A description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or
watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity
on these communities and wetland functions;
e. A description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological
communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the
application and each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact
to wetlands or watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered
was deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
f. An analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material;
g. Management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the
proposed activity.
h. If the Agency deems that an outside agency review of the application is warranted,
and adequate outside agency review is not available to the Agency at little or no cost
to the Town, the applicant shall be required to pay the cost of that review. The cost
will be determined by the Agency and shall be paid by the applicant prior to the
issuance of the permit (if approved).
i. An affidavit from the applicant's consulting engineer or legal representative
attesting that the erosion and sediment control plans comply with generally accepted
best management practices or the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control (DEP Bulletin 34).
j. An affidavit from the applicant's consulting engineer or legal representative
attesting that the stormwater quality and quantity treatment design complies with
generally accepted best management practices or the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater
Quality Manual published by the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection (if applicable).
k. An affidavit from the applicant's consulting engineer or legal representative
attesting that the design of any proposed stream crossings comply with generally
accepted best management practices or the "Stream Crossing Guidelines" published
by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection dated February 26,
2008 as revised (if applicable).
l. A document listing each erosion control measure, stormwater quality and quantity
treatment measure, and stream crossing shown on the site plan with its
corresponding "best management practice" recommended by DEP Bulletin 34, the
Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, and/or the DEP "Stream Crossing
Guidelines". If there is no corresponding best management practice, so state and
explain.
16
7.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located
within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the
adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the
sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8 Fifteen (15) copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete
application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Agency.
7.9 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in
accordance with Section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the
expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit
shall contain the information required under Section 8 of these regulations provided:
a. The application may incorporate the documentation and record of the original
application;
b. The application shall describe the extend of work completed at the time of filing
and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
c. The application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated
or completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with
or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was
issued;
e. The Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application
to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation
of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgement, the permit is likely to be
renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by not
interrupting the activity.
7.10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder
unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which
requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with
17
regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit may
be valid form more than ten years.
7.11 If the Agency deems that a peer review of any information submitted by the applicant is
warranted, the applicant will be required to pay the cost of that peer review prior to a final
decision.
7.11 Vernal Pool Indicators
a. Direct Indicators: The wildlife species listed below require vernal pools for
successful reproduction, and are therefore considered "obligate vernal pool species".
They serve as direct indicators of the existence of a vernal pool ecosystem and are
the primary beneficiaries of vernal pool ecosystem protection. Documentation of
vernal pool use by these species is the best way to identify vernal pool ecosystems.
Either of the following categories will verify the existence of a vernal pool
ecosystem:
1. Category 1: The existence of a seasonal watercourse in a confined basin or
depression that lacks a fish population, and shows evidence of breeding or
development by any of the following amphibian obligate species: spotted
salamander; marbled salamander; wood frog; Jefferson salamander/bluespotted
salamander complex.
As required by this definition, acceptable proof of breeding or development of
these obligate species include one or more of the following items:
Breeding:
a. Breeding adults:
1. Wood frogs: breeding chorus and/or mated pairs;
2. Obligate salamanders: courting individuals and/or spermatophores.
b. Two or more egg masses of any of the above-named species.
Development:
c. Tadpoles or larvae of the above species;
d. Transforming juveniles:
1. Wood frogs: tail stubs evident;
2. Obligate salamanders: gill remnants evident.
2. Category 2: The existence of a seasonal watercourse in a confined basin or
depression that lacks a fish population, and contains fairy shrimp or their eggs.
b. Indirect Indicators: In the absence of direct indicators (typically when the pool is
dry from late summer through early fall, or during the winter), indirect indicators
may be used to gauge the likelihood that a watercourse is capable of supporting
18
obligate species. The more indirect indicators there are (especially indirect
indicators 1 through 4), the greater the likelihood that a particular watercourse is a
vernal pool.
A defined depression or basin should be examined for the following indirect
indicators:
1. Fingernail clam shells, snail shells, caddis fly cases, diving beetles or evidence
of other aquatic invertebrates, among the leaf litter;
2. Presence of algal strands hanging over branches, or silt-stained leaves;
3. Dense wetland plant growth (e.g. buttonbush, burr-reed, etc.) In the interior of
the basin or depression;
4. A distinct waterline on the base of tree trunks or shrubs in the basin;
(Items 1 through 4 are strong indicators, indicating that the pool holds water
long enough to support breeding by obligate species)
5. Discolored water-stained gray leaf litter within the basin as distinguished from
the brown leaves on the adjacent upland floor;
6. Hummocks supporting moss, grass, sedges or woody growth along the edge of
the basin or depression;
7. Unvegetated, low-lying area or areas in the basin interior;
8. Standing water or ice in winter.
(Items 5 through 8 are moderate indicators that might signify the presence of a
vernal pool but do not provide strong evidence that the pool holds water long
enough to support breeding obligate species)
7.12 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or
preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
a. For purposes of this section, "conservation restriction" means a limitation, whether
or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement , covenant or condition, in any
deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land
described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision
of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or
water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in
agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.
19
b. For purposes of this section, "preservation restriction" means a limitation, whether
or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement , covenant or condition, in any
deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land
described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision
of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose purpose is to preserve
historically significant structures or sites.
c. No person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing
building or for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter
the footprint of such existing building, relating to property that is subject to a
conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides
proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such application, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction, including, but
not limited to, any state agency that holds such restriction, not later than sixty days
prior to the filing of the permit application.
d. In lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.12c, the applicant may submit a letter
from the holder of such restriction or from the holder's authorized agent, verifying
that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
SECTION 8
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
8.1 All applications shall be submitted to the office of the Town Planner of the Town of
Cromwell.
8.2 When an application to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an
inland wetland or watercourse is filed and any portion of such wetland or watercourse is
within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjacent municipality, the applicant shall give
written notice of the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the same
day to the inland wetlands agency of such municipality.
8.3 The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes section 8-7d(f), notify
the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition,
appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a. Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located
within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use
streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
20
c. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow
through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining
municipality; or,
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed
within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application.
8.4 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon
an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water
company as defined in Section 25-32a, the applicant shall provide written notice of the
application to the water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format
prescribed by said commissioner, provided such water company or said commissioner has
filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the
municipality in which the application is made and with the inland wetlands agency of
such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the application. The water
company and the Commissioner of Public Health, through a representative, may appear
and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of such notice shall be
provided to the Agency.
8.5 The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following the day of submission
to the Agency, or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
8.6 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional
information as the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional
information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in Subsection 10.2 of these
regulations.
8.7 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.8 Incomplete applications may be denied.
SECTION 9
PUBLIC HEARINGS
9.1 The Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the Agency
determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or
watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of
age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is
proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the Agency not later than fourteen days after
21
the date of receipt of such application, or the Agency finds that a public hearing regarding
such application would be in the public interest. The agency may issue a permit without
public hearing provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the agency on
or before the fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing
shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of such application. All
applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection.
Any person may appear and be heard at any such public hearing.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than
two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not
less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general
circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located.
9.3 The applicant shall send notice of the public hearing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owners of record of abutting land no less than fifteen days prior to the
day of the hearing.
9.4 In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of subsection
8.2 of these regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the clerk of the
adjoining municipalit(ies) has received notice of the pendency of the application. Proof
of such notification shall be entered into the hearing record.
9.5 The applicant shall post a sign or signs announcing the scheduled public hearing. The
sign or signs shall be not less than four feet by four feet in size and shall contain the name
of the applicant, the application file number, and the date, time, and location of the public
hearing in contrasting letters that are not less than four inches high. One sign shall be
posted on every side of the property that has frontage on a town road, and shall be placed
not more than five (5) feet from the edge of the property. The sign shall be in place
continuously for fourteen days prior to the public hearing and shall remain in place
throughout the public hearing.
SECTION 10
CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECISION
10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation.
b. Public comments, evidence and testimony.
c. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the Town
of Cromwell Conservation Commission, Planning and Zoning Commission,
Building Official, and Health Officer.
22
d. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the Connecticut
River Coastal Conservation District, the Midstate Regional Planning Agency, or
other regional organizations (e.g. Council of Governments); agencies in adjacent
municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical
agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations.
If the Agency deems that a peer review of any information submitted by the
applicant is warranted, the applicant will be required to pay the cost of that peer
review prior to a final decision.
e. Non-receipt of comments from agencies and commissions listed in Subsections
10.1.c and d above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the
decision of the Agency.
10.2 Criteria for Decision: In carrying out the purposes and policies of Section 22a-36 to 22a-
45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to
regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into
consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or
watercourses;
b. The applicant's purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the
proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental
impact to wetlands or watercourses;
c. The relationship between the short-term and long term impacts of the proposed
regulated activity on wetlands and watercourses and the maintenance and
enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would
be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such
activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such
resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of
issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1)
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or
enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority:
restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
e. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health, or the
reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated
activity; and
f. The suitability of the activity to the area for which it is proposed. This requires a
balancing of the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land,
23
with the need to protect its environment and ecology for the people of the state and
the benefit of generations yet unborn.
g. Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the
area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or
reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by
the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or
watercourses.
10.3 In the case of any application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the
Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or
watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the
record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the
Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in Subsection 10.2 of these
regulations. The finding and the reasons therefor shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be
feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less
adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in
writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this
subsection shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is
entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or
animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or
environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a
regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or
effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the
physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its
decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the
hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. A conclusion that a
feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not create a presumption that a permit
should be issued. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating that his application is
consistent with the purposes and policies of these regulations and Sections 22a-36 to 22a-
45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
10.8 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to
subsection 7.12c or 7.12d of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide
proof to the inland wetlands agency that granting of the permit application will violate the
24
terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of
such restriction, the inland wetlands agency shall not grant the permit approval.
10.9 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of
subsections 7.12c or 7.12d of these regulations, the party holding the conservation or
preservation restriction, other than a state agency that holds such restriction, may, not
later than fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with
the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to
appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding
that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction; or (2) the state agency
that holds such restriction may, not later than thirty days after receipt of actual notice of
permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and
regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall
immediately reverse such permit approval if the commissioner of the state agency that
holds such restriction certifies that the land use authorized in such permit violates the
terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
10.10 Nothing in subsections 7.12c or 7.12d of these regulations shall be construed to prohibit
the filing of a permit application or to require such written notice when the activity that is
the subject of such permit application will occur on a portion of property that is not
restricted under the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
SECTION 11
DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT
11.1 The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these
regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application
as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the
regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the
application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the
impacts of the regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or
other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or
(c) the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or
watercourse resources.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a
public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear
and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be
completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on
applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the
absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65)
days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or
more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the total of all such
25
extensions shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw such
application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in this
subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the
application. An application deemed incomplete by the agency shall be withdrawn by the
applicant or denied by the agency.
11.3 The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision.
11.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its
decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial
of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town
wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not
published within such fifteen day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of
such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which
requires zoning or subdivision approval, a special permit, or a variance, a copy of the
decision and report on the application shall be filed with the Town of Cromwell Planning
and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision.
11.6 Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which an approval is
required under Section 8-3, 8-25 or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be
valid for five years provided the Agency may establish a specific time period within
which any regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit issued by the Agency for
any other activity shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years.
11.7 No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written
permission of the Agency.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with Section 13 of these regulations, no
permit shall be issued until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 The Agency may require the applicant to pay for an environmental specialist to ensure
compliance with the approved "Erosion and Sediment Control Narrative and Construction
Sequence", conduct regular and special site inspections, be present during
environmentally-sensitive construction activity as directed by the Agency, and any other
related activities deemed appropriate by the Agency. No permit shall be issued until the
applicant has paid this amount to the Town.
26
11.10 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided the applicant and
if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or
inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or
future rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of Cromwell, and convey no
rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject
to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal
laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the Agency's permit also involves an activity which
requires zoning or subdivision approval, a special permit, or a variance under
Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant
to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such
management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as
needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation
and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses.
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the agency.
f. Permits shall include the following General Conditions:
1. This Permit shall expire five years after the date of its issuance;
2. All work shall be conducted as shown on plans submitted in connection with
this application as amended to reflect any conditions of this approval;
3. The Permittee shall notify the Development Compliance Officer and the Town
Engineer immediately prior to any work being conducted in a wetland or
upland review area;
4. The Permittee shall notify the Development Compliance Officer upon the
completion of the approved regulated activity;
5. In granting this Permit, the Agency has relied on information provided by the
Permittee and, if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive,
incomplete and/or inaccurate, this permit may be modified, suspended or
revoked;
27
6. Prior to commencement of any regulated activity and not more than 30 days
after the date of this permit, the Permittee shall submit a narrative "Erosion
and Sediment Control Chronological Order Checklist" for use by the
Permittee's contractors and town staff;
7. The Permittee shall mark the boundaries of all conservation easement areas in
a manner approved by the Agency, such as concrete monuments, a split-rail
fence, new trees or shrubs, metal medallions attached to existing trees, or
some combination of the above. The Permittee shall install said markers
before selling any residential lots, and before commencing with any other site
work;
8. The Permittee shall remove all temporary erosion and sediment control
devices not more than six months after the topsoil is stable.
SECTION 12
ACTION BY DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT
12.1 The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a
license for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent
finds that the conduct of such activity would result in a no greater that a minimal impact
on any wetlands or watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive
training program developed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant
to Section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall
be made on a form provided by the Agency and shall contain the information listed under
Section 6.5 of these regulations and any other information the Agency may reasonable
require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications
prescribed in Sections 7, 8, and 10 of these regulations, such agent may approve or extend
such an activity at any time.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of
such approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper
having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an
effect. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency within fifteen
days after the publication date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at
its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three
business days after receipt by such Agency or its agent of such appeal. Any person may
appear and be heard at the meeting held by the Agency to consider the subject appeal.
The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or
require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 6 of these regulations.
28
SECTION 13
BOND AND INSURANCE
13.1 The Agency may require as a permit condition the filing of a bond with such surety in
such amount and in a form approved by the Agency.
13.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these
regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
SECTION 14
ENFORCEMENT
14.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to
inspect property, except a private residence, and issue notices of violation or cease and
desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement
of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Agency or its duly
authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under Section 10.2
of these regulations. The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with
the authority to issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other
actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations.
14.2 The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections, at reasonable hours, of all
regulated activities for which permits have been issued with the consent of the property
owner or the authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit. This permission
shall be indicated on the permit application.
14.3 In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Agency or
its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the
property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner.
14.4 If the Agency or its designated agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining
any activity, facility, or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the
Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person
conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately
cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar
days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the
person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain
in effect. The Agency shall consider the fact presented at the hearing and within ten
(10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that
the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order
has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper
29
having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective
upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or
withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not
delay or bar an action pursuant to Section 22a-44(b) of the General Statutes, as
amended.
b. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining
such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the
Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation
including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The
Agency may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written
reply to the notice or file a proper application for the necessary permit. Failure to
carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the
order provided in Subsection 13.3.a or other enforcement proceedings as provided
by law. Other actions may include the filing of a certificate of such order in the
Office of the Town Clerk indexed under the name of the property owner(s). Such
certificate shall be released upon compliance with such order.
14.5. The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not
complied with the terms, conditions, or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded
the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to
revoking or suspending any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee,
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct
which warrants the intended action. The Agency shall hold a public hearing to provide
the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and
all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the
Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within
fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of the
suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
14.6. The enforcement remedies referred to herein are not intended to limit any other remedies
available in law or equity including, without limitation, fines and penalties otherwise
provided by law.
SECTION 15
AMENDMENTS
15.1 These regulations and the Wetlands Base Map for the Town of Cromwell may be
amended from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with changes in the Connecticut
General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses
becomes available.
30
15.2 An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the Agency's
regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter
to comply with any change in those regulations, including changes to setbacks and
buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision
of the Agency with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior
court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such
receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the
establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or
(2) to any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the
provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Wetlands Base Map shall be amended in the manner specified
in Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended. The Agency shall
provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed
regulations and notice of the public hearings to consider any proposed regulations or
amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five (35) days before the
public hearing on their adoption.
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the Wetland Base Map shall contain at
least the following information:
a. The petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number;
b. The address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
c. The petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition;
d. Map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the
existing and the proposed wetlands and watercourses boundaries on such land in
accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary
locations; and
e. The reasons for the requested action.
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Wetlands Base Map of Cromwell shall
bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but
is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing
imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the
Agency. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is
the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner,
developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 14.4, the
petition shall include:
31
a. The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and
owner(s) agent or other representative;
b. The names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land.
Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist
documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land
indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of
wetland soil types; and
d. Map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and
proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a competent soil scientist, geologist, ecologist, or
other individual satisfactory to the Agency.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on all proposed amendments to the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses regulations or map. Notice of such hearing shall be published in a
newspaper having substantial circulation in the municipality at least twice at intervals of
not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days,
and the last not less than two (2) days before such hearing. A copy of such proposed
amendment shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten
(10) days before such hearing.
15.8 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application to amend the regulations
or the Wetlands Base Map, the Agency shall hold a public hearing on such application.
The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action
shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days after completion of a public
hearing. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in
this subsection for the holding of the hearing and for action on such application, provided
the total of all such extensions shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may
withdraw such application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period
specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute
approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by the agency shall be
withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the agency.
15.9 The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in
the Wetlands Base Map was made.
32
SECTION 16
APPEALS
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
Section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection.
SECTION 17
CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
17.1 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations, the provision which
imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall
govern. The invalidity of any word, clause or sentence, section, part, subsection, or
provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be
given effect without such valid part or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the
Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern. The term “conflict” does not apply to
provisions reflecting the lawful exercise of the Agency's right to adopt administrative
procedures more stringent than those contained in the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Model Regulations" written by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
SECTION 18
OTHER PERMITS
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any
other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Cromwell,
the State of Connecticut, or the Government of the United States including any approval
required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility
of the applicant.
SECTION 19
RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION
19.1 The Agency and the Town Clerk for the Town of Cromwell shall retain complete
administrative records of Agency actions and dispose of such records in accordance with
the Records Retention/Disposition Schedule promulgated by the Connecticut State
Library.
33
SECTION 20
APPLICATION FEES
20.1 Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
a. Regulated Activities:
Nonsignificant Activity: $50 plus combined fees from below.
Significant Activity: $100 plus combined fees from below.
1. $1 per 1,000 square feet of wetland on the property, plus
2. $2 per 1,000 square feet of wetlands disturbed, plus
3. $5 per 1,000 square feet of uplands disturbed.
b. Permitted Uses as of Right and Nonregulated Uses:
As of Right: No charge
Nonregulated Use: $25
c. Modification of Previous Approval: $25
d. Map Amendment Petitions: $100 plus fee from Schedule below.
Length of Wetlands Boundary: Fee per 100 linear feet of Boundary:
a. Less than 500 linear feet: $10
b. 501 to 1,000 linear feet "a" plus: $5
c. 1,001 linear feet and up: "b" plus: $1
20.6 Land Use boards, commissions, and departments of the Town of Cromwell are exempt
from all fee requirements.
20.7 The applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the
fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the
Agency should consider in its determination under this subsection. The Agency may
waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the
environment or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably
be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount
of the application fee, or
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the
Town for reviewing and processing the application.
The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
34
SECTION 21
EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS
21.1 These regulations including the Wetlands Base Map, application forms, fee schedule and
amendments thereto, shall become effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk
and publication of a notice of such action in a newspaper having general circulation in the
Town of Cromwell.

ZO I ,G
REGULATIO S
TOWN OF CROMWELL
REVISED AUGUST 18, 2015
EFFECTIVE AUGUST 25, 2015

I
HOW TO USE THESE REGULATIONS
PHILOSOPHY
These Zoning Regulations are intended to guide land use activities in Cromwell in ways thatwill:
•protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
•maintain and enhance community character, and
•improve the economic value of property and general welfare ofresidents.
It is recognized that the appearance of property has a direct bearing on the economic value of that property and
also the economic value of adjacent and surrounding properties. The appearance of a single property also has a
cumulative effect which can enhance or diminish the beauty of the entire Town, and consequently the values of
property elsewhere within the Town.
ORGANIZATION
This set of Regulations has been organized around four main thematic elements. Understanding this
organization will help the user quickly locate the regulatory provisions they seek.
THEME· SECTIONS DESCRIPTION
Basics
Introduction and Background information and how the regulations will be
Definitions used and interpreted
Residential Zones
Zones and Uses Business Zones
Information about the various zoning districts and the
standards that apply within them
Special Zones
Basic Standards
Standards Special Pennits
Requirements for landscaping, signage, parking, nonconforming
uses and other activities
Special Requirements
Procedures
Administrative Administration
How applications will be processed and the regulations
will be administered
Zoning Board of Appeals
These Regulations are intended to be a dynamic document, not a static document. It is anticipated that these
Regulations will be regularly reviewed and updated, as necessary, to anticipate and reflect the ever changing
needs of the community and to guide land use activities in Cromwell in ways that will continue to maintain and
enhance community character and protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
.
J -
' ·~··
2005
June 7, 2005
5,2005
II August 2, 2005
I January 17, 2006
February 7, 2006
June 6, 2006
August I, 2006
September 19, 2006
October 17, 2006
December 5, 2006
April 5, 2007
September 18, 2007
September 18, 2007
June 17, 2008
April 7, 2009
April 21, 2009
October 20, 2009
November 15, 2011
November 19, 2013
August 4, 2015
August 18, 2015
REGULATION AMENDMENTS
u
"·"'"'" m<>nrlm
C:l:,a!Ullll;; olirMi r
I May 31, 2005 Change to I 0 revising the Conservation Subdivision Special Penn it
I approval process
I
'
June 2005 f Change to 18 regarding amount of parking at Retail and restaurant uses
I (approved on 6/72005. Filed with Town Clerk on 6/24/05)
July 13, 2005 Change to 16 regarding erosion and sediment control.
August 9, 2005 Change to 15 regarding filling and excavating; new 11.12 for car wash.
January 23, 2006 Change to 4 (Moratorium on Zone Changes) And I 0 (Moratorium on
Conservation Subdivisions)
February 15, 2006 Change to 4.2.84A (Wholesale Nurseries in PO Zone).
July I, 2006 Change to 4.3.b. (Sign Posting); and 21.1 (ZBA Sign posting).
August 11, 2006 Change to 3.1.27 (Golf Driving Range).
September 27, 2006 Change to 13.3 (Off-Site Improvements).
November 3, 2006 Change to 15. I (Filling and Excavation)
December 20, 2006 Change to 4.2.63 (Golfing Facilities).
April 18, 2007 Change to 5.8 (Active Adult Housing District).
October I, 2007 Change to 13.3b.5 (Prior Approval by !WA).
October I, 2007 Change to 20. l (Zoning Enforcement).
July I, 2008 Change to 12 (Special Flood Hazard Area).
April 14, 2009 Change to 5 (Flood Plain District).
April 24, 2009 Change to 19 (Sign Regulations).
November 2, 2009 Change to 11.1 (Landscaping Regulations)
November 18, 2011 Changes to Zoning Regulations
November 26, 2013 Changes to 3.5.C.3 Delete Crematories
August 11, 2015 Changes to 3.1 Downtown Cromwell District
August 25, 2015 Changes to 4.0 add 4.7 Planned Residential Development
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
BASICS
l. INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
l. l AUTHORITY
1.2 PURPOSES
l.3 INTERPRET A TI ON OF REGULATIONS
1.4 ZONING DISTRICTS.
1.5 CONFORMITY REQUIRED.
1.6 DEFINITIONS
1.7 DEFINED TERMS.
ZONES AND USES
2. RESIDENTIAL ZONES
2. I PERMIT TYPES
2.2 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE DISTRICTS
2.3 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
2.4 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
2.5 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
2.6 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
2.7 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
2.8 LARGE DOMESTIC ANIMAL PETS
2.9 HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
2.10 PARKING OF SPECIAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
3. BUSINESS ZONES
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
iii
1
2
3
3
4
27
27
27
31
31
31
31
31
32
32
35
DOWNTOWN CROMWELL DISTRICT
BUSINESS DISTRICT
3 BUSINESS INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT (BP)
3 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I)
4. SPECIAL ZONES
4.1 TYPES OF SPECIAL DISTRICTS
4.2 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT (SFHAOD)
4.3 RIPARIAN PROTECTION DISTRICT (RPD)
4.4 ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING DISTRICT (AA)
4.5 INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (ID)
4.6 MIXED-USE DISTRICT (MU)
4. 7 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRO)
STANDARDS
5. BASIC STANDARDS
5. l LANDSCAPING
5.2 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
5.3 SIGNS
5.4 STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL
5.5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
5.6 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
5. 7 CORNER LOTS
5.8 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS AND DRIVEWAY OBSTRUCTIONS
5.9 CONVERSION OF EXISTING ONE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
5.10 VENDING PERMITS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
iv
35
42
48
54
58
62
62
62
82
83
86
88
88
96
96
101
110
135
136
138
141
141
142
143
EXEMPTIONS 143
PERMITS 145
6.l FILLING AND REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL 145
6.2 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES 148
6.3 CAR WASH FACILITIES 150
6.4 PUBLIC GARAGES. MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE AND MOTOR VEHICLE REFUEL/RECHARGE
STATIONS 150
6.5 DRIVE-IN WINDOWS
6.6 REAR LOTS
6.7 CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS
6.8 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS
6.9 DAY CARES
6.10 BED AND BREAKFAST INN
7. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
7.1 NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, BUILDINGS, AND I OR STRUCTURES.
7.2 TEMPORARY PERMITS
7.3 INTERVENING LOTS
7.4 REDUCTION OF LOT AREAS AND YARDS
7.5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ADMINISTRATIVE
8. PROCEDURES
8.1 APPLICATION TYPES
8.2 ZONING SIGNOFF (STAFF)
8.3 USE PERMIT PROCEDURES (STAFF)
8.4 CHANGE OF USE PERMIT (STAFF)
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
v
151
154
155
160
162
162
164
164
164
165
165
165
167
167
167
167
169
8
8.8
8.9
8.10
9.
9.
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
10.
l 0.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
OF ZONING COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES
APPLICATION PROCEDURES (COMMISSION)
PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES (COMMISSION)
REGULATION AMENDMENT APPLICATION PROCEDURES (COMMISSION)
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT APPLICATION PROCEDURES (COMMISSION)
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION PROCESSING
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
ENFORCEMENT
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS
IMPACT STATEMENT
AMENDMENTS, VALIDITY, EFFECTIVE DATE
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
POWERS AND DUTIES
PROCEDURE
AN APPEAL OF ORDER OR DECISION. (ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS)
VARIANCE PROCEDURES (ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS)
MOTOR VEHICLE LOCATION APPROVAL (BOARD)
APPENDIX
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vi
169
71
176
181
184
188
193
193
194
195
198
200
201
201
201
202
204
206
1. INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
.l AUTHORITY
These Regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut, as amended.
1.2 PURPOSES
1.2.A These Regulations are adopted for the purposes of:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.2.B
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
guiding the future growth and development of Cromwell in accordance with the Plan of
Conservation and Development;
lessening congestion in the streets;
securing safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers;
promoting health and the general welfare:
providing for adequate light and air;
preventing the overcrowding of land and avoiding the undue concentration of population;
and
facilitating the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and
other public requirements.
These Regulations are adopted to:
give consideration to the character of each area and its peculiar suitability for particular
uses;
conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout
Cromwell;
protect historic factors and resources;
protect existing and potential public surface and ground drinking watersupplies;
provide for the development of housing opportunities, including opportunities for
multifamily dwellings, consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastructure capacity, for all
residents of Cromwell and the planning region;
6. provide for housing choice and economic diversity in housing, including housing which
will meet identified housing needs; and
7. protect environmental resources.
1.3 INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS
1.3.A Prohibited If Not Permitted.
l. Any principal use of land, buildings or structures not expressly permitted by these
Regulations in a particular zoning district is prohibited in that district.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
1
For a principal use permitted by these Regulations, accessory uses which are clearly and
customarily incidental and are actually subordinate to the permitted principal use may be
permitted the Enforcement Officer.
Any activity not expressly permitted by these Regulations in a particular
prohibited in that district.
district is
4. In the event of uncertainty as to whether a use or activity is permitted, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to interpret these Regulations.
5. Mining is prohibited in Cromwell.
1.3.B Minimum Standards.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, unless
the context clearly indicates that such provision is intended to be a maximum limitation.
1.3.C Multiple Standards.
l. In the event that there are found to be conflicting requirements within these Regulations,
the most restrictive provision shall be applied
2. The provisions of these Regulations may be superseded by other local, State, or Federal
laws or regulations
3. These Regulations do not release a person from having to comply with a more restrictive
law, ordinance, easement, covenant, rule, regulation, or permit.
1.4 ZONING DISTRICTS.
1.4.A Districts and Boundaries.
1. To accomplish the purposes of these Regulations, the Town of Cromwell shall be and is
divided into different classes of districts or zones as enumerated in these Regulations.
2. The location and boundaries of zoning districts shall be as shown on the "Official Zoning
Map," of the Town of Cromwell, as may be amended, which is on file in the Planning and
Zoning Department.
3. The official Zoning Map, as may be amended, is hereby declared to be a part of these
Zoning Regulations.
1.4.B Boundary Interpretation.
If not clearly delineated on the Zoning Map, zone district boundaries shall be construed in the following
sequence:
1. following the center line of a street, railroad, right-of-way, or easement:
2. following lot lines, such being lines of record at the time of adoption of these Regulations
or relevant amendments hereto;
3. where zone boundaries are set back from street lines, they shall be considered as running
parallel thereto, at distances shown or measured; and
4. following the lines of a particular physical feature including brooks, streams, or
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
2
floodplains: and
in cases uncertainly regarding a zone boundary on Zoning the the
zone boundary shall be determined the Enforcement Officer.
1.5 CONFORMITY REQUIRED.
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered, moved or maintained, nor shall any building,
structure, or land be used except in conformity with these regulations and the permitted uses herein prescribed
for the zone in which such building, structure or land is located. All uses which are not permitted shall be
considered as prohibited.
1.6 DEFINITIONS
1.6.A Use of Terms.
Definitions to be Applied. Jn the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, the words and phrases
set forth in these Regulations shall be construed as defined in this Section, unless otherwise clearly qualified by
their context.
1.6.B Specific Terms.
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, certain words contained herein shall be interpreted
as follows:
1.6.C
1. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
2. The word "may" is permissive.
3. When not inconsistent with the context:
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
(1) Words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa.
(2) Words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa.
(3) Words in the masculine include the feminine and neuter and vice-versa.
The words "occupied" or "used" include the words "designed, arranged or intended to be
occupied or used."
The words "zone," "zoning district," and "district" have the same meaning.
The word "person" also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation or other legal
entity.
"Filed" shall mean "submitted" and vice-versa.
The "Town" is the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut.
The "Commission" is the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Terms Not Defined.
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, words not defined in this Section shall be
interpreted by the ZEO consulting one or more of the following:
1. A comprehensive general dictionary
2. The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers University, Center for Urban
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
3
(Piscataway, NJ), as
DEFINED TERMS.
For the purpose of these regulations, the following words are defined below:
CONCEPT OF "ACCEssoRr AND "PRINCIPAL" I
Accessory. Subordinate, and customarily and clearly incidental to a principal building, structure, or use on I
the same lot.
Accessory Apartment. See HOUSING RELATEDTERMS
Accessory B U'lI d.m g. S ee BU I· 1d·m g, A ccessory (C(iY) BUILDING RELATEDTERMS
Accessory Dwelling Unit. See Dwelling Unit, Accessory@ HOUSING RELATEDTERMS
Accessory Use. See Use, Accessory @ USE RELATED TERMS
Principal. The primary or predominant building, structure, use, or activity on a lot or parcel
Principal Building. See Building, Principal@BUILDING RELATEDTERMS
Principal Use. See Use, Principal @ USE RELATED TERMS
Accessory. See CONCEPT OF "ACCESSORY" AND "PRINCIPAL"
Accessory Apartment. See HOUSING RELATEDTERMS
Accessory Building. See Building, Accessory@ BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Accessory Dwelling Unit. See Dwelling Unit, Accessory@ HOUSING RELATED TERMS
Active Adult Housing. See HOUSING RELATED TERMS
Adult Day Care. See DAY CARE RELATED TERMS
Alcoholic Beverages, Sale of. See SALES RELATED TERMS
Alter, to Make an Alteration. As applied to a building or structure, means a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts thereof, the movement of all or any part thereof, or the substantial reconstruction thereof, so as
to produce a substantial change in appearance, character, or construction; also means an enlargement, whether
by increasing in height, coverage, volume or floor area. As applied to a use, means a change or enlargement in
the character, area occupied by, intensity, or scope of the use, including, but not limited to, the extension of
hours of operation, the addition of other activities, equipment, functions, or processes, or the extension into
additional land or building area.
Alteration, Substantial. The expansion of an existing building in a Business or Special Zone by 10% or more,
or the expansion of a multi-family building in any zone by I 0% or more, or any change to the vehicle
circulation of an existing parking lot in any zone.
Average Finished Grade. see GRADE, A VERA GE FINISHED@ HEIGHT RELATED TERMS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
4
ANIMAL RELATED TERMS I
Commercial Kennel. Premises maintained and operated as a business for the grooming, boarding, daycare I
training of domestic animals, or uses determined by the Commission to be similar in nature and licensed
the State of Connecticut.
Large Domestic Animal Pets. Large domestic animal pet shall include, but not be limited to, horse, cow,
calf, goat, sheep, and llama, for non-commercial uses. (See Section 2.8 LARGE DOMESTIC ANIMAL
PETS.).
Livestock. Farm animals and animals used for profit or other productive purposes. Does not include pets.
Pets. Any animal customarily kept by humans for companionship, including but not limited to dogs, cats,
birds, rabbits, hamsters, mice, turtles, and the like.
·.
AUTOMOBILE·ORIE. NTEDBUSINESSRELATED TERMS .
Car Wash. Washing and polishing of automobiles. May include automobile detailing services.
Drive-In Windows. An opening in the wall of a building or structure designed and intended to be used to
provide sales to and/or service to patrons who remain in their vehicles.
Motor Vehicle Refuel/Recharge Stations. Any building or premises so used for the sale of gasoline as to
require a license from the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes
Section 14-321, as amended. It shall also include any building or premises used for polishing, greasing,
washing, repairing or servicing of motor vehicles and the renting/leasing of vehicles and equipment trailers.
Motor Vehicle Service. Any building or premises so used for the repair of motor vehicles as to require a
license from the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes Section
14-52, as amended. Includes auto body repair.
Basement. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Bed and Breakfast Inn. See LODGING RELATED TERMS
Billboard. See SIGN RELATED TERMS
Building, Accessory. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Building. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Building Coverage. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Building, Detached. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Building, Principal. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
5
.
'•
BUILDING-RELATED TERMS
the building that is partly underground which has more than half of its structural
grade of the adjoining the building.
Building, Accessory. A building which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal building
and/or use permitted on the same lot. The term "accessory building" when used in connection with a farm I
shall include all structures customarily used for farm purposes. Except for farms, no accessory building shall
be larger than the principal building.
Building. A building is an independent structure having a roof supported by columns or walls resting on its
own foundation and includes shed, garage, stable, greenhouse or other accessory building. Covered porches
and decks, whether open or enclosed, shall be considered as part of the building.
Building Coverage. The percentage of the lot that is covered by the horizontal roof area of all buildings and
structures on the lot.
Building, Detached. A building separated on all sides from adjacent buildings by open spaces from the
ground up.
Building, Principal. That single building or structure, or interrelated group of buildings or structures, in
which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which the building or structure is situated.
Cellar. The portion of the building that is partly underground which has more than half of its structural
headroom below the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
Floor Area. That area which has a minimum head room of seven (7) feet when measured vertically upward
from a finished floor; but in the area next below the roof such space shall be counted only if it is connected
with the floor below by a permanent inside stairway. Basement rooms; garages or any other form of attached
structure; cellars; rooms for heating equipment; and open or enclosed porches shall not be included.
Gross Leasable Area. Gross Leasable Area is the total area which is leasable exclusive of areas common to
multiple tenants.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground, or anything attached to
something having a location on the ground. Includes a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made
facilities or infrastructures.
Structural Alterations. Any change in or addition to the structural or supporting members of a building
such as bearing, walls, columns, beams or girders.
Temporary Structure. A structure which by type and materials of its construction is erected for an expected
or intended use of not more than two years from the date of the permit and is so stated in the permit. Such
structure shall include tents, portable band stands, bleachers not erected in conjunction with athletic fields,
reviewing stands, or other structures ofsimilar nature.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
6
I
I
I BUILDING ILLUSTRATIONS
Basement Cellar
Floor Level
[--------- I.-.-- _----__....---r-
50% or more
of height above
average grade
Less than 50%
of height above
average grade
Business Office. An office of recognized professions such as doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers,
musicians, artists, designers, teachers and others who through training are qualified to perform services of a
professional nature.
Car Wash. See AUTOMOBILE ORIENTED BUSINESS RELATED TERMS
Cellar. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Club. A use providing educational, meeting, or social facilities for civic or social clubs, fraternal I sororal
organization, and similar organizations and associations, primarily for use by members and guests.
Recreational facilities, unless otherwise specifically cited in this section, may be provided for members and
guests as an accessory use. A club does not include a building in which members reside.
Commercial Kennel. See ANIMAL RELATED TERMS
Conference Center. A facility used for academic, business or professional meetings, which may also offer
accommodations for sleeping, dining and recreation.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
7
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT RELATED TERMS
Primary Conservation Area or Feature. Wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, and steep slopes of 331
percent or greater. .
Secondary Conservation Area or Feature. Culturally and environmentally sensitive areas and features
1
including wildlife habitats, land that protects critical or threatened natural communities and species as
identified by the Department of Environmental Protection, mature or productive forestland, contiguous
open space or connective green belts, active or inactive farmland and meadows, areas that have recreation
value, scenic views, ledge outcrops, significant individual trees, and other cultural features such as historic .
and archeological sites.
Conservation Subdivision. A pattern of development that permits a reduction m lot area and bulk
requirements with the remaining land devoted to open space.
Conventional Subdivision. A pattern of subdivision development that permits the division of land in the
standard form provided by the Town for the District in which it is located.
Potential Development Area. An area or areas within the site that contains no Primary Conservation
Area or Feature, and may contain a limited amount of Secondary Conservation Area or Feature.
Conservation Subdivision. See CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT RELATED TERMS
Contractor Yard. Any space, whether inside or outside a building, used for the storage or keeping of
equipment, machinery, or vehicles, or parts thereof, which are in use by a contractor.
Conventional Subdivision. See CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT RELATED TERMS
Coop. See FARM RELATED TERMS
Cultivation of Land. See FARM RELATED TERMS
DAY CARE RELATED TERMS
Adult Day Care. A program of supplementary care provided to one (1) or more persons on a
regularly recurring, but part-time basis, in a place other than the recipient's own dwelling.
Day Care Center. As defined in CGS 19a-77, as may be amended: (A facility ... which offers or provides a
program of supplementary care to more than 12 related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a
regular basis.)
Family Day Care Home. As defined in CGS 19a-77. as may be amended: (A facility ... which consists of
a private family home caring for not more than six (6) children, including the provider's own children not
in school full time ... )
Group Day Care Home. As defined in CGS 19a-77, as may be amended: (A facility ... which offers or
provides a program of supplementary care to not less than seven (7) nor more than 12 related or unrelated
children on a regular basis.)
Drive-In Windows. See AUTOMOBILE ORIENTED BUSINESS RELATED TERMS
Dwelling. See HOUSING RELATED TERMS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
8
I
I
I
I
Converted. See HOUSING RELATED TERMS
Dwelling, Multiple-Family. See HOUSING RELATED TERM
Single-Family. See HOUSING RELATED TERMS
Dwelling, Two-Family. See HOUSING RELATED TERMS
Earth Material. See EARTH EXCAVATION RELATED TERMS
Enlarge, Enlargement. Any addition to the floor area of an existing building, an increase in the size of any
other structure, or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use. "To enlarge" is to
make an enlargement.
Extend, to Make an Extension. An increase or amplification, as distinguished from establishment or
inception. "Extension" shall be deemed to include the expansion in the seasons or periods of use of a
non-conforming seasonal use, or of a seasonal dwelling on a non-conforming lot; and any increase in the
normal days or hours of operation, or any increase in the scope of services offered, of any non-conforming,
non-residential use of land, buildings, or structures.
EARTH EXCAVATION AND FILL DEPOSITION RELATED TERMS
Earth Material. Topsoil, sand, loam, gravel, peat, stone or any other earth product.
Excavation. Fill or removal in accordance with Section 6.1 of these Regulations.
Fill. Earthen material brought to a site from a non-contiguous location so as to create a higher finished
elevation anywhere on the site.
Foundation Volume.
•For subdivision approval, the volume of the cellar or foundation of all buildings shown on the site
development plan plus four ( 4) cubic yards per linear foot of new road (if applicable).
•For site plan approval of any residential or non-residential building, the volume of the cellar or
foundation of all buildings on the site development plan.
•For plot plan approval, the volume of the cellar or foundation of all buildings shown on the plot plan.
Removal. Earthen material taken off a site to a non-contiguous location so as to create a lower finished
elevation anywhere on the site.
FARM RELATED TERMS
.·
Coop. A small cage or other building used for housing chickens and other birds.
Cultivation of Land. To improve and prepare (land), as by plowing or fertilizing, for raising crops; till.
(Definition will probably not be included in the Zoning Regulations.)
Farm. An area of five (5) or more acres devoted to farm uses, for gain or the expectation of gain, in the
raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry, or dairy products. It includes necessary structures within
the prescribed limits and the storage of materials and equipment used. It excludes the raising of fur bearing
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
9
as fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, eggs, honey, maple syrup,
including Christmas trees, cemetery baskets, etc. The sale of jams, jellies and baked or prepared foods may
also permitted.
Greenhouse. An enclosed structure used for the cultivation or protection of plants.
Poultry. Domesticated fowl collectively, especially those valued for their meat and eggs, as chickens,
turkeys, ducks, geese and guinea fowl.
Family. See HOUSING RELATED TERMS
Farm. See FARM RELATED TERMS
Farm Building. See FARM RELATED TERMS
Farm Stand. See FARM RELATED TERMS
Fast-food Restaurant. See RESTAURANT RELATEDTERMS
Fill. See EARTH EXCAVATION RELATED TERMS
Flood. See FLOOD RELATED TERMS, Section4.2.F.
Floor Area. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Foundation Volume. See EARTH EXCAVATION RELATEDTERMS
Freestanding Sign. See "Sign, Freestanding" @ SIGN RELATED TERMS
Frontage. See LOT RELATED TERMS
Golf Course. See RECREATION RELATED TERMS
Golf Driving Range. See RECREATION RELATED TERMS
Golf, Miniature. See RECREATION RELATED TERMS
Government Services. Any activity or use, carried out by a local public agency or its duly authorized agents,
such as police stations, refuse disposal areas, schools, pollution control plants, highway garages, town halls,
town office buildings, fire departments, non-commercial ambulance and other emergency services, and other
similar uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Greenhouse. See FARM RELATED TERMS
Gross Leasable Area. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Height, Building. See HEIGHT RELATED TERMS
Height of Luminaire. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Height, Sign. See Sign Height @ SIGN RELATED TERMS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
10
HEIGHT RELATED TERMS
Average Finished A reference plane established by the average of the ground level adjoining the
or structure along all of the exterior walls, from the exterior wall to a point l 0 feet from the building
1
or structure. ;
I
Height, Building. The vertical distance from the average finished grade for a building or other structure, or
for a building wing or distinct portion of a building or other structure, to the highest of the following
elevations on the building or other structure:
• the elevation of the highest point of the highest dome, flat, shed, or mansard roof, including the top of
any parapet;
• for roofs which are gable, hip, or A-frame roofs, the mean elevation of the roof (other than a dormer)
with the highest mean elevation between its highest ridge and its lowest corresponding eave,
• for roofs which are gambrel roofs, the mean elevation of the roof (other than a dormer) with the highest
mean elevation between its highest ridge and its lowest corresponding eave or the elevation of the
highest pitchbreak, whichever is greater, and for roofs which are salt box roofs, the mean elevation of
the side of the salt box roof (other than a dormer) with the highest mean elevation between its highest
ridge and its lowest corresponding eave.
Height of Luminaire. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Height, Sign. See Sign Height@ SIGN RELATED TERMS
Story. That part of a building between the surface of a floor (whether or not counted for purposes of
computing floor area) and the ceiling immediately above it.
HEIGHT ILLUSTRATIONS
Gable
Roof
'~ verage grade
Gambrel
Roof
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
11
Average grade
I I
I
~ E
E E "' E
!II " !II ii J: J: 2'
"' J":' "' :"t: "' :"t: = a " ~
c: .§ g Dome ii Mansard ii 5 ~ 5 5 Flat $.
!!! lll ill
Roof Roof Roof
Average
HOME-BASED BUSINESS RELATED TERMS
;";"
Home-Based Business. The accessory use of a portion of a dwelling or accessory building for business
purposes by the resident occupants when clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the
dwelling (such as a home office or a home occupation). A Home-Based Business may be either Major or
Minor. See below.
This definition includes, but is not limited to, the office, studio or workshop of an architect, artist, computer
or Internet-based business, dentist, dressmaker, economist, engineer, insurance agent, lawyer, musician,
photographer, physician, psychologist, real estate broker, serviceman or a dwelling used for preserving or
cooking for compensation. Such uses as restaurants, tearooms, funeral homes, barbershops, beauty parlors,
dancing schools, public garages, and animal hospitals are not considered incidental and accessory to a
residential use and shall not be deemed a home- based business.
Home Office/Studio. The accessory use of a dwelling for occasional business use (as part of employment
typically occurring elsewhere) or a home-based business involving no non-residents employees and no
regular visitors to the business. See Section 2.9.A
Minor Home-Based Business. The use of a dwelling for a home-based business, which may include one (1)
non-resident employee, involving no more than five (5) patron, client, or associate visits per week. See
Section 2.9.B
Major Home-Based Business. The use of a dwelling for a home-based business involving two (2) or more
non-resident employees or six (6) or more patron, client, or associate visits per week. See Section 2.9.C.
Accessory Apartment. A dwelling unit accessory to and contained within a single-family dwelling that
provides complete housekeeping facilities. It shall not have an independent electricity, fuel, water, sewer or
other utility bill.
Active Adult Housing. An Active Adult Housing (AA) Zone is one in which the housing development fully
complies with the provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act, as amended, and Connecticut State
Statutes Section 46a- 64b. as amended as it pertains to "Housing for Older Persons." This includes
com liance with an and all rules romul ated b the United States De artment of Housin and Urban
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
12
;
I I
Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A building used or designed as a dwelling for three (3) or more families living
Dwelling, Single-Family. A building designed for and occupied as a dwelling for not more than one family.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A building designed for and occupied as a home or residence for two (2) families.
Family. Any number of individuals regularly living together as a single housekeeping unit with complete
individual bathroom, and doing their cooking on the premises: as distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding or rooming house or hotel.
Home Office/Studio. See HOME BASED BUSINESS RELATED TERMS
Hospital. Unless otherwise specified, the term "hospital" shall be deemed to include sanitarium, clinic, and any
other place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of ailments, and shall be deemed to be limited to places for
the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments.
Hotel. See LODGING RELATED TERMS
Institution. An organization, establishment, foundation, or society, which is devoted to and uses its land and
buildings for the promotion of elderly care, health, and education objectives.
Junkyard. See WASTE MANAGEMENT RELATED TERMS
Landscaped Area. Landscaped Area shall mean an open area, a water body, a landscaped area, or naturally
vegetated area maintained in natural ground cover, lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plantings.
Large Domestic Animal Pet. See ANIMAL RELATED TERMS
LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Light, Direct. Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the
refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.
Light Fixture, Full Cut-off Type. A luminaire or light fixture that, by design of the housing, does not allow
any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above a 90 degree horizontal plane from the bottom surface of the
luminaire.
Light, Fully Shielded. Fully shielded luminaire light fixtures which can control the glare in any direction.
Light Glare. Light emitting from a luminaire with intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
13
Light, Indirect. Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of surfaces other than those
with the light fixture.
Isodiagram. A graphical representation of illuminance used to show the level and/or evenness of a
de s1·g n an d t 0 sho w h OW rl g ht fiI Xt ures WI·1 1 perf io rm on a given s1· 1 e.
Light Pollution. Stray or reflected light that is emitted into the atmosphere above the 90-degree horizontal
plane from the luminaire and which can or does cause unwanted sky glow or which can or is seen from an
abutting property.
Light Trespass. Direct light from an artificial light source on one property that is intruding into an area
where it is not wanted or authorized, or does not belong.
Lighting, Outdoor. The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device
located outdoors that produces light by any means.
Lumen. A unit of luminous flux, detennined from the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp, where one
foot-candle is one ( 1) lumen per square foot.
Luminaire. A complete lighting system, including a light source component (lamp or lamps that produce the
actual light) and a fixture.
Luminaire, Height of. The vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire
to the bottom surface of the luminaire.
Uplighting. Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane.
Light, Direct. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Light Fixture, Full Cut-off Type. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Light, Fully Shielded. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Light Glare. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Light, Indirect. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Light Isodiagram. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
14
I I
I
LIGHTING ILLUSTRATIONS
Luninaire
I Fully
I shielded F ull cut-off
•I .' fixture light :..."gli: Poj1i.:tt.On I µ ..~o . J • '-'?/,: g.~:i n g
I - ··-· .. .. .. .. ... .. . ..... . ... ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ..
I -- ~
9. ~
' i,.. :§ ' 41
<:. 'O ·=
~ ""' i·I ~ i Light i ~ :c ...I Trespass • .s
•········-·- - - - - -·
I
I ,' •, ,
• I Ground Surface
Property•
Line .:
Luminaire - Shielded Luminaire - Not Shielded
.., , '
~ :
c :
~ :
~ :
."J' ,''
,
,''
'
Property
Line
Property
Line
--------- ---
Light Manufacturing. Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, converting, altering, assembling and testing,
engineering and marketing development of products. Incidental accessory uses: individual offices, sales rooms
and storage for wholesale distribution of items manufactured or assembled on the premises.
Light Pollution. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Light Trespass. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Lighting, Outdoor. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Livestock. See ANIMAL RELATED TERMS
Lot. See LOT RELATED TERMS
Lot Area. See LOT RELATED TERMS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
15
Lot """""""' See LOT RELATED TERMS
uuuu•i:.· See LOT RELATED TERMS
See LOT RELATED TERMS
Lot, Depth of. See LOT RELATED TERMS
Lot, Line. See LOT RELATED TERMS
Lot, Rear. See LOT RELATED TERMS
Lot, Through. See LOT RELATED TERMS
Lot, Width of. See LOT RELATED TERMS
Lumen. See LIGHTrNG RELATED TERMS
Luminaire. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
Luminaire, Height of. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
LODGING RELATED TERMS
Bed and Breakfast Inn. An owner-occupied dwelling unit that contains no more than four (4) guest rooms
where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation.
Hotel. A building designed as the more or less temporary abiding place for more than 50 persons, or
providing 25 or more sleeping rooms in which lodging is provided for compensation with or without meals.
Lot. A single parcel or tract of land under separate ownership.
Lot Area. The total horizontal area included within lot lines, measured in square feet.
Lot Frontage (or Frontage). The extent of land along a front lot line.
Lot, Building. A parcel of land used or occupied, or to be used or occupied by a principal use, building or
group of buildings and accessory buildings and including such open spaces as are required by these
regulations.
Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets having an interior angle of not more
than 135 degrees.
Lot, Depth of. The mean distance from the street line to the opposite rear lot line measured in the general
direction of the side lines of the lot.
Lot, Line. The lot line bounding a lot.
Lot, Rear. A lot which does not have the minimum amount of street fronta e re uired b these Re ulations.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
16
on astreet.
Width of. The distance between the side lines of a lot measured either along the front lot line or along
LOT ILLUSTRATIONS
\_
!"l
1'l
...I
i::
..~..
t..i i 11! ::;
_1',l
;:
£
Strfft
Front Lot Lme
Front Lot
(Corner)
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Front Lot
S•<le Lot Lone
$tde Lot Lone
Front Lot
(Pie-Shape)
." !ii-------...:
0
J
~ ,";;'
.. c
'-'::;
~ j Rear Lot
Major Home Occupation. See HOME BASED BUSINESS RELATED TERMS
Medical or dental office, clinic, or laboratory. Use of a site for facilities which provide diagnoses, minor
surgical care and outpatient care on a routine basis, but which does not provide overnight care or serve as a
base for an ambulance service. Medical offices are operated by doctors, dentists, or similar practitioners
licensed by the State of Connecticut. Emergency treatment is not the principal type of care.
Minor Home Occupation. See HOME BASED BUSINESS RELATED TERMS
Motor Vehicle Refuel/Recharge Stations. See AUTOMOBILE ORIENTED BUSINESS RELATED TERMS
Museum. An establishment for preserving and exhibiting artistic, historical, scientific, natural or man-made
objects of interest. Such activity may also include accessory uses such as retail sales, the holding of meetings,
and social events.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
17
NONCONFORMING RELATED TERMS
Nonconforming. The situation where a use, activity, structure, or lot does not conform to the
of these Regulations. I
I
Nonconforming Building. See Nonconforming Structure.
Nonconforming, Legal. The situation where a nonconforming use, activity, building, structure, or lot existed j
or was lawful prior to the time:
•these Regulations became effective, or
•an amendment hereto which created the nonconformity became effective.
Nonconforming Lot. A parcel of land which fails to meet the area, shape, or frontage or any other
applicable requirement of these regulations pertaining to lots.
Nonconforming Building or Structure. A building or structure that does not conform to these Regulations
with respect to size, area, height, setback or other requirement for the zone in which it is situated.
Nonconforming Use. A use of land or of a building that does not conform to these Regulations for the zone
in which it is situated.
Open Space. Land or water areas which include but are not limited to: areas left in their existing natural state;
agricultural land for which development rights have been assigned or otherwise alienated in perpetuity; areas
and facilities for non-commercial, non-profit passive and active recreation, areas for wildlife habitat,
groundwater recharge and scenic preservation
Open Space, Useable. Land within the development which is not covered by buildings, roads, driveways,
parking areas, or service areas, or which is not set aside as private yards, private patios, or private gardens for
individual residents. Such land shall be configured throughout the site so as to provide for passive and active
recreational opportunities, as well as for conservation purposes. Land within 20 feet of a dwelling unit shall not
qualify as "useable open space".
Outdoor Recreation. See RECREATION RELATED TERMS
Parking Space. An off-street space available for the parking of one ( 1) motor vehicle.
Pet. See ANIMAL RELATED TERMS
Portable Sign. See "sign, Portable " @ SIGN RELATED TERMS
Potential Development Area. See CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT RELATED TERMS
Poultry. See FARM RELATED TERMS
Primary Conservation Area or Feature. See CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT RELATED TERMS
Principal. See CONCEPT OF "ACCESSORY" AND "PRINCIPAL"
Principal Building. See Building, Principal@ BUILDING RELATEDTERMS
Principal Use. See Use, Principal @USE RELATED TERMS
Private Street. See STREET RELATED TERMS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
18
I
I
I
I
I
'
I
Sign. See Sign, Projecting@ SIGN RELATEDTERMS
See CONCEPT OF "ACCESSORY" AND "PRINCIPAL"
Public. Unless specifically indicated, shall mean anything owned, operated, provided and/or
maintained by a local, state, or federal government Also includes places available for use by the public for no
fee, such as open space land.
Public Street. See STREET RELATED TERMS
Public Utility. Any public or private entity engaged in providing ancillary cooling water services for electric
generation facilities or distributing electricity, electronic communications, or water to the general public,
including associated substations, pumping stations, water storage, waste water treatment and water treatment
facilities. Said term shall not include junkyard or solid waste facility.
·.
RECREATION RELATED TERMS
·.
Golf Course. An area of not less than 40 acres devoted to the playing of golf and related activities, with
participation either being limited to members or open to the general public. It includes necessary structures
and/or the storage of equipment and materials used.
Golf Driving Range. An area of not less than two (2) acres nor more than 25 acres where practicing of
golfing technique may take place. It includes accessory structures for the storage of equipment and materials
used.
Golf, Miniature. An area of not more than two (2) acres devoted to golf putting, typically directing the golf
ball through or around obstacles. It includes accessory structures for the storage of equipment and materials
used.
Outdoor Recreation. Building and/or other facility designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and
other customary leisure activities.
Vehicle, Recreational. Any of the following vehicles: sail boat, motor boat, boat trailer, camper trailer, or
mobile home.
Removal. See EXCAVATION RELATED TERMS
RESTAURANT RELATED TERMS
Fast-food Restaurant. A restaurant where the principal business is the sale of foods or beverages to the
customer in a ready-to-consume state, typically served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers, for
consumption within the restaurant building, elsewhere on the premises or for carryout/delivery for
consumption off the premises, and designed for rapid service and high customer turnover.
Restaurant. A commercial enterprise containing a kitchen and seats whose primary function is the
preparation and selling of food and/or beverages to the patron in a ready-to-consume state on the premises.
Restaurant, Sit-Down. A restaurant where the principal business is the sale of food or beverages to the
customer in a ready-to-consume state, typically with washable plates, glasses, and utensils, with accessory
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
19
'
I
I
SALES RELATED TERMS
Alcoholic Beverages, Sales of. Buildings, or uses, where any spirituous or intoxicating liquors, and all
mixed liquor, any part of which is spirituous or intoxicating, such as wine, ale, port, beer or ''hard liquor" is
sold.
Retail Sales. The sale of goods or commodities in small quantities directly to consumers. I
Wholesale Sales. The sale of goods in large quantities to retailers, and not primarily to the general public. I
Recycling Center. See WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT RELATED TERMS
Restaurant. See REST AU RANT RELATED TERMS
Retail Sales. See SALES RELATED TERMS
Road. See STREET REL TED TERMS
Self-Service Storage Facility. Any real property designed and used for the renting or leasing of individual
self-contained units of storage space to occupants who are to have access to such units for storing and
removing personal property only, and not for residential purposes.
Setback. See YARD RELATED TERMS
Sign. See SIGN RELATED TERMS
Sign Area. See SIGN RELATED TERMS
Sign, Replacement. See SIGN RELATED TERMS
Billboard. An outdoor sign advertising products or services which are not made, produced, assembled,
stored or sold from the premises upon which the sign is displayed, or any sign more than 200 square feet in
sign area.
Sign. Any device for visual communication advertising objects made or sold, or services rendered on the
premises, which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not
including any flag, badge or insignia of any government or government agency, or of any civic, charitable,
religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar organization; or any building feature, including roof or other special
illumination, special colors or effects, or building or roof lines which serve to identify the use or occupancy
of any building or site through a recognized motif or symbol.
Sign Area. The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing the extreme limits of sign display,
including any frame or border. Curved, spherical, or any other shaped sign face shall be computed on the
basis of actual surface area. Where there is no defined si n back round or anel (such as individual detached
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
20
that is or on, or attached the surface an
Sign, Freestanding. A sign supported by one or more upright poles, columns, or braces placed in or on the
ground and not attached to any building.
Sign, Hanging. A business sign erected, projecting perpendicularly to the building wall surface to which it is
attached, no part of which is more than six ( 6) feet from the wall surface of the building on which it is
erected.
Sign Height. The vertical distance measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point on the sign
or sign structure.
Sign, Incidental. A sign that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as
"handicap parking," "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar directives.
Sign, Moving. Any sign, or any portion of any Sign, which is not fixed or stationary, or which is capable of
any movement whatsoever; excluding barber poles and clocks.
Sign, Monument. A sign that is supported by a structure or apparent structure in direct contact with the
ground that supports or appears to support the message portion of the sign.
Sign, Neighborhood identification. A sign which identifies or otherwise describes the name of the
development or neighborhood upon which it is situated.
Sign, Portable. Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building, including any sign attached
to or displayed on a vehicle that is used for the expressed purpose of advertising a business establishment,
product, service or entertainment, when the vehicle is so parked as to attract the attention of the motoring or
pedestrian traffic.
Sign, Projecting. A sign which is attached and perpendicular to a building.
Sign, Replacement. A sign that takes the place of what previously existed and is equivalent in size and
design.
Sign, Property Identification. A sign which identifies or otherwise describes the name, ownership or
location on the lot or parcel of land upon which it is situated
Sign, Temporary. A sign which is intended to advertise community or civic events, construction projects,
real estate for sale or lease, or any other special event of a temporary nature.
Sign, Wall. A sign painted on the outside of a building, or attached to, and erected parallel to the face of a
building and supported throughout its length by such building.
Sign, Window. A sign affixed to a surface of a window or erected within two (2) feet thereof for the purpose
of advertising the sale of goods or services sold or provided from the premises.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
21
SIGN ILLUSTRATIONS
Sign with Background Panel Sign with Multiple Faces
"A"
~ ...
A
Sign A "8"
u9n
Content 'f
'f
I I
Sign Area• "A" x wB"
Sign Area= ("A," x "8") +("A," x "B")
SIGN ILLUSTRATIONS
Sign with No Background or Panel Sign withNo Background or Panel
(letters on building wall). (letters on stone wall)
... "A" .... .c "A" ...
Sig-n:- - ,. A
~grf qq_n.fe_ni- "B" banteni ... " Sign Area• "A" x "B"
Sign Area,. "A" x "B"
Solid Waste. See WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT RELATEDTERMS
Solid Waste Facility. See WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT RELATED TERMS
Story. See HEIGHT RELATEDTERMS
A
' "B"
Public Street. A road accepted and maintained by the Town of Cromwell, or a proposed street shown on a
subdivision plan approved by the Commission in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Cromwell
Subdivision Regulations.
Private Street. A road, street, or other vehicular passageway used for general circulation within a
Conservation Subdivision and maintained or to be maintained by a party other than the Town of Cromwell.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations 18.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
22
I
Structure. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Structural Alterations. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Temporary Sign. See ·'Sign, Temporary"@ SIGN RELATED TERMS
Temporary Structure. See BUILDING RELATED TERMS
Trailer, Utility. A trailer used to carry personal items such as recreational equipment, lawn debris and lawn
care material.
Uplighting. See LIGHTING RELATED TERMS
USE RELATED TERMS
,'
Use. The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or
may be occupied or maintained.
Use, Accessory. A use which is customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a
lot or a building and located on the same lottherewith.
Use, Business. Activity carried out for monetary gain, or an activity that is of type that is typically carried on
for monetary gain, regardless of actual profit or loss.
Use, Mixed. A building, or lot that contains both residential and non-residential uses.
Use, Nonconforming. See Nonconforming Use @Nonconforming Related Terms.
Use, Permitted. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent includes all uses authorized by these Regulations
by Use Permit, Site Plan Approval, or Special Permit, except non-conforming uses.
Use, Principal. The primary purpose or function for which a premises is used, designed, or intended to be
used.
Use. See USE RELATED TERMS
Use, Business. See USE RELATED TERMS
Use, Mixed. See USE RELATED TERMS
Use, Nonconforming. See USE RELATED TERMS
Use, Permitted. See USE RELATED TERMS
Use, Principal. See USE RELATED TERMS
Vehicle, Commercial. A motor vehicle which possesses one or more of the following characteristics:
• designed and built to perform a function other than carrying eight (8) or fowerpassengers;
• a lettered sign, product logo or related design painted or affixed to the vehicle;
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
23
I
modifications to facilitate the carrying goods or equipment for a commercial
purpose;
• for commercial purposes for more than four ( 4) hours in any one ( 1) day on a regular basis.
Vehicle, Recreational. See RECREATION RELATED TERMS
Wall Sign. See "Sign, Wall"@ See SIGN RELATED TERMS
WASTE MANAGEMENT RELATED TERMS
. .·
Junkyard. Any land or building used in whole or in part for the collection, storage, and/or sale of wastes,
paper, rags, a clutter of metal, scrap metal, glass or similar accumulations of appliances, articles or material;
or any place in or on which old material, glass, paper, cordage, or other waste or discarded or second hand
material which has not been a part, or is not intended to be part, of any motor vehicle, is stored or deposited.
It includes also any business and any place of storage or deposit, whether in connection with another
business or not, which has stored or deposited two or more unregistered motor vehicles, or which has stored
or deposited two (2) or more motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition for legal use on
public highways; or used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or other waste or
discarded or secondhand material which has been a part, or intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle.
Recycling Center. A building or structure within which discarded storage batteries, white metals,
automobile tires, paper, motor oil and vegetation is temporarily stored for further shipment.
Solid Waste. Unwanted or discarded materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material, or hazardous or regulated waste.
Solid Waste Facility. Any solid waste disposal area, volume reduction plant, "trash-to-energy" plant or
other facility the purpose of which is the disposal, processing or permanent storage of solid waste including
loading and transportation facilities or equipment used in connection with the processing of solid wastes, but
excluding transfer stations and recycling centers.
Transfer Station. Any storage or collection facility which is operated as a relay point for municipal solid
waste, or recyclable products which ultimately are to be transferred another facility.
Watercourse. Those areas designated and defined as watercourses by the Cromwell Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency, pursuant to its Regulations, as the same may be amended from time to time.
Wetlands. Those areas designated and defined as inland wetlands by the Cromwell Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency, pursuant to its Regulations, as the same may be amended from time to time.
Wholesale Sales. See SALES RELATED TERMS
Window Sign. See "Sign, Window" @See SIGN RELATED TERMS
Yard. See YARD RELATED TERMS
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
iNTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
24
.
YARD RELATED-TERMS .
Setback. The minimum required yard or distance from any street line or lot line, or edge of an accessway (in
the case of a parcel encumbered by an accessway) to a building, structure or use.
Yard (or Setback). An open, unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a building or structure.
Yard, Aggregate Side. The total side yard that is required when variable yard depths are allowed.
Yard, Front. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front wall of the principal
building and the front lot line. The depth of the front yard line shall be measured horizontally by the shortest
distance between the front line of the building and the street line.
Yard, Rear. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the most rear principal building and
the rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of
the principal building toward the nearest part of the rear lot line.
Yard, Side. An area between a principal building and the side lot line extending from the front yard, or front
lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required yard shall be measured
horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the nearest part of the main building.
YARD ILLUSTRATIONS
.· ;-
· ·i
Side
Yard
Side
Yard
i
i~
' - -- --. --- -- -- --- -~ -- --- ----- -. . .. --... , Side Yard Seblck
I
!Mnlrrum
jR.,..
•Yard ,
:Sft>Kk:
~ >r ;::ml
, I
------·_ --· t-~Sel>ack_ ___,_ ___J
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
25
Zone. See Section 1.6.B or "Zoning District."
Zoning District. An area described by the Cromwell Zoning Regulations in which a uniform set of regulations
relating to use of the land and structures on the land, in order to protect the public health, safoty and welfare.
Zoning Enforcement Officer. As provided in CGS 8-12 as may be amended, the person or persons designated
by the Commission to interpret and enforce the Regulations, or 'his/her designee(s.)
Zoning Violation. The failure of a lot, building, structure or use to be compliant with the Cromwell Zoning
Regulations.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
26
I
I
2. RESIDENTIAL ZONES
2.1 PERMIT TYPES
Activities permitted in these regulations may require permits from the Planning and Zoning Commission or
their administrative agent, the Zoning Enforcement Officer/Zoning Official. The following table identifies the
permit types, issuing agency and the procedural requirements for these permits. Uses listed on the following
pages are color coded to correspond with the permit type.
ISSUING AGENCY PROCEDURAL
INFORMATION
NO PERMIT REQUIRED NIA NIA
Zoning Enforcement Officer or
USE PERMIT Planning and Zoning Section 8.2
Commission
SITE.PLAN APPROVAL .. Planning and Zoning
Section 8.6
Commission
SPECIAL PERMIT
Planning and Zoning
Section 8.7
Commission
2.2 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE DISTRICTS
2.2.A Purpose.
1. R-15. Purpose: To cover the central core of Cromwell where availability of public utilities,
proximity to schools, and existing patterns of development make this density appropriate.
2. R-25. Purpose: To cover those areas of Cromwell where development has occurred, and
should continue to occur, at less intense densities, and where water and sewer may or may
not be available.
3. R-40. Purpose: To cover those areas of Cromwell which are largely undeveloped or
predominantly rural in character and which are least likely to have access to water and
sewer lines.
2.2.B Bulk Requirements.
Minimum Minimum Yards Maximum
I I ! Aggregate ! Building I i I I Building
Zone Lot Area l Fronta2e Front i Side ! Side ! Rear Covera2e I Hei2ht
i R-15 15,000 SF I 100 LF 35 LF I 15 LF I 35 LF I 25 LF 15 LF I 35 LF
I R-25 25,000 SF i 130 LF
I R-40 40,000 SF I 160 LF I
40 LF i 20 LF i 50 LF i
40 LF I 25 LF I 60 LF I
I I I
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
27
50 LF 15 LF i 35 LF
50 LF 15 LF I 35 LF I
I
!
Principal Uses.
No Permit is Required
•Single-family dwelling
•Farm
•Cultivation of land
•Public utility substations, pursuant to the Connecticut Siting Council.
2. Requires Use Permit Approval[Section 8.2]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
HOUSING USES
(SEE SECTION)
•Two-family dwelling
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
FARMING RELATED USES
(SEE SECTION)
• Large Domestic Pet 2.8
•Farm stand
•Private greenhouse
•Farm buildings. All farm buildings and residential
accessory buildings housing livestock or poultry shall be
located at least I 00 feet from any street or lot line
3. Requires Site Plan Approval (new construction) [Section 8.5] I Change of Use Permit
(existing building I structure) [Section 8.3]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
28
(SEE SECTION)
I
I
I I
I
I
I
4. Permit Approval (Section 8.7]
HOUSING USES
•Assisted li.ving facility, congregate housing, continuing
care ret1rement community, or a nursing facilitv I
•Conservation subdivision I
!
•Dwelling, converted (3 or more units)
•Rear lot
FARMING RELATED USES
•Commercial Kennel
•Riding academy and stables
OTHER USES
•Colleges and schools/dormitories
•Group Day Care Home, Day care center
•Hospital
•Municipal facilities and services
•Places of worship/churches
•Public utility service yard
•Radio mast, amateur
•Outdoor recreation facility
•Temporary amusements
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
29
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
I
I
6.7 l
5.9
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
6.9
'"
•
i I •
•
•
I !
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
I •
•
•
2.2.D Accessory Uses.
USE
Cultivation of Land
Family Day Care Home
Fences which are less than SIX ( 6) feet tall provided
visibility is not blocked
Playscapes
Parking or storage of any number of motor vehicles,
registered or unregistered, if parked or stored m a
completely enclosed garage or building. Any number of
registered vehicles may be parked outside except as
otherwise prohibited by these regulations. One unregistered
vehicle in good condition (fully inflated tires; all doors,
hood and trunk; no broken or missing windows)
Parking for one (I) commercial vehicle not exceeding
11,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and a cargo area not
exceeding 200 cubic feet
Parking for a maximum of two (2) recreational vehicles
Parking for a private utility trailer
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2]
USE
Parking areas for Principal Uses (less than 20 parking
spaces)
Farm Stand
Large Domestic Animal Pets
Accessory building in the front yard at a municipal facility
Minor Home-Based Business
Accessory Apartment
Home Office I Studio
Coops housing poultry
Greenhouse
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
30
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
2.7.B and 5.8
I
I
I
I i
I
I
2.10
2.10
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
5.2
2.8
2.9
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
3. Requires Site Plan Approval [Section 8.6]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
• Parking areas for Principal Uses (20 or more parking
spaces)
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section 8.7]
USE
• Major Home-Based Business
• Bed and Breakfast Inn
• Private garages larger than 1,000 square feet, up to 1,600
square feet total on any single lot
• Parking for a second commercial vehicle not exceeding
15,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and a cargo area not
exceeding 200 cubic feet (total of two (2) on a residential
property)
• Parking for one ( 1) commercial vehicle exceeding 15,000
pounds gross vehicle weight and/or a cargo area of 200
cubic feet
• Parking for a commercial trailer
2.3 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
2.4 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
2.5 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
2.6 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
2.7 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
2.7.A Accessory Buildings in Residential Use Districts.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
31
(SEE SECTION)
5.2
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
6.10
2.7.A4
2.10
2.10
2.10
No accessory building in a residential district shall be located in any front yard (except for
accessory buildings which may be permitted in the front yard at a facility). No
accessory building shall be located in any side nearer to the line than the
width required for a side yard for the principal building, or in a rear yard unless
at least five (5) feet from any lot line. No accessory building, except a building used in
connection with a farm, shall exceed 18 feet in height.
2. On corner lots in addition to the above requirements, no accessory building in a rear yard
shall be nearer a street line than the least depth of any front yard required along such street.
3. A building attached to the principal building by a covered passageway, or by having a wall
or a part of a wall in common with it, shall be considered an integral part of the principal
structure and not an accessory building.
4. The total combined private garage facilities in connection with a single-family dwelling
may not exceed 1,000 square feet in area except as follows. By Special Permit, total
combined garage facilities on a conforming lot may exceed 1,000 square feet but shall not
exceed L600 square feet. An application for a Special Permit shall include a site plan
showing existing and proposed screening (buildings, trees, and shrubbery) which in the
Commission's judgment will adequately screen the proposed garage facilities.
5. Coops housing poultry shall not be located closer than ten ( 10) feet from a side or rear
property line and no closer to any adjacent dwellings than the building on the property.
Coops shall have a maximum of l 0 hens and roosters shall not be permitted.
2.7.B Fences.
In residential districts, fences not exceeding six (6) feet in height are permitted along rear and side lot lines
only and may not extend into the front yard. Within the front yard, fences may not exceed four (4) feet in
height except on corner lots where requirements of Section 5 .8 must be met.
2.8 LARGE DOMESTIC ANIMAL PETS
2.8.A Permit Required.
The keeping of a Large Domestic Animal Pet shall be permitted as an accessory use upon the issuance of a Use
Permit.
2.8.B Requirements.
1. Minimum Lot Area. The Large Domestic Animal Pet must be owned by the resident
occupant and there shall be a minimum area of three (3) acres devoted to the first Large
Domestic Animal Pet and one-half (Yi) acre for each additional Large Domestic Animal
Pet. Watercourses shall not be included in the calculation ofarea.
2. Setbacks. The grazing area of Large Domestic Animal Pets shall be restricted to no closer
than ten ( 10) feet from the lot line and prohibited entirely from the Front Yard.
3. Manure piles and buildings housing Large Domestic Animal Pets shall be a minimum of
I 00 feet from adjacent lot lines.
2.9 HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
2.9.A Home Office/Studio.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
32
'"u''"'"'''"' for personal business purposes. Nothing in these regulations shall restrict
the occupant for business purposes where:
No business is conducted on the premises computer, mail, or
communication technology.
No persons other than members of the family are employed.
3. No external evidence of the business is visible.
4. No business signs are erected.
5. No pedestrian or automobile traffic other than that is normally generated by a residence.
2.9.B Minor Home-Based Business.
use a
A minor home-based business where such business is located within the same dwelling used by such person as
his or her primary residence provided that:
1. the area devoted to such accessory use (including storage of any supplies or materials) shall
not exceed 25 percent of the total square footage of the dwelling (exclusive of garage, attic
and basement, orcellar);
2. not more than one ( 1) nonresident person shall be employed on the premises;
3. the accessory use shall:
(I) be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling by the residentoccupant,
(2) clearly be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes,
(3) not change the exterior residential appearance or character of the building or be
noticeable from the exterior of the building,
( 4) not materially change the traffic characteristics of the neighborhood,
(5) not have any outside storage or display of merchandise, equipment, or machinery
relative to the use,
(6) not include the keeping of stock in trade nor the sale or rental of any goods not
produced within the premises,
(7) not involve the display of signs or products in, on, or about the premises except for a
sign as permitted by these Regulations, and
(8) not involve retail sales at the premises.
4. parking areas for residents, employees or the general public shall not be located m an
inappropriate location and any parking areas shall be screened, if necessary.
2.9.C Major Home-Based Business.
A major home-based business where such business use does not comply with the requirements of Subsection
2.9.B, but where the Commission feels the use is appropriate in a Residential Zone, subject to Section 8.6.
2.10 PARKING OF SPECIAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
1. Commercial Vehicles.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
33
One commercial vehicle not exceeding 15,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and a
cargo area not exceeding 200 cubic feet may be parked or garaged on a lot.
By Special Permit, a second commercial vehicle not exceeding the weight and cargo
requirements listed above may be parked or garaged on a lot. When reviewing a
request for such a Special Permit the Commission shall consider such factors as
proposed screening; proximity to adjacent lots and buildings; the size, intended use,
and hours of operation of the vehicle in question; other vehicles on the property;
character of the neighborhood.
(3) By Special Permit, one (I) commercial vehicle exceeding the requirements referred to
in subsection ( 1) above may be parked or garaged on a lot. When reviewing a request
for such a Special Pennit the Commission shall consider such factors as proposed
screening; proximity to adjacent lots and buildings; the size, intended use. and hours
of operation of the vehicle in question; other vehicles on the property; character of the
neighborhood.
2. Recreational Vehicles. Not more than two (2) recreational vehicles may be parked or
garaged on a lot, subject to the following requirements:
(1) Said vehicle(s) shall not exceed 35 feet in length;
(2) Said vehicle(s) may be parked in the driveway but shall not be parked elsewhere in
the front yard as defined in the Zoning Regulations;
(3) Said vehicle(s) may be parked in the rear or side yard, but no closer than five (5) feet
from any rear or side lot line and must be adequately screened by plantings,
buildings or fencing;
(4) Said vehicle(s) may not be occupied while parked or garaged.
3. Private Utility Trailers.
(1) Trailers of any length may be kept within a garage or accessory building.
(2) Trailers not more than 24 feet in length may be kept outside of a garage or other
accessory building subject to the following requirements:
a) trailer(s) may be parked in the driveway but shall not be parked elsewhere in
the front yard as defined in the Zoning Regulations;
b) trailer(s) may be parked in the rear or side yard, but no closer than five (5) feet
from any rear or side property boundary and must be adequately screened by
plantings, buildings or fencing.
4. Commercial Trailers. By Special Permit, one (I) or more commercial trailers not
exceeding 16 feet in length may be kept within a garage or accessory building or
sufficiently screened. When reviewing a request for such a Special Permit the Commission
shall consider such factors as:
(1) Proximity to adjacent lots and buildings;
(2) The size, intended use, and hours of operation of the trailer( s) in question;
(3) Other trailers and vehicles on the property;
(4) Character of the neighborhood
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
34
3.> BUSINESS ZONES
1 DOWNTOWN CROMWELL DISTRICT (DC)
3.LA Purpose.
L Provide general guidelines as well as specific criteria for the appropriate development of an
area of town whose pattern of development was established many years ago, before zoning
was adopted in town.
2. Where appropriate, encourage high density, pedestrian-oriented commercial development
of a type consistent with the historic character of the area. Encourage the use of
architectural and site design elements that are compatible with existing structures in the
center of the Downtown Cromwell District, and which promote pedestrian-oriented
businesses (such as placing the building as close to the street as possible; using attractive
doorways and display windows; putting parking spaces behind the building, etc.).
3. Where appropriate, encourage high density, pedestrian-oriented multi-family development
of a type compatible with the historic character of the area. Encourage the use of
architectural and site design elements that are compatible with existing structures in the
center of the Downtown Cromwell District (such as placing the building relatively close to
the street; putting parking spaces behind the building, etc.).
4. Where appropriate, permit high density, single-family residential development of a type
consistent with the character of the existing neighborhood in the R-15 District to the east of
the District;
5. Encourage the use of architectural and site design elements that are consistent with the
existing pattern of single-family development in the area (such as placing the house
relatively close to the street; narrow side yards, etc.) and are typical of house design during
the early part of the 20th century (open porches across the front of the house; detached
garages behind the house, etc.);
6. Facilitate the maintenance and upgrading of the neighborhood;
7. Encourage the appropriate development of vacant and underutilized lots; and
8. Lessen the adverse effects of existing inappropriate and incompatible uses.
3.1.B Bulk Requirements.
Zone
DC
Minimum Minimum Yards
l Aggregate
Side ! Side
I
I
Lot Area ! Fronta e Front
5,000
square 70 feet 10 feet I 0 feet 25 feet
feet
1. Height to be determined
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
35
Rear
20 feet
100
percent
40 feet
I
I
I
I
I I I
I
Principal Uses.
No
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
HOUSING USES
(SEE SECTION)
•Two-family house
•Minor home based business
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
FARM RELATED USES
(SEE SECTION)
•Large domestic pet
•Farm stand
•Private greenhouse
•Farm buildings (all farm buildings housing livestock
shall be located at least 100 feet from any street or
lot line)
3. Requires Site Plan Approval (new construction) [Section 8.5] I Change of Use Permit
(existing building I structure) [Section 8.3]
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
36
I
I
I
SERVICE RELATED USES
•Animal hospital or veterinarian office
r ff y
•Day-care center, including an adult day-care center
•Dry cleaning establishment
•F uner al horn e !
•Personal service establishment (hair, nails, tailoring,
tanning)
•Pet store, pet grooming and pet training
•Self-service automatic laundry establishment. Such
establishment shall be permitted to provide on-site I
washing as an accessory service
•Service establishment (repair, rental and/or service) of
any item which is allowed to be sold in the zone
except automobiles, trucks and trailers
OFFICE RELATED: VSES
•A TM, walk-up
•Bank or savings and loan (State or Federally
association chartered)
•General or business office
•Medical or dental office or clinic
FOOD/HOSPITALITY RELATED USES
•Outdoor service accessory to a sit-down restaurant,
including the placement of seating and tables out of
doors and food service
•Restaurant, Sit-down (excludes fast-food restaurant
and drive-in window).
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
37
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION}
ADDmONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
I
I
•Restaurant. fast food- without drive-in window
•Bakery
ADDffiONAL CRITERIA
RECREATION/AMUSEMENT USES .··.
(SEE SECTION)·
... · .
•Athletic club
•Interior recreational uses including but not limited to a
theater, billiard parlor, bowling alley
•Playground or recreation areas operated by a
governmental unit
. . . · ,~ . " .. , ~ •) . --: ' . . . .
INS~oNAi.U E .· ADl>mo~AJ... ~RIA' .·.:
.··. ·
0
··· ••• ·· ·· •.. •• · • ·· •· (sEE . EctioN> ...
..___--'-'-----"-"--'-~-··· ": : .. \ ;,,,:: .. :: -~i.___,,_.__-'"""'""-·--'-"-~--"--'-'"-~-'-'-------~-'-="'---'~~~.-...·'-· ":·.. ..." ''" ' '-::;>. ...-~~--'-·~
•Club, lodge or fraternal organization (private and
operated for the benefit of the members and not for
gain)
•Museum
~~--·-·----· .>' ---·--·--- -~-·----. -. .- .-. - --:.. ;-- -·---
Ai>ilmo AL CBITERIA
"',,::·:
. ,( . E ECTION)
--------'~-----:.·'"->'·"'""'. "..' ~~-·-·. - ·--'-· ....·.·- ·_,."i":·_· ·.'."""".• " ::"::'~.~. .-_-=''.: _ _ ,··-' --'"''---':-'---~
•Nurseries and sale of produce and plants (Commission
shall approve areas for outside display)
• Retai I store
•Public utilities
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section8.7]
RETAIUWHOLESALESALESUSES
•Retail store for the sales of alcoholic beverages
•Outside storage or display of merchandise
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
38
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
i
I
I
HOUSING USES
•Assisted living facility, congregate housing, continuing
care retirement community, or a nursing facility I
•Caretakers quarters I
I
•Multi-family dwelling units
•Rear lot
FOOD I HOSPITALITY RELATED USES
•Bed and breakfast inn
•Hospital
•Hotel, which may include an accessory sit-down
restaurant (but not a fast-food restaurant or any
drive-in facilities), banquet hall and/or conference
center
•Restaurant, Sit down with the accessory Sale of
Alcoholic Beverages for on-site consumption
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•Government Services
•Public services, including ambulance service, fire
station, library, police station, post office and
terminal for public vehicles (including repair or
storage)
•Place of Worship/Church
OTHER USES
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
39
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
6.8
6.6
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
I
I
I
I I
baseball batting facility, miniature golf and putting
course, tennis facilities, ice skating facilities and
.iiSchool for training in occupational skills. Enrollment
may be open to the public or limited; may include
dormitories for students and instructors as an
accessory use.
3.1.D Accessory Uses.
l. No Permit is Required
USE
•Home Office/Studio
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2)
USE
•Accessory Apartment
•Farm stands
•Fences which are less than six ( 6) feet tall provided
visibility is not blocked, per Section 5.8
•Accessory buildings housing livestock or poultry
•Pools and other recreational structures such as tennis
courts
•Private garages, sheds or gazebos, or other structures
up to 1,000 square feet in total on any single lot
•Signs pertaining to a permitted principal use on lot
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
40
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
2.9
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
5.8
I
I i
i
I
I
Requires Site Plan Approval [Section 8.6]
USE
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (less than 20 parking
spaces)
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section 8.7]
USE
•Live entertainment
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (20 or more parking
spaces)
3.1.E Architectural Review.
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
5.2
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
5.2
I
I
Because of the Downtown Cromwell District's proximity to the "Upper Houses National Register Historic
District" and the "Main Street National Register Historic District," and because the purpose of these regulations
is to encourage appropriate, pedestrian-oriented development consistent or compatible with the area, the
appearance of any new or modified structure shall be a factor in the Commissions' decision. Therefore:
1. Any application for Site Plan Approval involving commercial or multi-family construction
must include architectural renderings of the structure. The Commission may call upon other
agencies, organizations, or qualified individuals to aid it in evaluating a project.
2. Any application submitted to the Town Planner for the construction of or substantial
changes to a single-family house must include architectural renderings of the house. The
Town Planner will forward those renderings to the Commission for its review before
granting Zoning Approval. The Commission may call upon other agencies, organizations,
or qualified individuals to aid it in evaluating a project.
3. Any application submitted to the Town Planner for the rehabilitation or alteration of an
existing commercial structure must include architectural renderings of the proposed
rehabilitation or alteration. The Town Planner will forward those renderings to the
Commission for its review before granting Zoning Approval. The Commission may call
upon other agencies, organizations, or qualified individuals to aid it in evaluating these
renderings.
3.1.F Pre-Application Review.
Applicants are encouraged to meet with the Commission prior to application on an informal basis to discuss
design issues.
3.1.G Housing Options.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
41
- ·:" - . - . .. - - . . - .
•· - • . . I
Where multi-family dwelling units are proposed for new construction within the Downtown Cromwell Di strict,
they shall be subject to the following requirements and regulations:
TIERl TIER2
·.:
Maximum units per acre 8 12
Required commercial gross floor area in development 10% 25%
Minimum percent of residential units located above the first floor 30% 50%
3.1.H Sidewalks.
1. Sidewalks shall be required at all new construction or significant modifications. Except as
provided for below, sidewalks shall conform to the Town of Cromwell's specifications and
shall be located according to the Town's direction.
2. The Commission may, at its discretion, require the use of ornamental paving materials
instead of conventional concrete sidewalks.
3.2 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (LB)
3.2.A Purpose.
The purpose of the LB zone is to provide a neighborhood shopping zone where retail business or service
establishments supply commodities or perform services to the daily needs of the residential neighborhoods.
3.2.B Bulk Requirements.
· Minimum
I
i
Z011e Lot Area i Fronta e
LB
15,000
square
feet
I 00 feet
3.2.C Principal Uses.
1. No Permit is Required
USE
•Public Open Space
Minimum Yards
t Aggregate
Front Side I. Side. Rear
I 0 feet JO feet 20 feet 10 feet
•Public utility substations, pursuant to the Connecticut Siting Council.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25 .2015
BUSINESS ZONES
42
Maximum -
Building Building ·
Covera e Hei t
75 percent 35 feet
i
I
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
(SEE SECTION)
•None
3. Requires Site Plan Approval (new construction) [Section 8.5] I Change of Use Pennit (existing
building I structure) [Section 8.3)
.··
SERVICE RELATED USES
·.
•Animal hospital or veterinarian office
•Cemetery
•Day-care center, including an adult day-care center
•Dry cleaning establishment
•Funeral home
•Personal service establishment (hair, nails, tailoring,
tanning)
•Pet store, pet grooming and pet training
•Self-service automatic laundry establishment. Such
establishment shall be pennitted to provide on-site
washing as an accessory service
•Service establishment (repair, rental and/or service) of
any item which is allowed to be sold in the zone
except automobiles, trucks and trailers
OFFICE RELATED USES ...
•A TM, drive-up
•ATM, walk-up
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
43
. · ..
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDIDONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
·. '
.
·.
•Bank or savings and loan (State or Federally
association chartered)
•General or business office
•Medical or dental office or clinic
.. FOOD/HOSPITALITY RELATED USES
•Outdoor service accessory to a sit-down restaurant,
including the placement of seating and tables out of
doors and food service
•Restaurant, Sit-down (excludes fast-food restaurant
and drive-in window).
•Restaurant, fast food - without drive-in window
•Bakery
. .. : ~ · ... ·>·.:: . :.,.· --~- , ·:
. RECREA1.1Q /AMU ~EMENTUSE
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION} . :
AI>nmoNAL CRITERIA
· · (sEi ·sErnC>N) ·
f--~-· ---~--------·--····'---...:..--= '-h"','".''"•";· .'.' --··-1--==~-'-'---"--";'"'·"'':...;'";.' --'--'-===== --'
•Athletic club
•Interior recreational uses including but not limited to a
theater, billiard parlor, bowling alley
•Playground or recreation areas operated by a
governmental unit
•Car wash and/or auto detailing establishment
•Motor re-fuel/re-charge filling station
•Parking and/or commercial storage of vehicles
•Rental of trailers accessory to motor vehicle service
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
44
I
I
I
I
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•Club, lodge or fraternal organization (private and
operated for the benefit of the members and not for
OTHER USES
•Nurseries and sale of produce and plants (Commission
shall approve areas for outside display)
•Retail store
•Utilities, including gas regulation stations, telephone
exchanges, pumping stations, aboveground water
storage tank, water reservoirs and satellite and cable
television facilities
4. Requires Special Pennit Approval [Section8.7]
RETAIL/WHOLESALE SALES USES
•Retail store for the sales of alcoholic beverages
•Outside storage or display of merchandise
•Sale at retail of any commodity manufactured,
processed, fabricated or warehoused on the
premises provided the total floor area devoted to
retail sales does not exceed 20 percent of the gross
floor area of the building
•Sale at retail of equipment, supplies and materials
designed especially for use in agriculture, mining,
industry, business, transportation, building and
other construction,
commercial explosives
HOUSING USES
with the exception of
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
45
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDmONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
I
I
I
I
I
FOOD/HOSPITALITY USES
•Bed and breakfast inn I
•Drive-in window service of any kind
•Hospital
•Hotel, which may include a sit-down restaurant (but
not a fast-food restaurant or any drive-in facilities)
banquet hall and/or conference center '
•Live entertainment
•Pet day-care facility or pet boarding facility
•Restaurant, Sit down with the accessory Sale of
Alcoholic Beverages
•Restaurant, fast food - with drive-in window
AUTOMOTIVE RELATED USES
•Motor vehicle sales
•Motor vehicle service (limited repair license or general
repair license)
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•Government Services
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
46
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
6.5
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
6.4
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
I I
I
I
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
OTHER USES
(SEE SECTION)
•Drive-in window service of any kind
6.5
•Outdoor recreational uses, including but not limited to
baseball batting facility, miniature golf and putting
course, tennis facilities, ice skating facilities and
golf driving range
•Exterior recreational uses, including but not limited to
baseball batting facility, miniature golf and putting
course, tennis facilities, ice skating facilities and
golf driving range
•Railroad facilities
•School for training in occupational skills. Enrollment
may be open to the public or limited; may include
dormitories for students and instructors as an
accessory use.
•Self-storage facility
•Public utility, pursuant to Siting Council.
3.2.D Accessory Uses.
1. No Permit is Required
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
(SEE SECTION)
•Home Office/Studio 2.9
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
47
(SEE SECTION)
I
I
l
I
I
I
3. Requires Site Plan Approval [Section 8.6]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
(SEE SECTION) ;
•Outdoor storage of material
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (less than 20 parking
5.2
spaces)
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section 8.7]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
(SEE SECTION)
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (20 or more parking
5.2
spaces)
3.3 HIGHWAY BUSINESS (HB)
3.3.A Purpose.
The Highway Business District encourages high quality business development along key transportation routes
in Cromwell.
3.3.B Bulk Requirements.
c Minimum
l
I
Zone Lot Area ! Frontai?:e
60,000 I
I
HB square I 200 feet I
feet I
3.3.C Principal Uses.
1. No Permit is Required
Minimum Yards
I i Aggregate i I
Front I Side i Side i
I I I
I I I
25 feet I
I 25 feet I 50 feet I
I I
I I I
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
48
Maximum
Rear
Building j Building
Covera2e Hei2ht
I
25 feet 65 percent 40 feet
I
I I
I
I
I
Farms
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
(SEE SECTION)
•None
3. Requires Site Plan Approval (new construction) [Section 8.5] I Change of Use Permit (existing
building I structure) [Section 8.3]
...
.·.
SERVICE RELATED USES
. .·· .
•Animal hospital or veterinarian office
•Day-care center, including an adult day-care center
•Dry cleaning establishment
•Funeral home
•Personal service establishment (hair, nails, tailoring,
tanning)
•Pet store, pet grooming and pet training
•Self-service automatic laundry establishment. Such
establishment shall be permitted to provide on-site
washing as an accessory service
•Service establishment (repair, rental and/or service) of
any item which is allowed to be sold in the zone
except automobiles, trucks and trailers
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
49
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
.· j
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
OFFICE RELATED USES .. (SEE SECTION)
•A TM, drive-up
•A TM, walk-up
•Bank or savings and loan (State or Federally
association chartered)
•General or business office
•Medical or dental office, clinic or laboratory
ADDITl()NAL CRITERIA : ., ··~ ._-: . ~· " '
~. "' . ' . -: .. :· ~ >·•'.
.i.:
(SE~ SECTION)
•Restaurant, Sit-down
•Restaurant, fast food - without drive-in window
•Bakery
,_,..~-----,_..·---·------·---------- . ~n~o~J\L cRirnuA:
SEMENTU ES
.-;,. . ----+--_:_:.:.~·<.L :-'Ei>.::·.;:; ;..;E....:..c..:-1'--1'-oN.s· ).~-
•Athletic club
•Interior recreational uses including but not limited to a
theater, billiard parlor, bowling alley
•Playground or recreation areas operated by a
governmental unit
~uToiwoTIVE RELAnl> usEs · ·" < •• • / ••••• •• • • '
· ADDmONAL CRITERIA'° ; ·
. (SERSEc:rION) ;
•Car wash and/or auto d~tailing est~blishm~~;t'"--~-=-4"----'--..:....;~:..;._.__-2...:--'-'_j:;~~:.:._.i_::~~_:__J
•Motor vehicle refuel/recharge stations
•Motor vehicle sales
•Motor vehicle service (limited repair license or general
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25 .2015
BUSINESS ZONES
so
I I
I
I
I
INSTITUTIONAL USES
. ·.
•Club, lodge or fraternal organization (private and
operated for the benefit of the members and not for
gain)
•Museum
OTHER USES
•Nurseries and sale of produce and plants (Commission
shall approve areas for outside display)
•Retail store
•Public utilities
4. Requires Special Permit Approval (Section8.7]
RETAIL/WHOLESALE SALES USES
•Retail store for the sales of alcoholic beverages
•Outside storage or display of merchandise
•Sale at retail of any commodity manufactured,
processed, fabricated or warehoused on the
premises provided the total floor area devoted to
retail sales does not exceed 20 percent of the gross
floor area of the building
•Sale at retail of equipment, supplies and materials
designed especially for use in agriculture, mining,
industry, business,
other construction,
transportation, building and
with the exception of
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
51
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)·•
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
..
.
I
I
I
I
I
I
HOUSING USES
•Multi-family dwelling units
FOOD/HOSPITALITY RELATED USES
•Bed and breakfast inn
•Drive-in window service of any kind
•Hospital
•Hotel, which may include a sit-down restaurant (but
not a fast-food restaurant or any drive-in facilities),
banquet hall and/or conforence center
•Live entertainment
•Outdoor service accessory to a sit-down restaurant,
including the placement of seating and tables out of
doors and food served thereat.
•Pet day-care facility or pet boarding facility
•Restaurant with the accessory sales of alcoho lie
beverages
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•Government Services
•Public services, including ambulance service, fire
station, library, police station, post office and
terminal for public vehicles (including repair or
storage)
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
52
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
6.8
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
6.10
6.5
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
I
I
I
I
I
OTHER USES
•Drive-in window service of any kind
•Outdoor recreational uses, including but not limited to
baseball batting facility, miniature golf and putting
course, tennis facilities, ice skating facilities and
golf driving range
• Rai I road facilities
•School for training in occupational skills. Enrollment
may be open to the public or limited; may include
dormitories for students and instructors as an
accessory use.
•Self-storage facility
•Public utility
3.3.D Accessory Uses.
1. No Permit is Required
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2)
USE
•Accessory Apartment
•Farm stands
3. Requires Site Plan Approval [Section 8.6]
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
53
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
I
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
us :_,,-
•Outdoor storage of material
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (less than 20 parking
spaces)
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section8.7]
. ..
USE
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (20 or more parking
spaces)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA.·. .
(SEE SECTION); ,
5.2
ADDITTONAL CRITERIA .
(SEE SECTION)
5.2
.-., ;
.·'
3.4 BUSINESS INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT (BP)
3.4.A Purpose.
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas primarily for planned general office and business park
developments and related services which will be compatible with, and serve as a transition to, nearby
residential areas and will promote a quiet, clean environment.
Development in this zone should emphasize a high level of architectural and landscape excellence. The intent
is to create an attractive business environment.
3.4.B Bulk Requirements.
Minim,. um
'i"
ZOae LOt Area ! Fron e
BP
60,000
square
feet
200 feet
3.4.C Principal Uses.
1. No Permit is Required
USE
•Farms
Minimum Yards.
! Aggregate
Front . Side ! Side
35 feet 25 feet 50 feet
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
54
Rear
25 feet
Maximum
Building l Building•
Covera e: ! He· t<
50 percent 60 feet
•Public space and passive recreation
•Public utili ties, pursuant to the Connecticut Siting Council.
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2]
ADDmONAL CRITERIA
USE
(SEE SECTION)
•None
3. Requires Site Plan Approval (new construction) [Section 8.5] I Change of Use Permit
(existing building I structure) [Section 8.3]
··,, ....•. ·~.-··-::-:·>. .: .. . ' "~,-''. :: .·
· ' .. · · ADDITI() .· .. J\L CRITERIA
(SEE SECTI<)N)
SERVICE RELATED USE
e • ,, • ' ·~ ,';-:.··: .": ', .:'(,•,•: ';
•Animal hospital or veterinarian office
•Day-care center, including an adult day-care center
•Funeral home
~··-----··- · · ·-··----··-·--- ·--· .. - ----.. ... ··-- ------
ii;·tRITERIA
- ·
"
OFFIC RELATEDU E
·- ·· . -·- ··
•A TM, drive-up
•ATM, walk-up
•Bank or savmgs and loan (State or Federally
association chartered)
•General or business office
•Medical or dental office, clinic or laboratory
RECREATION/AMUSEMENT USES •
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
55
ADDITIO
;( EESECOON)
----- ~:-:- :·>· .. ..
•·
ADDmONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
I
I
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•Club, lodge or fraternal organization (private and
operated for the benefit of the members and not for
gain) I
•Museum
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section 8.7]
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•Government Services
•Public services, including ambulance service, fire
station, library, police station, post office and
terminal for public vehicles (including repair or
storage)
OTHER USES
•Audio and/or video production facilities
•Assembling, manufacturing and processing facilities
•Outdoor recreational uses, including but not limited to
baseball batting facility, miniature golf and putting
course, tennis facilities, ice skating facilities and
golf driving range
•Hotel
•Hospital
I
I
•School for training in occupational skills. Enrollment
may be open to the public or limited: may include
dormitories for students and instructors as an
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
56
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)·
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
I
I
I
I
l
3.4.D Accessory Uses.
1. No Permit is Required
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2]
USE
•None
3. Requires Site Plan Approval [Section 8.6]
•Outdoor storage of material
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (less than 20 parking
spaces)
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section8.7]
USE
•Caretakers quarters
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (20 or more parking
spaces)
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
57
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA.
(SEE SECTION)
5.2
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
5.2
I
I
I
3.4.E Prohibited Uses.
Residential uses, as that term is used in Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-30g(g), and that term has been
construed by the Connecticut Courts.
3.5 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I)
3.5.A Purpose.
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas primarily industrial development and related services. Residential
development is not envisioned in this area.
3.5.B Bulk Requirements.
Minimum Minimum Yards Maximum
i ! Aggregate Building Building
Zone, Lot Area l Fronta2e Front Side I Side Rear Covera2e Bei2ht I
21,780 I I
I I
I square I 125 feet 30 feet 10 feet I 25 feet 50 feet 75 percent 70 feet
feet I I
; I
3.5.C Principal Uses.
1. No Permit is Required
USE
•Farms
•Public open space
•Public utilities
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2]
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
USE
(SEE SECTION}
•None
3. Requires Site Plan Approval (new construction) [Section 8.5] I Change of Use Permit
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
58
(existing building I structure) [Section 8.3]
SERVICE RELATED USES
•Animal hospital or veterinarian office
•Day-care center, including an adult day-care center
•Funeral home
> ',
: -~,':: ,. :' .
'"i •
•A TM, driv~~~p--- .
•A TM, walk-up
•Bank or savings and loan (State or Federally
association chartered)
•General or business office
•Medical or dental office, clinic or laboratory
TITUTIO AL USE
•Club, lodge or fratem~l-o;·~anization (private and
operated for the benefit of the members and not for
gain)
•Museum
RECREAnoN'1Mn7sEMENT u · .·
•Playground or recreation areas operated by a
governmental unit
ADDffiONAL CRITERIA ·
(SEE SECTION)
ADDmONAL CRITERIA .
~:. , ..... .. ···:· ~ . (S~~~EC'I1,QN}>'~ :····· ,,
lDnmo AL·~
F J;E E9JQ~
· .. · ADDmONAL CRITERIA~ .
. . . (SEE:·sECrtON) ..
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
59
I I
I
'
OTHER USES
11Assembling, manufacturing and processing facilities
•Audio and/or video production facilities
•Restaurant, no drive-in windows
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section 8.7]
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•Government Services
•Public services, including ambulance service, fire
station, library, police station, post office and
terminal for public vehicles (including repair or
storage)
OTHER USES
•Nurseries and sale of produce and plants (Commission
approval shall be required for areas for outside
display)
•Contractor yard for vehicles, equipment, materials
and/or supplies
•Freight, truck and bus terminals
•Motor vehicle service (limited repair license or general
repair license)
•Research laboratory
•School for training in occupational skills. Enrollment
may be open to the public or limited; may include
dormitories for students and instructors as an
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
60
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
6.4
I
I
I !
---=--~---=-~·:::----·T,.,:cf'~ ~ .-.=:· ·.-:-:'_" --~ :=,-=-.. .= ~ :.;----~"'--:--.; • • -7_>:•--:_-~"~: .. . I -
- . .
. _:· =·'' ~J -· ~-J· ..... . .. _:. _·,__ -=- -- =---· .. :.:_L":ll = - ,_:__,...._ =- -- - . . I
accessory use.
•Outdoor recreational uses, including but not limited to
baseball batting facility, miniature golf and putting
course, tennis facilities. ice skating facilities and
golf driving range
•Wholesale distribution of goods manufactured on the
premises (not retail)
3.5.D Accessory Uses.
1. No Permit is Required
USE
•None
2. Requires Use Permit Approval [Section 8.2)
ADDmONAL CRITERIA
USE'
(SEE SECTION)
•Farm stands
3. Requires Site Plan Approval [Section 8.6)
~,-·--·~·-·--···-------------- ----.....------------,.-~.:· ·.',.·. ..---_,,.-
ADDITIO' Al;CRriERIA
(SEE ~ECI'ION) ..
,:--:~..:- : ..
1-~--------·- -··---------·-·--·--··-+--'-"'~-------- .. -
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (less than 20 parking
spaces)
•Outdoor storage of material
4. Requires Special Permit Approval [Section 8.7)
USE
•Parking areas for Principal Uses (20 or more parking
spaces)
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25 .2015
BUSINESS ZONES
61
5.2
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
(SEE SECTION)
5.2
Prohibited Uses.
uses, as that tenn is used in
the Connecticut Courts.
General Statutes Section
4. SPECIAL ZONES
4.1 TYPES OF SPECIAL DISTRICTS
There are three types of zoning districts:
Base - traditional zoning classification
and that term has been
Overlay an area where certain additional requirements are superimposed upon a base zoning district.
Floating - an unmapped zoning district that is established on the zoning map only when a master plan of a
proposed development is approved.
In this section the Special Zones can be characterized as follows:
BASE OVERLAY FLOATING
Riparian Protection Special Flood Hazard Area Active Adult Housing
Institutional Development
I
I
Mixed Use
Planned Residential District
I
4.2 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT (SFHAOD)
4.2.A Statutory Authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has in Title 7, Chapter 98, Section 7- 148 and in Title 8, Chapter
124, Section 8- 2of the General Statutes delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the
Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Cromwell, Connecticut, hereby established a Special Flood
Hazard Area Overlay District.
4.2.B Finding of Fact.
1. The flood hazard areas of the Town of Cromwell are subject to periodic flood inundation
which results in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safoty and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
62
uses vulnerable to floods or to other lands which are inadequately
flood proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage. Uncontrolled
'""'""''n~ and use floodplains can adversely affect the community.
Town of Cromwell has voluntarily participated in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) since prior to 1990. The NFrP is founded on a mutual agreement between
the Federal government and each participating community. Local, State and Federal
governments must share roles and responsibilities to meet the goals and objectives of the
NFIP. The community's role is of paramount importance. Property owners are able to
receive Federally-subsidized flood insurance only if the community enacts and enforces the
minimum floodplain regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
4.2.C Purpose.
It is the purpose of this regulation to regulate floodplain development, promote public health, safety, and
general welfare, and minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
4.2.D
1. To protect human life and health, and prevent damage to property;
2. To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities, infrastructure and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges, located in the
floodplain;
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood
hazard areas in such a manner as to minimize flood damage and flood blight areas;
7. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood hazard area;
8. To prevent increase in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in
conflicts between property owners;
9. To ensure that those who occupy the flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their
actions; and
10. To discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate
the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
Objectives.
[n order to accomplish its purposes, this regulation includes objectives, methods and provisions that:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flood or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective
barriers that are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
53
dredging other development may or
Prevent or barriers or obstructions which will unnaturally
flood to other lands.
4.2.E Areas To Which This Regulation Applies.
This regulation shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) within the Town of Cromwell.
4.2.F Definitions.
Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one ( 1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of
one (I) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet
flow.
Base Flood. The flood having a one (I) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also
referred to as the I 00-year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part
of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The elevation of the crest of the base flood or I 00-year flood. The height in
relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the
floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
Cost. As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration,
repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate for
flood hazard areas.
The estimate shall include, but not be limited to:
1. the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service
equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and
air conditioning and utility meters; labor;
2. built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the
building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead;
3. contractor's profit; and
4. grand total.
Items to be excluded include the cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside
improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation
systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to
buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials;
and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
64
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The of additional sites
the construction of for servicing the lots on the manufacturing homes are to be affixed
the utilities, the construction of streets. and either final site grading or the pouring
concrete pads).
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The Federal agency that administers the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP).
Finished Living Space. Finished living space can include, but is not limited to, a space that is heated and/or
cooled, contains finished floors (tile. linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be
painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items
that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace. A fully enclosed area below
the base flood elevation (BFE) cannot have finished living space and needs to be designed for exposure to
flood forces. These spaces can only to be used for parking, building access or limited storage.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters. or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). The official map of a community on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the limits of the regulatory floodway and I 00-year
floodplain.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (I 00-year floodplain) and the
insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. FIRM published after January 1990 may also show
the limits of the regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local
flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), which
accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may provide the
regulatory floodway limits.
Floodplain Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management
regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship.
Floodplain Violation. Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, flood- proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is
resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
( 1.0) foot. For the purposes of these regulations, the term ''Regulatory Floodway" is synonymous in meaning
with the term "Floodway".
Functionally Dependent Use or Facility. A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that
are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service
facilities.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
65
Adjacent Grade (HAG). The
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure. structure that is:
natural the ground to construction
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district:
3. Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or ( d) Individually listed
on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
4. By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
5. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such an area meets the design
requirements specified in Section 4.1 of these regulations.
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one ( l) or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved
property.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market Value. Market value of the structure shall be determined by either:
1. an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser;
2. the property's tax assessment, minus land value;
3. the replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; or
4. the structure's Actual Cash Value.
Mean Sea Level (MSL). The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
New Construction. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August I, 1977
(the effective date of the floodplain management regulations), and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after August I, 1977.
Recreational Vehicle - A vehicle which is:
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
66
built on a chassis;
four hundred ( 400) square or less when at
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a duty truck;
4. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (I)
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood
elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs
provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be
verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the land shown as Zones A, Al-30. AE. AO, AH, on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the Area of
Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of
temporary forms; not does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation. alterations, additions or
other improvements to a structure, taking place during a ten (I 0) year period, in which the cumulative cost
equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure as determined at the beginning of such ten
( l 0) year period. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual
repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
or
2. Any alteration of a "historic" structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a ·'historic structure."
Water Surface Elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929
(or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
4.2.G Basis For Establishing The Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA).
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
67
Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for the Town of
CromwelL dated August 28, 2008, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM)
and/or Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM), dated August 28, 2008, and other
supporting data, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into
this regulation it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map
amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA.
2. The SFHA includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, Al-30, AE, AO, and AH,
including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM or FBFM. SFHAs are determined
utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs
published in the FIS for a specific location. Also included are areas of potential,
demonstrable or historical flooding, including any area contiguous with but outside the
SFHA identified by FEMA, and where the land surface elevation is lower than the base
flood elevation (BFE) as shown in the FIS, and the area is not protected from flooding by a
natural or man-made feature. The FIRM, FBFM and FIS are on file in the office of the
Town Engineer at the Cromwell Town Hall.
4.2.H Structures Already In Compliance.
A structure or development already in compliance with this regulation shall not be made non-compliant by any
alteration, modification, repair, reconstruction or improvement and must also comply with other applicable
local, State, and Federal regulations. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
modified or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this regulation and other applicable
regulations.
4.2.I Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any ex1stmg easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this regulation and another ordinance, regulation easement, covenant or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
4.2.J Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this regulation, all provisions shall be:
1. considered as minimum requirements;
2. liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and;
deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
4.2.K Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This regulation does
not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Area or uses permitted in such areas will be
free from flooding and flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of
Cromwell or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. The Town of Cromwell, its officers and
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
68
assume no liability for another person's reliance on any maps, data or
4.2.L Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this regulation should be declared invalid
for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this regulation, which shall
remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this regulation are hereby declared to be
severable.
4.2.M Designation Of The Local Administrator.
The Public Works Director is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
regulation.
4.2.N Certification.
Where required under this regulation, a Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this regulation. Such certification must be provided to the Public Works Director.
4.2.0 Establishment Of The Special Flood Hazard Area Special Permit.
A Special Flood Hazard Area Special Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this
regulation prior to the commencement of any development activities in the floodplain. Special permits issued
under this regulation shall expire if actual construction of a permitted structure does not commence within one
hundred and eighty ( 180) days of the permit approval date.
4.2.P Permit Application Procedures.
1. A Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) Special Permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in Special Flood Hazard Areas in this
community.
2. Prior to any development activities, application for a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
Special Permit shall be made to the Public Works Director on forms provided and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing, at a minimum, the
lot lines and location of the parcel; the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the
area in question; limit and extent of the I 00-year floodplain and/or floodway boundary and
base flood elevation(s); existing and proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities and the location of the foregoing.
3. Specifically, the following information is required to be submitted to the Public Works
Director (or his designee ):
(1) Application Stage. The applicant shall provide at least the following information,
where applicable. Additional information may be required on the permit
application form.
a) Base flood elevation (BFE) for the site in question as determined in the
FEMA Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). The FIS flood profiles provide more accurate BFE data than
the FIRM. The extent of the I 00- year floodplain and floodway must be
depicted with a boundary line on any site plans and shown in relation to
existing and proposed structures or development;
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
69
c)
in relation to mean sea of the proposed lowest
basement, of all new construction, substantial improvements
repairs to structures that have sustained substantial damage;
in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential new
construction, substantial improvements or repair to structures that have
sustained substantial damage will be dry flood-proofed;
d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that
the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other materials required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in order to officially
amend or revise the Flood Insurance Rate Map. The applicant must pay
any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The
applicant must also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of
the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained;
e) A statement and supporting documentation (all costs of project, market
value of structure, etc.) verifying that the proposed alterations to an
existing structure meets or does not meet the criteria of the substantial
improvement and/or substantial damage definition. If a development
meets the definition of substantial improvement and/or substantial
damage, the structure must be brought into compliance with all
floodplain regulations as if it was new construction;
f) Where applicable the following certifications by a Connecticut registered
engineer or architect are required, and must be provided to the Public
Works Director. The design and methods of construction must be
certified to be in accordance with accepted standards of practice and
with the provisions of Section 4.2.T.
g) Non-residential flood-proofing must meet the provisions of Section 4.2.T3;
h) Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE) must meet the
minimum design criteria in Section 4.2.T4;
i) No (0.00) increase in tloodway water surface elevations are allowed. Any
development in a tloodway must meet the provisions of Section4.2.V;
(2) Construction Stage.
a) Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction, the applicant
shall provide verification to the Public Works Director (or his designee)
of the following as is applicable:
b) Lowest floor elevation shall be verified for:
c) A structure in Zones A, AE, Al-30, AO or AH is the top of the lowest
floor (including basement);
d) A non-residential structure which has been dry flood-proofed is the
elevation to which the flood-proofing is effective (Note: For insurance
purposes, a dry flood-proofed, non-residential structure is rated based
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
70
4.2.Q
on the elevation of lowest floor unless it is floodproofed to one foot
above the BFE. );
e) Deficiencies detected by the review the above shall corrected
the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work
being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to
make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project
Duties and Responsibilities of the Local Administrator.
Duties of the Public Works Director shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Review all permit applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements of
Section 4.2.P3( I).
2. Review all permit applications to determine whether the proposed development and
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
3. Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this regulation
have been satisfied.
4. Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary Federal or State pennits have
been received. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with
the permit application. Such permits include, but are not limited to, Stream Channel
Encroachment Line (SCEL) Permit, Coastal Area Management (CAM) Permit, Water
Diversion Permit, Dam Safety Permit, and Army Corps of Engineers 40 I and 404 Permits.
5. Notify the regional planning agency and affected municipality at least 35 days prior to a
public hearing if any change of regulation or use of a flood zone will affect an area within
500 feet of another municipality.
6. Notify the adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental Protection (DEEP),
Inland Water Resources Division, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
8. Obtain, record and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new construction, substantial improvements or repair to a
structure that has sustained substantial damage.
9. Obtain, record and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new
construction, substantial improvement or repair to a structure that has sustain substantial
damage has been flood-proofed.
10. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Public Works Director (or his
designee) shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in
accordance with Section 4.2.T3.
11. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the area of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions) the Public Works Director (or his designee) shall
make necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this regulation.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
71
4.2.R
2. Require the applicant to provide base flood elevation data for all proposed development,
manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance
with Section 4.2.G and Section 4.2.P, the Public Works Director (or his designee) shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a Federal, State or other source in order to administer the provisions of Section4.2.R.
14. All records pertaining to the provisions of this regulation shall be obtained and maintained
in the office of the Public Works Director (or his designee).
15. Upon completion of the permitted development and prior to issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy (CO), necessary as-built surveys (prepared by a Connecticut Licensed
Professional as per Connecticut State Statutes) and engineering and architectural
certifications shall be provided to the Public Works Director (or his designee)
demonstrating compliance with the approved plans and standards set forth in Section 4.2.P.
General Standards.
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) the following provisions are required:
1. New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have sustained substantial
damage shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
2. New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have sustained substantial
damage shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
3. New construction, substantial improvements, and repairs to structures that have sustained
substantial damage shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
4. New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained
substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water.
5. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, HY AC ductwork,
and other service facilities, or any machinery or utility equipment or connections servicing
a structure shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation (BFE) to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. This
includes, but is not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps,
hot water heaters, ventilation ductwork, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction
boxes, and circuit breaker boxes.
6. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system.
7. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood
waters.
8. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
9. Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the
structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad,
or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have
the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
72
allow for the infiltration of water.
In any a watercourse that or the flood capacity must
maintained. Notify adjacent communities and the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection (DEEP), Inland Water Resources Division prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse.
11. If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire
structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction
requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages,
decks. sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches
that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the
standards of the more restrictive zone.
12. If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most
restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone:
structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions,
garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or
porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the
requirements of the more restrictive zone.)
13. Compensatory Storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas
which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new
construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure,
shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be
provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it
shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for
flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the
theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the I 00-year flood
elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume
shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body.
Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
14. Equal Conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced,
as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments
resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase
in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a
registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such
encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood
elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including
work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause
an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
4.2.S Standards for Watercourses without Established Base Flood Elevations (Un-numbered
A Zone), Adopted Floodways and/or Flood Mapping.
1. The Public Works Director shall require base flood elevation (BFE) data be provided with
any application for new construction, substantial improvement, repair to structures which
have sustained substantial damage or other development in Zone A without a FEMApublished
BFE (un-numbered A Zone). The Public Works Director (or his designee) shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, including data developed for subdivision proposals, as criteria for
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
73
new construction. substantial improvements, repair to structures which have
substantial damage or other development in un-numbered A Zones on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) meet the standards in Section 4.2.P and
4.2.T. If no BFE can be determined. the lowest floor. including basement, must be
elevated to two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade next to the structure.
2. When BFEs have been determined within Zones Al-30 and AE on the community's FIRM
but a regulatory tloodway has not been designated, the Public Works Director must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have
sustained substantial damage or other development, including fill, shall be permitted which
will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one ( 1.0) foot at any
point within the community when all existing and anticipated development is considered
cumulatively with the proposed development.
3. The Public Works Director may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses
without FEMA-published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or
whenever such data is available from any other source (in response to the municipality's
request or not), the community shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle
that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing
the water surface elevation more than one ( 1.0) foot at any point within the community.
4. The Public Works Director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE and
floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained
substantial damage or other development in any area of potential. demonstrable or
historical flooding within the community meet the standards in Section 4.2.P and Section
4.2.T.
Under the provisions of 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Chapter I, Section 65.12, of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A 1-30, AE, AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one ( 1.0)
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
4.2. T Specific Standards.
1. Construction Standards in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), Zones A, A 1-30,AE.
2. Residential Construction. All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to
structures that have sustained substantial damage which are residential structures shall have
the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation (BFE). Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the
structure must be elevated to or above the BFE.
3. Non-Residential Construction.
(1) All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have
sustained substantial damage which are commercial, industrial or
non-residential structures shall:
a) Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation (BFE); or
(2) In lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to
one (I) foot above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
74
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage water. and
that such structures are composed of structural components having
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
A Connecticut registered profossional engineer or architect shall
review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
this section. Such certification shall be provided to the Public Works Director
(or his designee) on the FEMA Flood proofing Certificate, Form 8 I -65.
(3) Electrical. plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the
structure must be elevated to or above the BFE.
4. Fully Enclosed Areas Below The Base Flood Elevation of Elevated Buildings.
(1) All new construction, substantial improvements, or repair of substantial damage to
residential or non-residential structures that include fully enclosed areas
formed by a foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation
(BFE) of an elevated building, shall be designed to preclude finished living
space and be designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls (wet
flood-proofing). Designs for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a Connecticut registered professional engineer or architect, or meet
the following minimum criteria listed in sections (a)-(g) below:
a) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a
total net area of not less than one ( l) square inch for every one (I)
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. These hydraulic
openings must be located on at least two (2) different walls. Only the
area (square footage) that lies below the BFE can be used in the
calculation of net area of vents required. lf the structure has more than
one ( 1) enclosed area, openings must be installed in the exterior walls
of each enclosed area so that flood waters can enter directly from the
outside;
b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (I) foot above
grade. At least one side of the structure's fully enclosed area must be at
or above grade. Fill placed around the foundation walls must be graded
so that the elevation inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than
the adjacent outside elevation on at least one ( 1) side of the building.
The finished floor of the enclosed area shall be no lower than the
bottom of the foundation openings. The foundation slab of a residential
structure, including the slab of a crawlspace, must be set equal to the
outside finished grade on at least one side of the building;
c) The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit
of flood waters in both directions without any external influence or
control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and
other non-automatic mechanical means. Other coverings may be
designed and certified by an engineer or approved by the Public Works
Director;
d) The area cannot be used as finished living space. Use of the enclosed area
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
75
shall be the minimum necessary and shall only be the parking
of vehicles, building access or limited storage. Access to the enclosed
area shall be the necessary to of
vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment
used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry
to the living area (stairway or elevator). The enclosed area shall not be
used for human habitation or partitioned into separate rooms;
All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below the BFE shall
be unfinished and resistant to flood damage.
f) Electrical, plumbing, HY AC ductwork, machinery or other utility
equipment and connections that service the structure (including, but not
limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps,
hot water heaters, ventilation, washers, dryers, electrical junction
boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the
fully enclosed area below the BFE. Utilities or service equipment
located in this enclosed area, even if elevated above the BFE in the
space, will subject the structure to increased flood insurance
g) A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor
slab below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and
must meet the standards of Sections 4.2.T4(a)-(f). A garage attached to
a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the
BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters in both directions. Flood openings or vents are required in
the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage doors. The human
intervention necessary to open garage doors when flooding occurs is
not an acceptable means of meeting the openings requirements. In
addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage
below BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. Garages
attached to non-residential structures must also meet the
aforementioned requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the
requirements of Section 4.2. T3.
5. Manufactured (Mobile) Homes and Recreational Vehicles (RVs).
(l) In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), any manufactured (mobile) homes to
be newly placed, undergoing a substantial improvement or repaired as a result
of substantial damage, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest floor is
at or above the base flood elevation (BFE). The manufactured home must also
meet all the construction standards per Section 4.2.Tl. This includes SFHAs
outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home
park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or on a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has
incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.
(2) All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be placed on a permanent
foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is
securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and
hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
(3) All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be installed using methods
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
76
and practices which mm1m1ze damage. Adequate access and drainage
should be provided. Elevation construction standards include foundations
no more than ten (I 0) feet and reinforcement is provided for
more than six ( 6) feet above ground
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either:
a) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and
b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, OR
c) meet all the general standard of Section 4.2.R and the elevation and
anchoring requirement of Section 4.2.T5( 1 ), 4.2.T5(2), and 4.2. T5(3).
(5) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
4.2.U Flood ways.
Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are areas designated as floodways on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM). Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has
erosion potential, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and repairs to
substantially damaged structures and other developments shall be permitted unless certification, with
supporting technical data, by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood
discharge. Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design. A permit may be
given which allows encroachments resulting in increases in base flood elevations provided the community first
obtains a conditional floodway revision by meeting the requirements of CFR. 44, Chapter I, Subsection 65 .12.
4.2.V Standards for Development in Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zones AO and AH).
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are areas designated as shallow flooding areas (AO
and AH Zones). These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate. In AO and AH zones, the following provisions apply:
1. For residential structures, all new construction, substantial improvements and repair to
structures that have sustained substantial damage shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM), in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two (2) feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
2. For non-residential structures, all new construction, substantial improvements and repair to
structures that have sustained substantial damage shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, above the highest adjacent
grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement,
shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade; or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood- proofed
to or above the depth number, in feet, specified on the FIRM above the highest
adjacent grade, or if no depth number is specified at least two (2) feet above the
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
77
4.2.W
highest adjacent so that any space below that level is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to passage of water and with structural
components having the capability resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects buoyancy. Designs complying with requirement
must be certified by either a Connecticut licensed profossional engineer or
architect.
(3) On-site drainage for all proposed structures in AO and AH Zones located on slopes
shall provide adequate drainage paths to guide flood waters around and away
from such structures.
Permitted Uses in all Special Flood Hazard Areas.
The following uses are permitted in Special Flood Hazard Areas:
l. Farming (including grazing, crop, tree and truck farming, and other agricultural uses):
2. Recreation (including bathing places, boat ramps, docks, picnic areas, play fields. golf,
tennis and parking areas);
3. Public utility wire and pipe lines for transmission and distribution purposes; Temporary
storage of materials and equipment; and Flood protective uses.
4.2.X Permitted Structures and Buildings in Special Flood Hazard Areas.
The following structures and buildings are permitted in Special Flood Hazard Areas, (except in the floodway),
in accordance with Section 4.2.P above.
1. Buildings and structures accessory to agricultural uses for of goods and equipment and the
shelter of animals and fowl, but not including dwellings or buildings for human occupancy.
2. Public Utility buildings and structures.
3. Parks and recreation areas and attendant facilities: including boat ramps, docks, parking
areas, picnic areas, tables, shelters and fire places, golf courses, driving ranges, tennis
courts and bathing, but not including permanent buildings or structures such as club houses
or dwellings or buildings for human occupancy.
4. Dikes or other structures designed to divert or obstruct the flow of flood waters.
4.2. Y Special Permit Uses, Structures and Buildings in Special Flood Hazard Areas.
1. There are Special Flood Hazard Areas within the Town of Cromwell which lie outside the
boundary of the Riparian Protection District. The use of land and erection of structures and
buildings for residential and other non-residential purposes may be permitted in Special
Flood Hazard Areas outside the Riparian Protection District subject to the granting of a
special permit as provided in Section 4.2.P. lf the proposal is subject to the provisions of
the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Cromwell, a special permit is not required.
2. Uses that are permitted in a Zoning Use District may also be allowed in the Special Flood
Hazard Area which is located within the particular Zoning Use District.
4.2.Z Design Standards for Subdivision Proposals.
If a proposed subdivision, including the placement of a manufactured home park or subdivision, is located in a
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) the following requirements shall apply:
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
78
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
shall have adequate provided to reduce exposure to
[n all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available. the
applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis performed by a
Connecticut licensed professional engineer that generates BFEs for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions. The Public Works Director shall require the applicant to provide BFE data for
all subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, as per
Section 4.2.Q 12.
4.2.AA Floodplain Variance Procedures.
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Town of Cromwell, shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for Floodplain Variances from the requirements of this
regulation.
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Public Works Director (or
his designee) in the enforcement or administration of this regulation.
3. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or any person
owning land which abuts or is within a radius of l 00 feet of the land in question may
appeal within 15 days after such decision to the State Superior Court of Middlesex County,
as provided in Section 8-8 of the General Statutes of Connecticut.
4. The Public Works Director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request.
4.2.BB Specific Situation Floodplain Variances.
1. Buildings on a Historic Register - Floodplain Variances may be issued for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or any locally-adopted historic
district without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section and
provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the
structure losing its historical designation.
2. Functionally Dependent Use or Facility - Floodplain Variances may be issued for new
construction and substantial improvements and other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use or facility provided the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage, creates no additional
threat to public safety and meet all of the requirements of Section 4.2DD.
3. Floodway Prohibition - Floodplain Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
4.2.CC Considerations For Granting Floodplain Variances.
1. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this regulation
and the items listed below as 4.2.CC2- 4.2.CC 12. Upon consideration of these factors and
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
79
purposes
the granting
regulation, the Zoning Board of Appeals] may attach such conditions to
variances as it deems necessary to further purposes of this regulation.
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands the injury
danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
4. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
5. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
6. The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent
facility;
7. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the
proposed use;
8. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program for that area;
10. The safety access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergencyvehicles;
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
12. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, and streets and bridges.
4.2.DD Conditions for Floodplain Variances.
1. Floodplain Variances shall only be used upon a determination that the Floodplain Variance
is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard; and in the instance
of a historical building, a determination that the Floodplain Variances is the minimum
necessary as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building and result in the
loss of historic designation of the building. Floodplain Variances pertain to a piece of
property and are not personal in nature. A properly issued variance is granted for a parcel
of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the regulation
would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners.
Those characteristics must be unique to that property and not be shared by adjacent parcels.
For example, economic or financial hardship is not sufficient cause for a Floodplain
Variance, nor are inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal
preferences or disapproval of one's neighbors.
2. Floodplain Variances shall only be used upon:
(1) a showing of good and sufficient cause,
(2) a determination that failure to grant the Floodplain Variance would result m
exceptional hardship, and;
(3) a determination that the granting of a Floodplain Variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisance, damage the rights or property values of other persons
in the area, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws, ordinances or regulations.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
80
hardships that are based on unusual or unique physical characteristics of the
property in question, characteristics that are not shared by adjacent parcels,
quality to meet subsection above. Claims of hardship based on the
structure, on economic gain or loss, or on personal or self-created circumstances
are not sufficient cause for the granting of a Floodplain Variance.
No Floodplain Variance may be issued within a regulatory floodway that will result in any
increase in the I 00-year flood levels. A variance may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a
·'functionally dependent use" provided that there is good and sufficient cause for providing
relief; and the Floodplain Variance does not cause a rise in the 100-year flood level within
a regulatory floodway. The structure and other development must be protected by methods
that minimize flood damages.
4. Any applicant to whom a Floodplain Variance is granted shall be given written notice that
the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base
flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor elevation.
4.2.EE Floodplain Enforcement.
1. Each Special Flood Hazard Area Special Permit shall authorize, as a condition of approval,
the Public Works Director or designated agents to make regular inspections of the subject
property. The Public Works Director or designated agents are also authorized to inspect
any property in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) where it appears that violations of
these regulations may be taking place.
2. If the Public Works Director (or his designee) finds that any person is undertaking any
construction, substantial improvement, filling, or any other activity or maintaining a
condition which in violation of these regulations, the Public Works Director (or his
designee):
(1) Shall issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the subject
property owner, ordering that the activity cease and ordering the property owner
to either seed to obtain a Special Flood Hazard Area Special Permit prior to
continuing with the activity or, if appropriate, ordering that all violations and/or
obstructions be removed from the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
immediately.
(2) Notify the Building Official and Zoning Enforcement Officer and request that any
permit(s) in force be revoked or suspended and that a stop work order be issued.
(3) May suspend or revoke a Special Flood Hazard Area Special Permit if it is found
that the applicant has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set
forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of work as set forth in the
application including application plans. Prior to revoking any permit, the Public
Works Director (or his designee) shall issue notice to the permittee, personally
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct
which warrants the intended action.
(4) Failure to comply with any written order issued under this section shall be
considered a violation of these regulations and is subject to the penalties
described in Section 4.2.FF.
(5) In the event violations or obstructions are not promptly removed from the Special
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
81
Area Public Works Director his designee) may
removal and remediation work to be utilizing
Performance Guarantee money held in escrow pursuant Section 9.3 of this
or may direct the Town Engineer to cause such work to be done and
a lien against the property.
(6) Any person subjected to enforcement action pursuant to this regulation, may
appeal any requirement, decision, or determination of the Public Works
Director (or his designee) to the Zoning Board of Appeals, in accordance with
Section I 0.3 of this regulation. Such person shall provide such information as
necessary including appropriate certifications from a registered professional
engineer or architect in order to substantiate the claim that the requirement,
decision, or determination of the Public Works Director (or his designee) was in
error or unwarranted.
(7) Nothing contained herein shall prevent the owner of a residential dwelling,
commercial or industrial building existing at the time off the adoption of this
regulation from repairing, replacing or restoring said building or the
components thereof to substantially the same character and form as existed at
the time of such adoption.
4.2.FF Penalties For Violation in the Special Flood Hazard Area Overlay District.
Any violation of the provisions of this regulation or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grant of variances or Special Permits,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this regulation or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined a penalty of $250.00 per day or imprisoned for not more
than ten (10) days for each day of violation, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and reasonable legal
fees involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Cromwell from taking such
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
4.3 RIPARIAN PROTECTION DISTRICT (RPD)
4.3.A Purpose.
The purpose of the Riparian Protection District is to restrict development of property located in areas adjacent
to the Connecticut River and the Mattabasset River that are prone to flooding, to minimizing public and private
losses due to flood conditions.
4.3.B Description.
1. The Riparian Protection District is a base zone that shall encompass all land east of the
Connecticut River Stream Channel Encroachment Line as well as certain other lands in
close proximity to the Connecticut River, shown on the Town of Cromwell Zoning Map.
4.3.C Principal Uses by Use Permit.
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Use Permit in accordance with Section 8.2 of the
Zoning Regulations:
1. Open space.
2. Fanning
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
82
i
I
utilities
4.3.D Principal Uses by Special Permit
following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Special Permit in accordance with Section 6 of the
Zoning Regulations:
1. Storage of materials and equipment;
2. Recreational or cultural events of a limited duration.
3. Outdoor Recreation (including bathing places, boat ramps, docks. picnic areas. play fields.
golf, tennis and parking areas);
4.3.E Permitted Structures and Buildings.
The following structures and buildings are permitted, except for the floodplain exclusions in Section 4.2,
subject to the issuance of a building permit:
I. Buildings and structures accessory to agricultural uses for of goods and equipment and the
shelter of animals and fowl, but not including dwellings or buildings for human occupancy.
2. Public Utility buildings and structures.
3. Parks and recreation areas and attendant facilities: including boat ramps, docks, parking
areas, picnic areas, tables, shelters and fire places, golf courses, driving ranges, tennis
courts and bathing, but not including pennanent buildings or structures such as club houses
or dwellings or buildings for human occupancy.
4. Dikes or other structures designed to divert or obstruct the flow of flood waters.
4.4 ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING DISTRICT (AA)
4.4.A Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide for a planned residential community for adults 55 years of age or older
as a floating zone. The community shall be compatible with the character of any adjacent residential
neighborhoods and the town as a whole.
4.4.B Bulk Requirements.
Minimum Minimum Yards Maximum
I ! I I Building I Building f I ! Aggregate ! i
Zone Lot Area l Frontae:e Front I Side ! Side ! Rear Covera2e ! Hei2ht
AA 10 Acres I NIA NIA I NIA I NIA I NIA 35 percent I 35 feet
4.4.C Principal Uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as-of-right in the Active Adult District, subject to the issuance of a Use
Permit:
1. Single-family detached dwelling units.
2. Multi-family attached dwelling structures provided no structure contains more than four
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
83
units.
Recreation community centers, or accessory uses
and incidental to any permitted use.
4.4.D Accessory Uses.
following uses shall be permitted as-of-right in the Active Adult District, subject to the issuance of proper
I. Home Based Business subject to the provisions of Section 2.2.D and Section2.9.
4.4.E Permitted Residential Dwelling Unit Densities.
The maximum number of dwelling units shall be two (2) per gross acre.
4.4.F Establishment of District
1. The Commission may establish the AA by approving a Master Plan in accordance with
Section 8.9, which while not intended to be a substitute for detailed documentation
associated with a site plan, provides sufficient information to determine whether the
proposal is in conformance with Section 4.4.A and the Plan of Conservation and
Development (POCD). Such adoption shall constitute a zoning map amendment in
accordance with Section 8.9 of these Regulations.
2. District Eligibility. The following characteristics are required for a site to be eligible for a
zone change to AA District:
(1) Public water and public sewers shall be provided.
(2) Minimum District Size: ten (I 0) acres.
3. Appropriateness: In determining the appropriateness of a proposed AA Zone, the
Commission shall consider the following factors:
(1) The need within the Town for an additional AA Zone.
(2) Accessibility to major roads and proximity to community services.
(3) Physical characteristics of the lot.
(4) The existing municipal infrastructure's capability to support the proposed
development.
(5) The Commission may consider any other factors that it deems applicable to a
change of zone request.
4.4.G Master Plan.
1. The purpose of the Master Plan submission is to determine whether the proposed uses and
layout conform to Section 8.9 and to the Plan of Conservation and Development. The
Master Plan, once adopted, shall establish the dimensional characteristics of the AA and its
uses.
2. Changes to the Master Plan.
(1) Any modifications to dimensional elements in the Master Plan shall follow the
Special Permit Application Procedures in Section 8. 7.
(2) Any modifications to the use elements in the Master Plan shall follow the Zoning
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
84
Amendment Procedures in Section 8.9.
Site Plan.
As or after Master Plan approval for districts established after May I, 20 l, a Site
Plan Application must be submitted for approval in accordance with Section 8.6.
The Commission shall schedule a public hearing for the Site Plan Application.
4.4.I Design Requirements.
l. Building Location and Design.
(1) The minimum distance between structures shall be 20 feet.
(2) The minimum distance from a structure to a sidewalk or road shall be 20 feet.
(3) Structures containing more than two (2) dwelling units shall be varied substantially
in plane along the building's length.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall contain an attic or basement for storage.
(5) There shall be sufficient noise attenuation between dwelling units.
2. Landscaping.
(1) There shall have a minimum of 35 percent Usable Open Space.
(2) The Commission may require fences or landscaped screens between the proposed
use and existing uses of such extent and design as they feel appropriate to properly
buffer proposed and existing uses.
(3) Where an application is located in lands previously or naturally landscaped, such
as an estate, every effort should be made to preserve the original landscaping.
3. Parking.
(1) Garage space or off-street parking space for not fewer than two (2) vehicles shall
be provided for each one (I) dwelling unit. At least one (I) of the required parking
spaces shall be provided within an attached garage that shall be directly accessible
from within the unit. A minimum of 25 percent of the units shall accommodate a
two (2) car attached garage.
(2) Off-street guest parking shall be provided in the amount of one (I) space per four
( 4) units. Specifications for the layout of parking spaces shall be in accordance
with the Off-Street Parking Requirements.
4. Circulation and Vehicular Access.
(1) Through roads which shall be public, and interior accessways may be public or
private.
(2) No interior accessway shall be less than 20 feet in width. The Commission may,
where in its judgment traffic circumstances merit, require primary streets to be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Town of Cromwell road
specifications with a minimum road width of 26feet.
(3) Curbs and sidewalks may be required if the Commission deems them necessary.
5. Recreational Amenities.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
85
system and/or sidewalks shall be provided within the community.
facilities, open spaces, and facilities for active and/or passive
recreation shall be provided to serve community.
facilities shall be designed for the safety of and to facilitate use
elderly and handicapped persons.
Street Lighting. There shall be sufficient street lighting and all fixtures shall be designed to
be in harmony with the character of the development and provide adequate illumination.
Such fixtures shall be designed to not provide direct illumination onto adjacent residential
properties.
-1.4.J Occupancy Restrictions.
Occupancy shall be restricted as follows:
1. 100 percent of the occupied units shall be occupied by at least one (I) person who is 55
years of age or older.
2. A spouse; companion; or relative 18 years old or older; of an occupant who qualifies
pursuant to Section 4.4.J l above.
3. A person who qualifies pursuant to 4.4.J2 above who survives his or her spouse,
companion or relative or whose spouse, companion or relative has entered into a long- term
care facility.
4. Remaining parties pursuant to Section 4.4.J3 above who remarry or co-habitant must meet
all occupancy requirements.
5. Employees of the dwelling unit occupant who qualifies pursuant to Section 4.4.J 1, 4.4.J2 or
4.4.13 who perform substantial duties related to the care of the owner or occupant who
qualifies pursuantto Section 4.4.Jl,4.4.J2 or 4.4.J3.
4.4.K Verification.
On the anniversary date of the issuance of the first Certificate of Occupancy, the community association or
property manager shall verify compliance of the development with State and Federal requirements as set forth
in the provisions of the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995 to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and provide
assurance that the community is in compliance with the all requirements of this section and applicable law.
4.5 INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (ID)
4.5.A Purpose.
This is a floating zone intended to provide performance criteria that will provide for the appropriate
development of property to be used for institutional complexes whose principal function is the housing and
care of the elderly or the education of persons of any age. The intent of this section is to permit a degree of
flexibility within the institutional site for uses which will satisfy the needs of the elderly population while
providing proper on-site development which will blend with the existing community.
4.5.B Bulk Requirements.
Minimum
Zone Lot Area Fronta2e
Minimum Yards
l Aggregate i
Front Side ! Side ! Rear
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
86
Maximum
Building I Building
Covera2e ! Hei2ht
Principal Uses.
Permitted uses in the district shall be limited to:
1. Uses necessary for the care of the aged and elderly, including their health and education.
2. Assisted living facilities and continuing care retirement communities, to include units for
independent living, for personal care, for skilled nursing, and for rehabilitative services.
3. Colleges and universities.
4.5.D Accessory Uses.
None Identified.
4.5.E Establishment of District.
I. The Commission shall establish the ID by approving a Master Plan in accordance with
Section 8.9, which while not intended to be a substitute for detailed documentation
associated with a site plan, provides sufficient information to determine whether the
proposal is in conformance with Section 4.5.A and the Plan of Conservation and
Development (POCD). Such adoption shall constitute a zoning map amendment in
accordance with Section 8.9 of these Regulations.
2. District Eligibility. The following characteristics are required for a site to be eligible for the
ID designation:
(1) Public water and public sewers shall be provided.
(2) Minimum District Size: 30 acres.
4.5.F Master Plan.
1. The purpose of the Master Plan submission is to determine whether the proposed uses and
layout conform to Section 8.9 and to the Plan of Conservation and Development. The
Master Plan, once adopted, shall establish the dimensional characteristics of the ID and its
uses.
2. Changes to the Master Plan.
(1) Any modifications to dimensional elements in the Master Plan shall follow the
Special Permit Application Procedures in Section 8. 7.
(2) Any modifications to the use elements in the Master Plan shall follow the Zoning
Map Amendment Procedures in Section 8.9.
3. Application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by an impact analysis report. This
report shall document the potential impacts of the proposed development on residential
neighborhoods, public utilities, municipal services, land development patterns. the
economy, fiscal resources of the Town, and socioeconomic characteristics of the
population.
4.5.G Site Plan.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
87
I
Master Plan for districts established after May , 2011 a
submitted for approval in accordance with 8.6.
2. Commission shall schedule a the Application.
MIXED-USE DISTRICT (MU)
4.6.A Purpose.
The purpose of the Mixed-Use District is to facilitate the integration of diverse but compatible uses into a
single development, with the goal of creating a community that offers "live, work, and play" opportunities
within convenient walking distance of each other.
4.6.B Bulk Requirements.
Minimum Minimum Yards Maximum
I ! j Aggregate i Building I Building
I I i
Zone Lot Area i Frontae:e Front i Side i Side i Rear Coverae:e i Heie:ht
15,000 I ! I I I
I I
square I 00 feet 10 feet I 10 feet I 20 feet 10 feet 85 percent NIA
I I
feet I I
OTHER: Height to be determined by the Commission
4.6.C Principal Uses.
FOOD/HOSPITALITY RELATED USES
• Bed and breakfast inn
•Hospital
•Hotel, which may include a sit-down restaurant (but not a fast-food restaurant or any drive-in
facilities), banquet hall and/or conference center
•Live entertainment
•Pet day-care facility or pet boarding facility
•Restaurant with the accessory Sales of Alcoholic Beverages
•Restaurant, Sit-down (excludes fast-food restaurant and drive-in window)
•Restaurant, fast food - without drive-in window
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
88
I
I
care retirement
units
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•Club, lodge or fraternal organization (private and operated for the benefit of the members and not for
gaiaj I
I
•Government services I
•Museum
•Public Services
•Place of Worship/Church
INSTITUTIONAL USES
•General or business office
•Medical or dental office, clinic or laboratory
•Bank or savings and loan association (State or Federally chartered)
•A TM, walk-up
.
RECREATION/AMUSEMENT USES
.. · ..... .· ·.
• Jnterior recreational uses including but not limited to a theater, billiard parlor, bowling alley
•Athletic club
RE.T AIL/WHOLESA. LE SALES USES
•Nurseries and sale of produce and plants (Commission shall approve areas for outside display)
•Retail store
•Retail store for the sales of alcoholic beverages
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
89
I
.
I
storage or display of merchandise
SERVICE RELATED USES
•Animal hospital or veterinarian office
•Dry cleaning establishment
•Personal service establishment (hair, nails, tailoring, tanning)
•Pet store, pet grooming and pet training
•Self-service automatic laundry establishment. Such establishment shall be permitted to provide on-site
washing as a service
•Service establishment (repair, rental and/or service) of any item, except automobiles, trucks and
trailers, which is allowed to be sold in the zone
. . ·.··
OTBERUSES1
.. .. · ..
•Outdoor recreational uses, including but not limited to baseball batting facility, miniature golf and
putting course, tennis facilities, ice skating facilities and golf driving range
•Farms
•Other uses deemed appropriate by the Commission, provided said use is listed on the Master Plan and
approved by the Commission
•Public utilities pursuant to the Connecticut Siting Council
•Railroad facilities
•School for training in occupational skills. Enrollment may be open to the public or limited; may include
dormitories for students and instructors
4.6.D Accessory Uses.
USE'
•Outdoor service accessory to a sit-down restaurant, including the placement of seating and tables out of
doors and food served there
•Sale at retail of any commodity manufactured, processed, fabricated or warehoused on the premises
rovided the total floor area devoted to retail sales does not exceed 20 ercent of the ross floor area
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
90
Establishment of District
The Commission shall establish the MU by approving a Master Plan in accordance with
Section 8.9, which while not intended to be a substitute for detailed documentation
associated with a site plan, provides sufficient information to determine whether the
proposal is in conformance with Section 4.5.A and the Plan of Conservation and
Development (POCD). Such adoption shall constitute a zoning map amendment in
accordance with Section 8.9 of these Regulations.
2. District Eligibility. The following characteristics are required for a site to be eligible for the
MU designation:
(1) Public water and public sewers shall be provided.
(2) Minimum District Size: 10 acres.
4.6.F Master Plan.
4.6.G
4.6.H
1.
1. The purpose of the Master Plan submission is to determine whether the proposed uses and
layout conform to Section 8.9 and to the Plan of Conservation and Development. The
Master Plan, once adopted, shall establish the dimensional characteristics of the MU and its
uses.
2. Changes to the Master Plan.
(1) Any modifications to dimensional elements in the Master Plan shall follow the
Special Permit Application Procedures in Section 8.7.
(2) Any modifications to the use elements in the Master Plan shall follow the Zoning
Map Amendment Procedures in Section 8.9.
3. Application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by an impact analysis report. This
report shall document the potential impacts of the proposed development on residential
neighborhoods, public utilities, municipal services, land development patterns, the
economy, fiscal resources of the Town, and socioeconomic characteristics of the
population.
1.
2.
Site Plan.
As part of, or after Master Plan approval for districts established after May 1, 2011 a Site
Plan Application must be submitted for approval in accordance with Section 8.6.
The Commission shall schedule a public hearing for the Site Plan Application.
Change of Use.
Any subsequent change of use shall require a Use Permit.
4.7 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (PRD)
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
91
i
I
Purpose.
District (PRD) is a zone for uses. Its purpose is to provide for the
property in Cromwell in a manner consistent with the general vicinity,
single family, duplex, or multi- family residential units in areas where that type of housing already
The PRD will allow for a variety of housing types historically found in Cromwell but not currently
under present regulations.
4.7.B General BulkRequirements.
MINIMUM MAXIMUM
MINIMUM BUFFER FROM BUILDING
ZONE LOT AREA FRONTAGE ADJACENT PROPERTY COVERAGE
5 acres* 50 feet** 20 feet See Section 4.7.D
* Lot must be 5 acres in size and zoned for residential use as of October 1,.2015.
**Frontage shall be 50 feet or the width of a private roadway providing access to the site.
4.7.C Establishment of District.
4.7.D
1. The Commission shall establish the PRD consistent with the requirements in Section 8.9 by
approving a Master Plan which will provide sufficient information to determine whether
the proposal conforms with the Plan of Conservation and Development (POCD) and
satisfies the requirements for a Master Plan, as set out in Section 8.9. Such approval shall
constitute a zoning map amendment in accordance with Section 8.9 of these Regulations.
The goal of the PRO is to allow for flexibility in housing choices in a manner consistent
with and in harmony with the general vicinity of the lot to be developed.
2. District eligibility. The following characteristics are required for a site to be eligible for
PRO designation:
(1) public water and public sewers shall be provided
(2) Minimum District Size: 5 acres
(3) The property must be zoned for residential use as of September I, 2015
Principal Uses and Specific Requirements.
I HOUSING USES
•Single family homes
•Duplex (2-family) homes
•Multi-family dwellings
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
92
. ~- .. --. . '
RECREAnON USES
•Community centers
• Swimming pools (indoor and outdoor)
• Community fitness centers
•Playgrounds
•Parks
OTHER
•Parking garages or structures
.. MIN ; . MIN Ml ' .~~ l ACGREG · .. LOT FRONT BUJLDI G BUILOI G
u E AREA : YAJ.U> YARD . SID YARD .. COVERAGE .·.· ~IGHT
-''···-· ·-··..: · ·-· ·-'.>:
Single
5 houses
Family
per
7,000 sf 20 feet 25 feet I 0 feet 25 feet 25% 2 stories
House
buildable
area
6 houses
Duplex per
7,200 sf 20 feet 25 feet I 0 feet 25 feet 35% 3 stories
House buildable
area
Multi-
20 units per
Family
buildable NIA 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet 30 feet 50% 4 stories
area
Requirements for All Development in this Zone
1. The net buildable area shall be based on the following calculation:
a). total square footage of the let:,, _______________________ _
_ b). minus the areaofany special flood hazard area that is not in wetlands: _________ _
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
93
I
the wetlands area on the
2. Parking requirements for single, duplex and multi-family dwelling units shall conform to
the requirements of Section 5.2. Additional parking spaces may be required by the
Commission for guest parking. Handicapped parking shall conform to the requirements of
Section 5.2.E. Provisions for bicycle parking shall conform to the requirements of Section
5.2.F.
3. Roads, utility systems, drainage, and sidewalks shall be constructed to town
specifications unless alternate specifications are approved by the Commission.
4. Stormwater control plans shall conform to the requirements in Section 5.4.
5. Performance guarantee requirements must be posted as required in Section 9.3.
6. As-builts must be submitted before a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued.
Requirements for Multi-Family Development
The following additional requirements shall apply to multi-family development in this Zone:
1. Design Considerations
o Minimum dwelling units per building -3
o Maximum dwelling units per building -NIA
o Minimum buffer from adjacent residential zoned property as in Section 6.8.E
o Minimum landscaped area - 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit. Landscaping
shall conform to the standards in Section 5.1 of the Regulations unless the
Commission approves variations from those standards in order to better meet the
goals of this District.
2. Ownership and Maintenance (if applicable) - If the development includes
common or shared driveways, the requirements in Section 6.8.D.3 regarding
ownership and maintenance shall apply.
4. 7 .E Special Permit and Site Plan.
1. After the Master Plan is approved, an application for a Special Permit and Site Plan
must be submitted, consistent with the requirements of Sections 8.6 and 8.7. The
Special Permit and Site Plan will contain the details of the development and will be
accompanied by an impact analysis report that will document the potential impacts of
the proposed development on residential neighborhoods, public utilities, municipal
services, land development patterns, the economy and fiscal resources of the Town,
and socioeconomic characteristics of the population.
2. The Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the Special Permit. The Special
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
94
Permit and Site Plan Applications may be heard together.
Considerations. Before the Commission approves a
use, it shall determine that the application
in Section 8. 7 of Regulations, as well as:
(1) is appropriate in scale and density to the general vicinity of the property that is
the subject of the application;
(2) contains residential units and landscaping appropriate for the general vicinity;
and
(3) does not contain any uses which would not be compatible to those uses already
present in the general vicinity.
In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may:
stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety or
welfare; property values; the environment; safe traffic circulation; sound planning and zoning principles;
improved land use, site planning and land development; or better overall neighborhood compatibility, and
impose additional requirements, conditions or safeguards as a prerequisite to the issuance of the Use Permit by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer, if it shall be found necessary in order that the spirit of these Regulations may
be observed, public safety and welfare secured or substantial justice done.
4. Any condition or safeguard attached to the granting of a Special Permit;
(1) shall be binding upon the property as long as the Special Permit use is still m
operation, and
(2) shall continue to be in effect regardless of any change in ownership of the
property.
5. The Commission shall not approve any Special Permit for any property on which there
exists a zoning violation, unless such Special Permit application will remedy such
violation.
6. Site Plan Decision Considerations.
Before the Commission approves a Site Plan application for this use, it shall determine that the application
complies with the relevant requirements in Section 8.6 of the Regulations.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BUSINESS ZONES
95
S.BASIC STANDARDS
LANDSCAPING
t .A Purpose.
The purpose of these landscaping regulations is to enhance property values, to help minimize soil erosion, and
to improve the quality of environment and aesthetic appearance of Cromwell.
5.1.B Applicability.
These landscaping standards shall apply to any development in Cromwell which requires Site Plan Approval or
Special Permit Approval.
5.1.C General Requirements.
1. Landscape architect required. Unless waived by the Commission due to the minimal impact of a
proposed activity, a landscape architect licensed in Connecticut shall prepare the plans illustrating compliance
with the requirements of this Section.
5.1.D Specific Requirements.
1. Parking area landscaped area requirements.
(1) Parking areas shall be planted with trees a minimum of four (4) inches in caliper
measured six ( 6) inches above ground level, so that there is at least one tree per
ten ( 10) parking spaces within the parking lot.
(2) Such trees must be staked with two (2) three (3)-inch diameter stakes and protected
by curbing against damage by vehicles.
(3) A minimum planting area, equivalent to 150 square feet per tree shall be provided.
( 4) Required parking areas shall have a landscaped island at each end of each row of
vehicle spaces and an intermediate island for every 15 vehicle spaces. The
Commission may require more landscaped area based on the size of the parking
lot.
(5) Such planting islands shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide in the direction
parallel to the row and not less than 18 feet long in the direction perpendicular
to the row.
(6) Each such island shall have a suitable curb of stone or poured-in-place concrete,
and shall be planted with grass or ground cover, or have pedestrian pavers
where approved by the Commission, unless it is part of a drainage system.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
96
ALTERNATIVE PARKING LOT ISLAND DIAGRAM
2. Landscaped buffer requirement.
(1) Nonresidential buildings and uses, including vehicular areas, shall provide a
landscape buffer along the lot line abutting land used for residential purposes or
located in a residential district.
(2) Unless modified by the Commission, multi-family dwelling uses, including
vehicular areas, shall provide a landscape buffer along each lot line.
(3) The depth of the landscape buffer and the density of plant materials shall be
determined by the Commission based on the nature of surrounding uses and
using the following diagrams as a guide.
(4) Where circumstances warrant, the Commission may reduce the buffer width and/or
planting requirements due to existing vegetation or other factors or may
increase the planting requirements.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
97
I
I I
Minimum buffers.
ZONE
DC LB; HB; BP; I; ID; AA
MINIMUM BUFFER MU
Adjacent to a 20' 25'
I
35'
residential use
Adjacent to a 20' I 50' I 35'
residential district I I
I
From lot line to a NIA 25' 25'
parking space
3. Front yard landscaping requirements.
(1) In Business Zones a landscaped strip at least ten (I 0) feet wide shall be provided
adjacent to the street, excluding driveway curb cuts.
(2) For Special Permit uses in Residential Zones a landscaped strip at least 20 feet
wide shall be provided adjacent to the street.
(3) In Business Zones, one (1) canopy tree shall be planted in the front yard for each
50 feet of frontage or fraction thereof.
4. Side yard landscaping requirements.
(1) In Business Zones a landscaped strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided
adjacent to each side lot line.
(2) Special Permit Uses in Residential Zones shall provide a landscaped strip at least
ten ( 10) feet wide adjacent to each side lot line.
(3) Where side yards are required by this regulation, one (I) understory or evergreen
tree shall be planted for each 40 feet or fraction thereof and one (I) shrub shall
be planted for each 20 feet or fraction thereof.
5. Planting bed requirements.
(1) Where lots are to be developed in Business Zones, planting beds shall be provided
adjacent to any building(s) on the lot.
(2) The length of such planting beds shall be at least equal to 25 percent of the
circumference of the building(s) on the lot.
(3) Special Permit Uses in Residential Zones shall have planting beds the length of
which shall be at least 40 percent of the circumference of any building( s) on the
lot to be developed.
6. Buffer planting requirements.
(1) Against the lot lines, trees and shrubs shall be planted to give a screen at least 15
feet deep using approved, hardy, indigenous plant materials of which at least 30
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
98
I
I
I
I
shall be evergreens. The balance of the depth of the buffer shall
and maintained as acceptable permanent grasses.
existing natural growth shall be preserved where practicable and
supplemented with new planting according to the foregoing regulations in order
to give the required screening. Where the Commission finds that existing
natural growth has been cleared in apparent preparation for development it may
require the planting of the largest trees and shrubs commercially available to
replace them.
(3) Permanent structures such as fences, walls, etc. may be approved in lieu of
plantings or supplementing existing growth and/or planted trees and shrubs
where in the opinion of the Commission the intent of these regulations will be
served. Existing and proposed grading may also be considered in granting any
variation from these regulations.
(4) Where there is a conflict between the rear and/or side yards and the buffer
requirements, the more stringent yard requirements shall apply.
7. Stormwater structure landscaping requirements.
(1) Stormwater management systems shall be visually compatible with the
surrounding landscape and should have sufficient vegetation to screen adjacent
properties.
(2) Basin landscaping shall provide for stormwater quality remediation.
5.1.E Minimum Landscaping Material Standards.
1. Where canopy trees are required, they shall be native deciduous shade trees at least two and
one-half (2Yz) inches in caliper at planting with a mature height of at least 35 feet.
(1) Trees that will attain a height at maturity greater than 50 feet will be planted no
closer than 30 feet on center.
(2) In the business districts, the following restrictions shall apply:
a) No species shall reach a height of 30 feet at maturity.
b) Tree variety is required. Only ten (10) percent of a family and only five (5)
percent of a species may be planted on any site.
2. Where understory trees are used, they shall be native deciduous shade or fruit trees at least
one and one-half ( 1 Yz) inches in caliper at planting with a mature height of at least 12 feet.
3. Where evergreens are used, they shall be native coniferous species at least six (6) feet in
height at planting.
4. Where shrubs are required, they shall be native shrubs at least 18 inches in height at
planting.
5. The following plants will not be allowed within, or adjacent to a municipal right-of-way:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Weeping willow
Norway Maple
Silver Maple
Red Maple
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
99
White Pine
Red
(8) Pin Oak
(9) Ginko - female
6. The Tree Warden shall be consulted regarding tree species that are located in or adjacent to
any Town right-of-way.
5.1.F Existing Vegetation.
1. Existing plant materials may be used to meet all or part of the landscape regulations.
Significant trees. as defined in these Regulations, shall be preserved to the extent feasible
and any significant tree which is proposed for removal shall be clearly designated on the
site plan. Unless clearly designated for removal, significant trees shall be considered to be
designated for preservation. Where the Commission finds that existing natural growth has
been cleared in apparent preparation for development, it may require the planting of the
largest trees and shrubs commercially available to replace them.
2. Unless otherwise authorized by the Commission, any significant tree designated for
preservation shall:
(l) have no construction operations carried on within the drip-line of the significant
tree;
(2) have no material stored within the drip-line of the significanttree;
(3) if at risk of damage from construction, be protected by a four-foot high fence offset
at least ten (10) feet from the tree's trunk(s) except that, if the Commission so
designates, the fence shall be installed at the drip-line of thetree;
(4) shall have tree protection installed in advance when any construction activity will
occur within 40 feet of the affected tree( s ); and
(5) remain in place and be maintained in good repair during the construction period.
3. Damage to any significant tree shall be repaired by a Connecticut licensed arborist.
4. Any significant tree marked for preservation which is removed or damaged beyond
satisfactory repair shall be replaced with sufficient trees of the same or similar species as
approved by the Commission or its agent so that the combined caliper measurements of the
replacement trees shall equal or exceed the caliper measurement of the significant tree
which was removed or damaged.
5.l.G Landscaping Plan Requirements.
Landscaping plans shall show, at the same scale as the site development plan, the location of all proposed
planting and existing planting to be retained. A planting list is required.
5.1.H Variations to Landscaping Requirements.
1. These requirements are intended as a minimum guide for the landscaping to be developed.
2. The Commission may require additional landscaping or more mature plantings when
unusual conditions require more extensive screening.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
100
Commission may also waive certain specific requirements when warranted by
excellence in building design or proposed landscaping.
vegetation may used to meet or part of the landscaping requirements.
5.1.I Completion of Landscaping.
For new construction, all landscaping shown on the approved plan shall be completed
before a Certificate of Zoning Compliance can be issued, unless a Performance Guarantee
in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission assuring completion within a specific
time period (not to exceed one year) shall be filed with the Commission.
2. All trees will be staked for one (I) year. Stakes shall be removed at the completion of one
year.
3. All trees shall have a minimum of three (3) inches and a maximum of four (4) inches of
mulch placed around the base of the planting area and shall not touch the bark.
4. Such Performance Guarantee shall be used to install or replace required landscaping if the
work is not completed within the specified time period, and, by filing an application under
these Regulations, the property owner grants the Commission and its agents access to the
property for that purpose
5.2 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
5.2.A Purpose.
This Section is intended to provide adequate parking and loading facilities to serve all existing and proposed
uses. It is the goal of the Cromwell Planning and Zoning Commission to minimize the impact of stormwater
from impervious surfaces that result from off street parking and loading.
5.2.B General Requirements.
1. On any lot which is hereafter developed for residential, business, industrial, hotel or
institutional use there shall be provided adequate space suitably located on the lot for
parking, loading and unloading of goods and materials.
2. Where different uses occur on a single parcel of land, the parking and loading spaces to be
provided with respect to such parcel shall be the aggregate of the requirements for each
such use.
3. Except as may be provided in Section 5.2.H, all required parking spaces shall be
maintained for the exclusive use of residents, patrons, employees or tenants of the
building(s) on the site and shall not be used to meet the parking requirements of any other
use.
4. Any parking rights acquired from another parcel shall be recorded in the land records in the
deed of each parcel involved in such agreement, and such agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Town Attorney
5. All parking spaces provided pursuant to this section shall be on the same lot with the
building except that the Commission may permit the parking space to be on any lot within
500 feet radius of the building, if it determines that it is impractical to provide parking on
the same lot with the building in accordance with Section5.2.M.
6. Parking areas shall be paved with a dustless surface and shall have bumper and wheel
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
101
I
where needed and shall be graded and drained.
7. theaters. bowling night and other similar uses
carrying on the major portion of their business during the evening may provide 50
percent of the required parking space, as specified above. through use of parking space
provided for uses and buildings carrying on the major portion of their business during
daytime hours.
8. Any illumination of the parking area shall be so arranged that the light is reflected away
from adjoining premises light glare, light trespass, and light pollution is prevented.
9. For parking lots of 50 or more spaces intended for long-term employee parking, up to 20
percent of the parking spaces may be designated for compact cars. Such spaces shall be
located in a contiguous manner and marked by above grade signs.
5.2.C Area Required.
Parking Area Criteria. Except as provided below, off-street parking spaces and aisles shall be installed and
maintained as follows:
PARKING AREA CRITERIA DIAGRAM
A - PARKING ANGLE
PARKING AREA CRITERIA TABLE 30° 45°
B - CURB LENGTH 16'-6" 12'-9"
C - ST ALL DEPTH 18'-0" 19'-10"
D - VEHICULAR AISLE WIDTH - 24'-0" 24'-0"
TWO- WAY CIRCULATION
D - VEHICULAR AISLE WIDTH - 12'-0" 13'-0"
ONE- WAY CIRCULATION
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
102
60°
I 0'-5"
20'-0"
24'-0"
18'-0"
90°
9'-0"
18'-0"
24'-0"
24'-0"
Additional Parking Table Information:
• Loading Space Size. Each off-street loading space shall be at least ten (I 0) feet by 30 feet, with a
height clearance of at least 14 feet.
• A parking space specifically designed as being for compact cars shall not be less than eight (8)
feet wide by 17 feet long. Spaces to be set aside for compact cars shall be identified on the site
plan and they shall be physically separated from the normal size parking spaces and identified by
above grade signs.
• Specifications for Parking Facilities:
o Except for private residences, every parking facility shall be graded, hard-surfaced,
drained, and permanently marked to delineate both the individual parking spaces and the
uses served thereby.
o Every parking facility shall be maintained by the owner of the premises.
o Where required parking areas abut upon public streets or sidewalks, permanent barriers or
bumpers shall be provided.
o Completion of the off-street motor vehicle parking facilities and off-street loading spaces
required by this Section shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the Certificate of
Zoning Compliance, per Section 8.4 of these Regulations.
5.2.D Number of Spaces Required.
I. The minimum amount of parking and loading facilities required for any property shall be
determined by applying the standards of this Section to the actual and proposed uses and
when the requirements result in a fractional number, the minimum requirement shall be
rounded up to the next whole number.
2. In all districts, paved, permanently maintained off-street parking spaces shall be provided
as follows:
-., .. -····
- . , .. -,·;: . ,
. ,,. . ': .. · .. · .. ·, .
USE/AC'fMTV, SERVED
RESIDENTIAL USES
Multi-family dwelling units
Single-family dwelling unit
Single-family dwelling unit with a
home-based business
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
MINIMUM MAXIMUM
1.5 spaces for each unit
or per district
requirement (if any)
2 spaces.
2 spaces for the
dwelling unit plus
adequate parking for
employees, clients, and
vi sitors screened by
Cromwell Zoning Regulationsj8.25 .2015
BASIC STANDARDS
103
LOADING.
SPACES
I
Apartment
RETAIL, BUSINESS, BANK
OR OFFICE USES
Banks
Professional and commercial
offices
Retail outlets, shopping centers,
and similar uses up to l 0,000
square feet
Retail outlets, shopping centers,
and similar uses between I 0,00 I
I and 50,000 square feet
I I Retail outlets, shopping centers,
and similar uses over 50,000
square feet
< .
1 MEDICALRELATEDlJSES · .
· .. '"· .. ··. ..
Hospitals
Medical clinics and offices
Nursing homes
... . , ... .. · ...
RESTAUJlANTS<;i
< /
..
Fast-food Restaurants (even when
in conjunction with retail stores,
shopping centers, etc.)
Restaurants
I
abutting residential
U' l:SU ll.:l:S
1 additional space for I
each bedroom
I
I
I
8 spaces per 1,000
square feet of building
area
5 spaces for each 1,000
square feet of building
area
4 spaces for each 1,000 5 spaces for each
square feet of building 1,000 square feet of
area building area
3 spaces for each I ,000 4 spaces for each
square feet of building 1,000 square feet of
area building area
2.5 spaces for each 3 spaces for each
1,000 square feet of 1,000 square feet of
building area building area
1 space for every 3
beds
6 spaces per 1,000
square feet of building
area
l space for every 3
beds
I space for each 50
square feet of building
area
1 space for each 4 seats
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
104
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
At least I loading
space per building I
At least l loading
space per building
At least 1 loading
space per building
At least 2 loading
spaces per building
At least 1 loading
space per building
i
At least 1 loading
space per building
I
At least I loading
space per building
At least 1 loading
i space per building
Auditoriums. stadiums. theaters,
churches or other places of
assemblage with a maximum
capacity of 500 or less
Auditoriums, stadiums, theaters,
churches or other places of
assemblage with a maximum
Clubs
Industrial and all other
commercial uses
Hotel, Beds & Breakfast, and
other Lodging
Se If-storage
Sorority or fraternity house or
dormitory
Uses not listed or not clearly
defined
I space for each 5 seats
based on maximum
seating capacity
I space for each 8 seats
based on maximum
seating capacity
established by the Fire
Marshal
I space for every 4
employees on any l
shift
I space for each room,
but not less than 2
spaces
I space for every 50
storage units or fraction
thereof
I space for each 5
guests or persons
residing on the
premises, but no less
than 2 parking spaces
in any case
I
As required by the
commission based on
the requirements for
comparable uses
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
105
the Commission
based on the
requirements
applicable to
comparable uses
As determined by
the Commission
based on the
requirements
applicable to
comparable uses
Handicapped Parking.
spaces for handicapped persons shall be required in accordance with CGS I 4-253a
and the Connecticut Building Code (Sec. 29- 252, as amended), with regard to location,
size, marking, signage, and required number of handicapped accessible spaces based on use
and size of parking lot. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be as close as possible to a
building entrance or walkway leading directly to a building entrance and shall be adjacent
to curb cuts or other unobstructed methods permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped
person. For all uses in business districts, and parking lots in excess of eight (8) parking
spaces in residential districts, the minimum number of parking spaces for the handicapped
shall be provided in accordance with the Building Code.
2. Van Parking. Where handicapped accessibility is required, a minimum of one (I) van
parking space shall be provided, and additional van spaces shall be provided at a rate of one
(I) van space for every eight (8) handicapped accessible parking spaces required. The van
parking space shall be of such size as to accommodate a van designed for wheelchair
elevation and transport.
3. Signage. Handicapped accessible spaces shall be designated by above grade signs with
white lettering against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking
Permit Required" and "Violators will be fined". Such sign shall also bear the international
symbol of access. Accessible spaces for vans shall also bear the words "Van-Accessible."
4. Pavement Marking. Spaces reserved for handicapped parking shall be marked using yellow
or blue traffic pavement marking paint to indicate individual spaces.
5.2.F Bicycle Parking.
1. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided as part of new multi-family developments of
four ( 4) dwelling units or more, new retail, office and institutional developments, and all
transit transfer stations and park and ride lots.
2. Bicycle racks shall be located at each main building entrance, and placed in an area that is
highly visible.
3. Bicycle parking requirements shall apply to all new construction, changes of use, or
substantial improvement
4. Bicycle parking spaces shall:
(1) Provide a convenient place to lock a bicycle, and shall be at least six (6) feet long,
two (2) feet wide, and shall provide at least seven (7) feet of vertical clearance,
unless a bicycle locker is provided;
(2) Be capable of locking the bicycle and supporting the bicycle in an upright position;
(3) Be securely anchored to a supporting surface; and
(4) Bicycle parking shall not interfere with pedestrian circulation, and shall be
separated from automobile parking.
5. For any use where bicycle parking is required, if the vehicular parking is covered or partly
covered the bicycle parking will be covered at the same ratio.
5.2.G Shared Parking Facilities.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
106
Joint uses of
shall be not
parking facilities is permitted provided that the area of such
than the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed in
number of spaces in Section where a reduction
nnrr\\!Pri per Section .2.H below.
lot layout shall take into consideration pedestrian circulation. Pedestrian
crosswalks shall:
(1) be provided where necessary and appropriate,
(2) be distinguished by textured or special paving, and
(3) be integrated into the overall site development plans of the properties involved in
the shared parking arrangement.
5.2.H Reduction of Parking Facilities.
1. Permanent Shared-Use Reduction. The Commission may, by Site Plan Approval, allow a
reduction of the provision of up to 25 percent of the parking spaces required for the uses on
one (I) or more sites due to shared use of parking facilities when:
(1) the parking facilities provided on the site(s) are interconnected for both vehicles
and pedestrians with adjacent parking facilities to create a functional parking
arrangement,
(2) appropriate access and parking easements are executed between the adjacent
properties and in accordance with Section 5.2.84,and
(3) the Commission is satisfied that the parking needs of the joint users on the sites
occur at different hours of the day or that adequate parking will be available for
the current and potential future uses. Any change in use that would require
greater parking under these Regulations shall require review and approval by
the Commission, which may require the construction of additional parking.
2. Permanent Site Use Reduction. The Commission may, by Site Plan Approval, allow a
reduction of up to 25 percent of the required parking spaces on an individual site that is not
interconnected with one or more adjacent parking facilities when the Commission is
satisfied that the parking needs of the uses on the site occur at different hours of the day, or
adequate parking will be available for the current and potential future uses.
3. Temporary Installation Deferral. The Commission may, by Site Plan Approval, defer the
immediate installation of up to 25 percent of the required parking spaces where:
(1) sufficient evidence has been presented. in the judgment of the Commission. to
show that the reduced parking facilities will adequately serve the proposed use,
(2) the applicant shall show upon the Site Development Plan the complete layout for
the full parking requirements, and
(3) the applicant accepts, in writing, a requirement that the owner will file the Site
Development Plan in the Office of the Town Clerk, stipulating that the owner,
or the successor and assigns of the owner, will install as many of the deferred
parking spaces as the Commission deems necessary within six (6) months of the
Commission's request, when, in the opinion of the Commission, such
fnstallation is needed.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
107
Landscaping Required.
to the requirements for parking, the Planning and Zoning a reasonable
landscaping and for the uses covered in this Section and 'P1'n•m
5.2.J Parking Lot Construction.
layout construction shall be in accordance with the following parking specifications:
l. Parking Surface. The parking surface shall be treated with bituminous pavement products.
2. Alternative Parking Surface. The Commission may allow an alternate surface if the use is a
low traffic generator and the Commission is satisfied with the maintenance provisions
where appropriate, use of porous pavement, specially designed brick or block should be
promoted to increase on-site water retention for plant material and groundwater recharge
and to reduce problems related to runoff.
5.2.K Access Drives.
1. No exit from or entrance to an off-street motor vehicle parking facility or off-street loading
space shall be so laid out as to constitute or create a traffic hazard ornuisance.
2. Driveways to the street in any Business or Special Zone shall be a minimum of 12 feet
wide for one (I) way traffic, shall not exceed 24 feet in width. and shall not exceed two (2)
driveways.
3. Lots containing less than 150 feet of street frontage in any Business Zone shall be limited
to one (I) driveway to the street, except where the nature of the business requires drive- in
service, i.e. drive-in banks and motor vehicle refuel/recharge stations.
4. Driveway access in any Business or Special Zone shall be permitted to a street or parking
facility on an adjacent lot and connections to adjacent parking lots shall, at the
Commission's discretion, be made wherever practical.
5. Driveways adjacent to lots in any Business and Special Zone shall be a minimum of 12 feet
wide for one ( l) way traffic, shall not exceed 24 feet in width, and shall not exceed two (2)
driveways. This requirement may be modified if additional width is required by the
Connecticut Department of Transportation or the State Traffic Commission.
6. Lots in any Business and Special Zone with a side lot line of less than 200 feet in length
shall be limited to one ( l) driveway connecting with an adjoining lot for each side.
7. The Commission may waive this requirement when the Commission determines that a
suitable alternative will enhance public safety.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
108
Driveway Throat.
throat provided in accordance with:
j i MINIMUM
I
ILENGIB I DEVELOPMENT TYPE WIDTH i
II Residential, less than eight (8) parking spaces 15 feet I 20 feet I
I One ( l) way travel, non-residential and residential, greater than or equal to eight
15 feet I 20 feet
i (8) parking spaces I I
I
/ Two (2) way travel, non-residential and residential, greater than or equal to eight
I
I
I 24 feet 20 feet I (8) parking spaces
i l
I Business with no signalized driveways 24 feet I 20 feet I
I Business with signalized access 24 feet I 50 feet I I
I Business with greater than 200,000 gross leasable space 30 feet I 200 feet
DRIVEWAYIBROAT
5.2.M Location of Parking Spaces.
The off-street motor vehicle parking facilities and off-street loading spaces required by this Section in any
Business or Special Zone shall be located on the same land as the use or building served thereby except that:
1. The Commission may permit two (2) or more abutting properties to be served by a
common facility situated on one (I) or more of said properties. Documentation of perpetual
easements allowing shared parking must be submitted to the Commission, reviewed and
approved by the Town Attorney, and filed on the land records of the Town of Cromwell.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
109
Commission may permit parking facilities to be on land within 500 feet of a building
or use if it determines that it is impractical to provide parking facilities on same land
the building or use is located. Documentation of perpetual easements allowing
shared parking must be submitted to the Commission, reviewed and approved by the Town
Attorney, and filed on the land records of the Town of Cromwell.
In the Downtown Cromwell (DC) District, parking shall not be located within any required
yard setbacks or between the building and the front street line.
4. In all other Business or Special Zones, off-street parking facilities shall be located in back
of the front yard lines.
5. Parking lots in any Business or Special Zone shall be located at least five (5) feet from a
building, except as may be required for loading facilities.
6. Where the required parking spaces in any Business or Special Zone are provided by garage
or other covered space, the location of such garage or other covered space shall be in
conformity with the Zoning Regulations relating to a principal building.
7. Underground parking shall be permitted as a substitute for surface parking to allow the area
normally occupied by surface parking to remain undisturbed or to provide open space,
landscaping and similar amenities. Such parking:
(1) may permit a larger above-ground structure or intensification in use of the site to
an above-ground floor area exceeding the applicable floor ratio by up to I 5
percent,
(2) shall have its access screened from abutting properties, and street-level views of
underground parking access shall be minimized, and
(3) shall be designed such that any first-floor level above such parking shall not
exceed the curb level of any adjacent street by more than two (2) feet.
8. Parking Garages. Parking garages are authorized. There are no special provisions for
parking garages.
5.2.N Farm Exemption.
The provisions of this Section do not apply to vehicles, trailers, or construction equipment used on a farm as
defined in the Zoning Regulations.
5.2.0 Policing of Parking Spaces.
Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the owner or owners of the land on which such
off-street parking facilities are located from policing the same and from forbidding the parking of motor
vehicles thereon when the owner or user of such motor vehicle is not making use of the facilities, uses or
buildings for which such parking area is provided.
5.3 SIGNS
5.3.A Purpose.
The purposes of these sign regulations are to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication
in the Town: to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the Town's ability to attract sources of
economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse
effect of signs on nearby public and private property.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
110
General.
erected in the Town
to all applicable
Sign Prohibitions and Limitations - Signs which are not expressly
Regulations are prohibited.
set forth in
by these
(1) No sign shall use any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form, or character in such
manner as to interfere with moving traffic, including signs which incorporate
typical street-type and/or traffic control-type signage designs and colors.
(2) No illuminated flashing signs shall be permitted. Electronic
time/temperature signs and motor vehicle fuel price signs are permitted with a
Special Permit.
(3) No portable ··A frame" signs shall be permitted except for special events.
( 4) Off-premise directional and informational signs shall be permitted only for
governmental uses.
(5) No inflatable signs shall be permitted.
(6) No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility.
(7) Advertising in bus shelters shall not be considered a sign for the purposes of this
section.
(8) No moving signs are permitted.
5.3.C Sign Illumination.
1. The light source in any lighted sign shall be shielded in such a manner as to prevent light
glare, light trespass, or light pollution.
2. Colored lights shall not be used where they create any conflict with highway control traffic
signals. Red, green or amber neon signs shall not be installed or used within l 00 feet of any
traffic signal.
3. Direct external lighted signs shall be illuminated only to the degree necessary to ensure the
sign is readable.
4. The intensity of the lighting source shall be determined by the Commission, as appropriate,
based on the placement, style and materials of the sign itself.
5. Under appropriate conditions the hours of illumination may be limited to minimize adverse
effects on surrounding land uses or properties.
5.3.D Sign Placement and Location.
1. All signs except identification and directional signs for municipal facilities and municipal
signs for central directional indexing in industrial areas shall be erected inside lot lines of
the premises to which they pertain and shall not be located within or allowed to intrude into
any public street, road or highway right-of-way. No off-premises signs shall be permitted.
2. No sign shall be located on any corner lot or near any driveway that would violate the
visibility at intersections requirements in Section 5.8.
3. The area restrictions in this Section shall be interpreted as maximum area per sign face and
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
111
are not meant to prohibit the use of more than one (I) face.
5.3.E Signs Permitted in all Zoning Districts.
The following signs are permitted as an accessory use in all districts, a pennit is not required:
SIGN TYPE
PROPERTY
IDENTIFICATION .
HOME
IMPROVEMENT
BULLETIN
BOARD
CONSTRUCTION
FARM
EXAMPLES DESCRIPTION
A non-illuminated name sign or announcement sign for
a lawful activity located on the premises.
• all signs shall be located behind the front lot line and
shall not contain more than four ( 4) square foot in total
sign area per face giving the name of the land or
building on which displayed, the name of the owner or
lessees thereof, or information of historical interest.;
• shall not contain more than one (I) piece.
• no more than one (I) sign shall be permitted at one
time.
A non-illuminated name sign or announcement sign for
home improvement activity conducted on the premises
may be installed for the duration of the activity. Home
Improvement Signs shall not exceed two (2) square
feet in area.
Non-illuminated bulletin boards on the premises of
churches and similar uses not over 16 square feet in
sign area.
• One (I) bulletin board or sign on Town or school
property not exceeding 48 square feet in total area.
• One (I) bulletin board or sign on church or
institutional property not exceeding 48 square feet is
permitted by Special Pennit.
A non-illuminated sign not to exceed 12 square feet
in sign area when displayed on a building or property
in process of construction or improvements.
A non-illuminated name of a farm and proprietors
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
112
PUBLIC
PURPOSE
REAL ESTATE
TRAFFIC
CONTROL
thereof may be attached or painted on the wall of an
accessory building if the building is located at least 50
feet from the pub I ic highway, and if the total area of
the sign is limited to two (2) square feet for every
running foot of wall on which it is displayed.
Incidental non-illuminated signs, generally
informational, that have a purpose secondary to the
use of the property on which it is located, such as ·'no
parking," "entrance." " loading" and other similar
directives, subject to the approval of the Commission,
on any lot provided no such sign shall be larger than
two (2) square feet in sign area nor exceed a height of
six (6) feet. The Town of Cromwell shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section as to signs which
identify public buildings, community activities, signs
for business promotion, installed by a town agency,
or are directional in nature.
•House for Sale. One (I) non-illuminated
freestanding real estate sign announcing the
availability of a use of parcel provided such sign
may not exceed eight (8) square feet and an overall
height of six (6) feet.
• Real Estate Development. One (I) nonilluminated
freestanding real estate
development provided such sign may not exceed
32 square feet and is removed within six (6)
months of installation.
Traffic control signs and devices as permitted by the
Local Traffic Authority.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25 .2015
BASIC STANDARDS
113
TEMPORARY
NON-PROFIT
EVENT
PRIVATE
PROPERTY
notice,
or signs concerning a matter
any poster,
and any other device. to
announce the candidacy of any person or persons
seeking public office or offices or to state a position
or opinion on a matter of public interest or
controversy may be erected in any zone. Such signs
shall be displayed only in areas in which their display
is not prohibited by State or local law or regulation.
No permit is required.
Temporary off premises signs for events may be
erected listing the name of the organization, the time
and place of the meeting or event and any other
pertinent information, provided there are not more
than a total of seven (7) in number, with a minimum
separating distance of 4,000 linear feet between each
sign, and shall be located on a State Highway, and each
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and
shall not be erected more than 60 days prior to the
meeting or event and shall be removed within seven
(7) days of the meeting or event. No permit shall be
required.
No trespassing signs or signs indicating the private
nature of a driveway or premises, provided that the
size of any such sign shall not exceed two (2) square
feet in total area.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
114
I
I I
Signs Allowed in Residential Districts (Section 3)
Incidental
Home Office/Studio
Home-Based Business (Major or
Minor)
Property Identification
Single Establishment
Community Shopping Center
Monument
Menu Board
Neighborhood Identification
X=Not permitted or authorized
NP= No permit is required
P=Permitted - see specific sign standards
N/A=Not Applicable
p
x
NP
NP
NIA
NIA
NIA
NIA
x
5.3.G Signs Allowed in Business Districts (Section 4)
The following signs are permitted in any business district:
SIGN TYPE
Wall Sign
Awning
BUILDING-MOUNTED
p
I p
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
115
NIA
p
x
NP
NP
x
x
x
x
p
FREE-ST ANDING
p
p I
I • - = -- . -. - - - • - --. - - - - ·. - .
. . ·.
Projecting
Hanging
Directory
Incidental
Home-Based Business
Property Identification
Single Establishment
Community Shopping Center
Monument
Menu Board
Neighborhood Identification
X=Not permitted or authorized
NP=No permit is required
P=Permitted - see specific sign standards
N/A=Not Applicable
- -
p
p
p
p
p
NP
p
p
p
p
NP
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
1. Temporary Signs. For commercial purposes. Only one (l) temporary "grand opening" sign
or other special event. A Use Permit is required, and shall be issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer for the purpose of a grand opening. The Temporary Sign is authorized
to be installed up to 14 days before the event, and must be removed within one (l) day after
the event.
5.3.H Sign Standards.
WALL SIGN BUILDING-MOUNTED
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
116
include most types signage that are attached to the a wall.
H•V•~~·v channel letters made out of wood, or plastic.
Wall may be painted on a or on a is attached to a
Wall signs should be oriented to achieve balanced composition and harmony with
other architectural elements of a building fas:ade.
Wall signs should be placed on a flat building surface and should not be placed over or
otherwise obscure architectural building features.
• Signs affixed and parallel to the fas:ade of a building pertaining to a pennitted use or
business, providing no sign on any building shall extend above the top of the main
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
New in the Residence Zones Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• All wall mounted signs shall be affixed parallel to the wall to
which they are attached and shall not project more than 12 inches
therefrom.
• Limited by building size
Signs on a given wall surface shall not exceed three (3) square
feet of sign area for every linear foot of the same wall of that
section of the building.
• No one ( l) sign shall exceed 200 square feet.
• Building wall signs shall not project above the parapet or roof
line.
• N/A
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
117
INCIDENTAL BUILDING-MOUNTED
Incidental signs including credit-card symbol signs and similar messages that are
typically posted at the entrance of a business.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• All wall mounted signs shall be affixed parallel to the wall to
which they are attached and shall not project more than 12 inches
therefrom.
•NIA
• Signs displayed from the inside of the window shall not exceed
15 percent of the window area of each window.
• Building wall signs shall not project above the parapet or roof
line.
•NIA
AWNING BUILDING-MOUNTED
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
118
Awning signs include most types of signage that are attached to an awning mounted on
a building.
• Signs on awnings should be minimized and are only appropriate if there are no good
alternatives for wall signs, projecting signs or hanging signs.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement- Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• Signs may be located on awnings subject to size criteria.
Awnings must maintain a minimum clearance of 8 feet above any
public right-of-way or private sidewalk area.
• One (I) awning sign per tenant space.
• Signs on awnings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the
main area of the awning, or exceed 25 square feet in size,
whichever is smaller.
• 20 feet
• No sign shall be located on any roof, and no sign attached to a
building shall project above the top of the wall of the building.
•NIA
PROJECTING BUILDING-MOUNTED
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
119
Projecting signs are attached to a building face and project out perpendicular to the
building wall.
• Projecting signs are very effective when oriented to pedestrians on the sidewalk level.
•Appropriate materials include wood and metal with carved or applied lettering, or any
other material that is architecturally compatible with the building that the sign is
attached to.
• Multiple projecting signs should not be installed within I 0 feet from projecting signs
on the same building or on adjacent buildings or properties to ensure proper visibility
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
•New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval • • New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• Projecting signs must be attached to building faryades that have a
public entrance
• A minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above the public right-of
way or private sidewalk area must be maintained.
• May not project more than four ( 4) feet from the building that it
is mounted on.
• No sign shall be located within or hung over the right-of-way of
any street, except as authorized by the Town Council.
•One (l) projecting sign is allowed per tenant space.
• 6 square feet in the DC.
• 12 square feet in other business zones.
• 20 feet
• No sign shall be located on any roof, and no sign attached to a
building shall project above the top of the wall of the building.
·NIA
HANGING BUILDING-MOUNTED
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
120
Hanging signs, or suspended signs, are used to help define entries and identify business
names to pedestrians.
• Typically hanging signs small and can hang over a building entry if the appropriate
clearance is provided.
• Hanging signs can be particularly useful for storefronts that have multiple tenants.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
•New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
•New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• Hanging or suspended signs must be attached to building
fa9ades that have a public entrance and must maintain a minimum
clearance of 8 feet above any public right-of-way or private
sidewalk area.
• One (I) hanging or suspended sign is allowed per tenant space.
• 8 square feet.
•NIA
•NIA
DIRECTORY BUILDING-MOUNTED
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
121
rj 00
Directory signs are used for multi-tenant buildings to provide a directory of tenant
0 ~ locations within the building. They may also serve as the address sign for the property.
;5 ~ o • Directory signs are small scale and are oriented to pedestrians.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
·New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• On a wall by the building entrance.
• One ( 1) directory sign may be permitted per building entrance.
• 12 square feet (individual letters may not exceed 6 inches in
height).
• 5 feet.
•NIA
Internal Directional Signs. Internal directional signs shall be permitted provided they meet the
following criteria:
1. are not be legible from a public right-of-way.
2. are not internally illuminated.
3. do not exceed 18 square feet in sign area. The Commission may allow an internal use sign
to exceed 18 square feet through the Special Permit Application Process in Section 8.7.
4. a multi-tenant signage program for internal use signs is required when internal use signs
exceed 18 square feet on a multi-tenant site.
WINDOW BUILDING-MOUNTED
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
122
A window sign is a sign that is painted on or attached to a window and located within
12-inches of the face of a window.
• Window signs do not include business hours of operation or open/closed signs.
• Window displays, including merchandise displays, graphics and text, that are located
more than 12 inches from the face of a window are not considered signs.
• Window signs should be scaled to the pedestrian and oriented to window shoppers on
the sidewalk, as opposed to vehicles passing by.
• Window signs should be limited to small graphics and text that serve to frame a
window or to provide information.
• A window sign should not obscure the view into a store or place of business.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement- Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• There is no specific location requirement.
•There is no limit to the number of window signs allowed.
•There is no limit on the maximum area of a window sign
• No sign shall be located on any roof, and no sign attached to a
building shall project above the top of the wall of the building.
•NIA
HOME-BASED BUSINESS WALL-MOUNTED
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25 .2015
BASIC STANDARDS
123
The purpose of home-based business signs is to identify the name of a home-based
business and/or the occupation of a person conducting a home-based business.
• The colors and materials used for the sign must be compatible with the associated
building design.
• Lettering should be carved, routed or applied as opposed to painted on a flat board.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Zoning Permit
• New in the Residence Zones - Zoning Permit
• Must be attached to a building.
•There is no limit to the number of window signs allowed.
• There is no limit on the maximum area of a window sign
• 8 feet.
• No sign shall be located on any roof, and no sign attached to a
building shall project above the top of the wall of the building.
• No illumination is allowed
SINGLE ESTABLISHMENT FREE-ST ANDING - CLASS 1
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25 .2015
BASIC STANDARDS
124
Free-standing single-establishment signs are primarily intended to communicate with people in
automobiles. The sign structure is typically supported by two poles, but other types of supports may be
used.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM AREA
PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
OTHER
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• Additional Free Standing Sign when Frontage Exceeds 500 feetSpecial
Pennit
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence Zone
• May be located in required setback but must not impact the line of sight of
people in cars to pedestrians or other vehicles in driveways or street rights-of-way.
• on any lot in other than DC, one (I) sign may extend to within I 0 feet of any
street line provided that the sign does not exceed an area of 40 square feet and
more than eight (8) feet in any dimension.
• No sign shall be located within or hung over the right-of-way of any street,
except as authorized by the Town Council.
• One (I) sign is pennitted per lot, per street frontage.
• One (I) additional free-standing sign may be permitted by Special Penn it if the
subject property's frontage is in excess of 500 feet.
• No more than two (2) Class I free-standing signs on any single lot.
• 40 square feet per side and 80 square feet if two (2) sided.
• Where the parcel of land on which the hotel is situated is located 200 feet or less
from an interstate highway line, then one additional sign shall be permitted, which
sign shall not exceed 40 feet in height and shall not exceed 175 square feet in area.
• 21 feet
·NIA
• A pennanent freestanding sign shall be appropriately landscaped at its base. Said
landscaping shall be approved by the Commission as appropriate per the nature of
the application.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
125
COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER FREE-ST ANDING - CLASS 1
Shopping center identification signs are free-standing signs that identify two or more
establishments within a commercial development and should be compatible with the
design theme of the development.
• They may identify multiple tenants, but larger shopping centers with more than five
(5) tenants should avoid listing individual tenants, other than the project anchors, to
avoid sign clutter.
• The sign structure should contain elements of the design theme of the buildings in the
center.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• May be located in required setback but must not impact the line
of sight of people in cars to pedestrians or other vehicles in
driveways or street rights-of-way.
• A freestanding sign shall not be closer than ten (I 0) feet to a
street right-of-way line.
• One (I) community shopping center sign is permitted per lot,
per street frontage.
•No more than two (2) Class I free-standing signs on any single
lot.
UP TO 25,000
SF
32 square feet
64 square feet if
two (2) sided
SIZE OF BUILDING
25,000 - 75,000
SF
50 square feet
I 00 square feet if
two (2) sided
MORE THAN
75,000 SF
I 00 square feet
200 square feet if
two (2) sided
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25 .2015
BASIC STANDARDS
126
MAXIMUM • 21 feet
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION ·NIA
OTHER . A permanent freestanding sign shall be appropriately
landscaped at its base. Said landscaping shall be approved by the
Commission as appropriate per the nature of the application.
MONUMENT FREE-ST ANDING - CLASS 1
Monument signs are typically used where building setbacks, orientation or design make it
difficult to provide other types of signage, such as wall signs, that are plainly visible to
people that are trying to identify a use.
• Monument signs have a solid base that the sign face is installed upon.
• These signs should be designed so that the style of the sign and its base are consistent with
the architecture of the buildings on the site.
• They are typically oriented perpendicular to the adjacent street and sidewalk and have a
maximum of two parallel sign faces.
• Monument signs provide opportunities for landscaping to enhance their appearance.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• May be located in required setback but must not impact the line of
sight of people in cars to pedestrians or other vehicles in driveways
or street rights-of-way.
• A freestanding sign shall not be closer than ten (I 0) feet to a street
right-of-way line.
• One (I) sign is pennitted per lot, per street frontage.
• No more than two (2) Class I free-standing signs on any single lot.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
127
• - - ;J -
- " - - - j y
- - '
MAXIMUM • 24 square feet
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM • 6 feet
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION •NIA
OTHER • A permanent freestanding sign shall be appropriately landscaped at
its base. Said landscaping shall be approved by the Commission as
appropriate per the nature of the application.
DIRECTORY FREE-STANDING - CLASS 1
Directory signs are used for multi-tenant buildings to provide a directory of tenant locations within the
building. They may also serve as the address sign for the property.
• Directory signs are small scale and are oriented to pedestrians.
• Note: the directory sign is in addition to the freestanding signs
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM AREA
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence Zone
• May be located in required setback but must not impact the line of sight of
people in cars to pedestrians or other vehicles in driveways or street rights-of-way.
• A freestanding sign shall not be closer than ten (I 0) feet to a street right-of-way
line.
• One ( 1) detached directory sign may be permitted per lot.
• No more than two (2) Class 1 free-standing signs on any single lot.
SHOPPING CENTER NAME
50 square feet
TYPE OF SIGN
MAJOR TENANTS
(DETERMINED BY
LANDLORD)
15 square feet
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
128
NON-MAJOR
TENANTS
6 square feet
MAXIMUM AREA • Total sign area cannot exceed 200 square feet
PER SIGN
MAXIMUM • I 0 feet
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION •NIA
OTHER • A permanent freestanding sign shall be appropriately landscaped at its base. Said
landscaping shall be approved by the Commission as appropriate per the nature of
the application.
MENU BOARD FREE-ST ANDING - CLASS 2
Menu board signs are used drive-in businesses to provide a directory of items sold at
that establishment.
• Menu board signs are small scale and are oriented to motorists in stationary vehicles
within close proximity to the sign.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• May not be located in required setback.
• Must not impact the line of sight of people in cars to pedestrians
or other vehicles in drives, driveways or street rights-of-way.
• One (I) primary and one ( 1) secondary per drive-in order station
• Primary - 36 square feet
• Secondary - 15 square feet
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
129
MAXIMUM • 6 feet
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION • Permitted.
INCIDENTAL FREE-ST ANDING - CLASS 2
• Incidental signs, on private property, directing and guiding traffic, identifying a
parking or loading area.
• Do not include a commercial message
• Are not to be legible from a public right-of-way.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• A multi-tenant signage program for internal use signs 1s
required when internal use signs exceed 18 square feet on a
multi-tenant site.
• Incidental sign larger than 18 square feet - Special Penn it
• New in the Residence Zones - Not Authorized in any Residence
Zone
• Limited to locations where the sign will not be legible from a
public right-of-way.
•No Limit
• 18 square feet in sign area. The Commission may allow an
internal use sign to exceed 18 square feet through the Special
Permit Application Process in Section 8.7 S
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
130
MAXIMUM • 8 feet
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION • Internal illumination is allowed.
NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTIFICATION FREE-ST ANDING - CLASS 2
The purpose of residential development signs is to identify the name of a development,
provided the development is not an in-fill project within an established neighborhood.
• They are usually monument signs or wall signs placed on a wall feature in a
landscaped open space area at the entry of the development.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Business Zones - Site Plan Approval
• New in the Residence Zones - Site Plan Approval
• At each major street frontage of a residential development
within a landscaped area that is maintained by a homeowner' s
association.
• Sign locations must not impact the line of sight of people in cars
to pedestrians or other vehicles in driveways or street
rights-of-way.
• One (I) sign is at each major street frontage of a residential
development.
• 32 square feet.
• 6 feet
• Permitted.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
131
HOME-BASED BUSINESS FREE-ST ANDING - CLASS 2
The purpose of home-based business signs is to identify the name of a home-based
business and/or the occupation of a person conducting a home-based business.
• They are typically supported by a single post, may be two-sided and they are usually
oriented perpendicular to the sidewalk instead of parallel.
• The colors and materials used for the sign must be compatible with the associated
building design.
• Lettering should be carved, routed or applied as opposed to painted on a flat board.
PERMIT TYPE
LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS
MAXIMUM
NUMBER
MAXIMUM
AREA PER SIGN
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
ILLUMINATION
• Replacement - Zoning Signoff
•New in the Business Zones - Zoning Signoff
• New in the Residence Zones - Zoning Signoff
• May be located in required setback but must not impact the line
of sight of people in cars to pedestrians or other vehicles in
driveways or street rights-of-way.
• One ( l) sign may be permitted per premises.
• 2 square feet per side.
• 8 feet
• No illumination is allowed.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
132
5.3.I Prohibited Signs.
SIGN TYPE
PORTABLE
UNAUTHORIZED
TRAFFIC
CONTROL
INFLATABLES
BANNERS
PENNANT FLAGS
EXAMPLES
KEEP
RIGHT
DESCRIPTION
Sandwich/:A-frame signs and mobile readerboard signs
Signs that may be confused with traffic control signs
or signals because of their color or size, location,
movement, content, coloring, or manner of
illumination;
4-w ~-----·---- - --- -------- - ---~
Posters, strings of lights, blinking
lights, balloons, search lights,
and other displays of a carnival
nature, except for signs of an
architectural nature, or for a
limited duration, such as
. .
seasonal decorations or grand
opening displays
Other than the flags of a nation, state, or town, no
larger than eight (8) square feet nor mounted higher
than 20 feet.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
133
VARIABLE
MESSAGE
ROOF MOUNTED
SIGNS
OFF-PREMISES
wom rl · ., . ; .~. w
t1rns ar
LETTERS
Commercial variable message Signs
Electronic commercial variable
message center signs, where the
message changes more
frequently than every three (3)
minutes.
Signs which advertise a business not located on the
premises for which the sign is located.
NOTE: Signs installed as part of a government-run
wayfinding signage program are exempt from these
requirements.
5.3.J Multi-Tenant Signage Program.
1. Multiple tenant commercial and industrial buildings shall submit a signage program to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for approval before permits for new signs are issued at
the property.
2. Program Scope. Such signage program shall address size, materials, placement,
illumination, and other information as may be required for the Commission to evaluate all
attached and detached signs which may be installed on a given site.
3. Approved Multi-Tenant Program. Such approved signage program shall guide the owner,
tenants, Commission, and Zoning Enforcement Officer in the application for and issuance
of any permits required by these Regulations.
4. Existing Sites. A Multi-Tenant Sign Program is required when a new Site Plan Approval or
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
134
5.4.A
for any
STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL
Stormwater Runoff Control Plans.
Site plans shall be accompanied by plans, prepared by a registered Professional Engineer
licensed in the State of Connecticut, providing measures for detention and controlled
release of storm water runoff when, at least one (I) of the following is met:
(1) Proposed Commercial or Industrial Developments;
(2) Proposed residential developments of (3) acres or more (excluding single-family,
duplex or triplex residential construction, as part of a previously approved
building lot);
(3) The proposed impervious area is 50 percent or greater.
(4) Any other developments may be required to provide such measures if deemed
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, by the Commission
2. When required, measures for the detention and controlled release of stormwater runoff
shall meet the following standards:
(1) Infiltration. Maximum infiltration to the ground water is encouraged. Design of the
stormwater management system shall consider reducing runoff by use of such
techniques as minimizing impervious areas and maximizing travel times by
using grass or rock-lined channels in lieu of storm sewers, and the use of rain
gardens for roof surface drainage.
(2) Release rate shall not exceed the rate of runoff for the same site in its undeveloped
state for all intensities and durations of rainfall. This may be accomplished
through the use of, but not limited to, the following design elements:
a) detention basins,
b) retention ponds,
c) roof or parking lot storage or
d) other acceptable means.
3. Required volume for stormwater detention shall be calculated on the basis of runoff from a
2-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year and 100-year frequency rainfall, as published by the
National Weather Service, the Connecticut Stormwater Management Manual, or other
recognized agency. The detention volume required shall be that necessary to handle the
runoff of a 25-year frequency rain- fall, for any and all durations, from the proposed
development less that volume discharged during the same duration at the approved release
rate as specified above.
4. In all cases, runoff shall be computed in accordance with Technical Release #55,
Engineering Division, Soil Conservation Service, USDA, January, 1975, as amended. The
Commission may allow alternate peak runoff modeling techniques.
5. All required basins, which are proposed to be maintained by the Town, are to be designed
and built in accordance with the policy of the Cromwell Town Council and at the direction
of the Town Engineer.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
135
Shared Stormwater Management Facilities.
that economic make combined retention
more practical, the may permit developers to construct joint
provided that a maintenance agreement is reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney
on the land records for each property involved. The Commission will require bonding and may
creation of a maintenance fund for combined retention areas.
5.4.C Maintenance.
L All on-site facilities shall be properly maintained by the owner of such, so that they do not
become nuisances. The owner shall submit a yearly record to the Commission of all
maintenance activities in compliance with the maintenance plan.
2. All stormwater control structures located on private property, whether dedicated to the
Town or not, shall be accessible at all times for Town inspection. Where runoff control
structures are to be accepted by the Town for maintenance, access easements shall be
provided, and subject to the review and approval of the Town Attorney.
3. All projects shall have a Stormwater Management/Best Management Practice (BMP)
Maintenance Agreement with the Town of Cromwell, subject to the review and approval of
the Town Attorney. This agreement shall be recorded in the Land Records of the Town of
Cromwell.
5.4.D Other Permit Requirements.
Permits for Stormwater Management Systems may also be required from the Town of Cromwell Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Agency where such systems may have an impact on inland-wetlands and
watercourses, and from the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, where a dam
is to be constructed or water diverted, see Connecticut General Statues Section 22a-365 et seq. and Section
22R-409.
5.5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
5.5.A Purpose.
This Section is intended to provide standards for earth-disturbing activities in order to minimize accelerated
erosion and sedimentation and to avoid unnecessary damage to land features, bodies of water and public works,
both on-site and offsite.
5.5.B Overall Requirements.
1. Any earth-disturbing activity, including grading and grubbing, shall consider the potential
problem of accelerated erosion and sedimentation and shall address such potential problem
in accordance with the standards outlined in a publication prepared and distributed by the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (DEEP) entitled "Guidelines for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control (2002)," as may be amended from time to time, available for
inspection at the Planning and Zoning Department.
2. Any development activity which will result in a cumulative disturbed area of more than
one-half (1h) acre, or in other cases as determined by Planning and Zoning Department
according to topographical conditions of the property, shall prepare and submit a soil
erosion and sediment control plan.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
136
5.5.D
Plan Requirements.
sediment plan shall consist of a map, a narrative.
materials as may necessary to fully describe the techniques which will be
utilized minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and
earth-disturbing activities.
2. Such soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately
control accelerated erosion and sediment and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on
the proposed site based on the best available technology and the guidelines specified in the
··Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002)," as amended.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Alternative design criteria, principles, methods and practices, such as Low Impact Design.
may be used with the approval of the Commission or its designated agent.
Plan Review and Approval.
Any soil erosion and sediment control plan submitted pursuant to this Section may be
reviewed by a technical expert retained by the Commission at the expense of the applicant.
The Commission or its designated agent may refer the plan to any other local, State or
Federal agency for their findings and recommendations.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed as extending the time limits for actions on any
application under Chapter 124 or 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Prior to the issuance of a Zoning Signoff, the applicant shall post a performance guarantee
in accordance with Section 9.3 .C. I At a minimum the performance guarantee shall cover
the costs of installation and maintenance of all erosion and sediment control elements. The
performance guarantee shall be paid in cash.
5.5.E Implementation.
1. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to:
(1) Implement the approved plan or any revision thereto,
(2) Install the erosion and sediment control measures and facilities as scheduled and as
shown on the approved plan, prior to the commencement of any site
development activity except as may be required to implement the plan; and
(3) Maintain the plan measures and facilities in effective condition to ensure
compliance with the approved plan.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may require the permitteeto:
(1) verify through progress reports and "as-built" surveys that soil erosion and
sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed
according to the approved plan and are being operated and properly maintained,
or
(2) retain an inspector who is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment
Control (CPESC) or other qualified professional to inspect the development
activity and to file periodic reports.
3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to withhold the issuance of Zoning
Signoffs or the issuance of zoning certificates of compliance unless, in its judgment,
accelerated erosion and sedimentation control measures have been complied with.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
137
Inspections shall be made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer during development to
ensure compliance with the approved plan that control measures and are
performed or installed and
5.6 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
5.6.A Purpose.
These Regulations are intended to provide standards with regard to exterior lighting in order to maximize the
effectiveness of site lighting, to enhance public safety and welfare, to raise public awareness of energy
conservation, to discourage the installation of lighting fixtures that emit objectionable illumination, to avoid
unnecessary upward illumination and illumination of adjacent properties, and to reduce glare.
5.6.B Applicability.
The standards herein shall apply to all exterior lighting where Site Plan Application or Special Permit Is
required, except for single-family dwellings. The Town Planner may refer any Site Plan to the Commission for
a determination of acceptable lighting fixtures.
5.6.C Standards.
1. All exterior lights and sign illumination shall be designed, located, installed and directed in
such a manner as to:
(1) prevent direct glare or I ight trespass,
(2) employ soft, transitional light levels which are consistent from area to area,
(3) minimize contrast between light sources, lit areas and dark surroundings, and
(4) be confined within the target area.
2. For commercial uses, for multi-family developments, for institutional uses or other nonresidential
uses in residential districts:
(1) no externally-mounted, direct light source directed towards the lot line shall be
visible at the lot line at ground level or above, and
(2) lighting fixtures for all vehicular areas and pedestrian areas shall be full cut-off
type fixtures or !ESNA cut-off fixtures as approved by the Commission, or shall
be fully shielded/recessed fixtures where the lens is recessed or flush with the
bottom surface.
3. Lighting fixtures for building security or aesthetics and any display purposes shall, unless
otherwise approved by the Commission or these regulations, be:
(1) top downward (not upward or sideways), and
(2) full cut off, or lESNA cut-off fixtures as approved by the Commission, or fully
shielded/recessed. Any application for use of IESNA fixtures shall include "cutsheets"
with specifications and details of the proposed fixture and pole.
4. Where outdoor playing fields or other special outdoor activity areas are to be illuminated,
lighting fixtures shall be specified, mounted and aimed so that:
(1) their beams fall within the primary playing area and immediate surroundings, and
(2) no light trespass is directed off the site.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
138
to highlight
non-essential lighting (such as
for ·'photocell on -
shall be targeted
aesthetic,
at the
and be
Where necessary, lighting for site security may be configured for motion or infrared sensor
operation.
8. The height of luminaires, except streetlights in public right-of-ways, shall be the minimum
height necessary to provide adequate illumination, but shall not exceed a heightof:
(l) 14 feet from the ground to the highest point of the fixture or pole in the DC.
(2) 14 feet in height from the ground to the highest point of the fixture or pole in any
other district unless specifically authorized by the Commission by granting of a
Special Permit and in no instance shall any pole or fixture exceed 24 feet in
height from the ground to the highest point of the fixture or pole.
9. Any application for use of fixtures in excess of 14 feetin height shall:
(1) include plans and details prepared by a professional lighting designer or electrical
engineer,
(2) show that the proposed number, height, and placement of fixtures will provide
sufficient illumination for both pedestrian and vehicular use with sensitivity to
the surrounding area and the proximity of residential and other uses that may be
affected,
(3) demonstrate that the proposed plan will result in fewer light poles and fixtures, less
visual impact on surrounding properties, reduced electrical consumption,
reduced overall glare, and lower light intensity, and
( 4) show that the scale of the proposed fixtures and poles is appropriate in relation to
the elevation of the site and surrounding properties and the buildings and
natural features on the site.
10. The "maintained horizontal illuminance recommendations" set by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) shall be observed unless modified by the
Commission.
11. High pressure sodium light sources are prohibited.
12. Tn any case, the Commission shall determine whether the type and style of proposed
lighting fixtures and illumination meets the standards, purpose and intent of these
regulations.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
139
FIXTURES
Fixtures Which Might Produce Glare or Light
xtu1es tnat ~roauce ~'are and lign! :respass
1~ 1st ielded F!oodl .qnts
Poortv-s'11eded floodl:ghlS
}fC9
~ 'UJJ!!!£!!!!JI ~ al l !n<:hielded 'Nallpack<::
]~ & unsn:e1oed or ".-c Poory-shielded Wall ~ ;:~ E Mount F•xtures '"'"' ti) . t'~~ .c,
~ ~,,
~··
Dr:ip-Lens & Sa9-Lens Fixtures - :'.
wi exposea bulb 1 refractor lens ~
unshielded Streetlight
6=-~ ~
UrSlllet<lled PAR
.~rtight<;
( _ _) '-V
5.6.D Exemptions and Modifications.
Light Trespass
The following types of lighting are exempt from these Regulations:
1. Traditional seasonal lighting;
2. Temporary lighting associated with a fair, carnival or similar function authorized by the
Town of Cromwell;
3. Temporary light used by the Police Department, Fire Department or Emergency Services.
4. The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow lighting that does not comply with the
specific standards listed in this Section provided the Commission determines that such
proposed lighting is consistent with the intent and purpose of these Regulations.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
140
5.7 CORNER LOTS
The following regulations pertain to lots with frontage on more than one (I) street:
1. A corner lot shall maintain front yard setback requirements for the street on which the main
building faces.
2. A side yard setback of a minimum of 65 percent of the setback line for the side street shall
be maintained.
3. All accessory buildings shall maintain front yard setback requirements for each street
frontage.
-t See Visibility at Intersection and Driveway Obstructions (Section5.8).
5.8 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS AND DRIVEWAY
OBSTRUCTIONS
5.8.A Intersections.
1. On a corner lot in any district, no planting, snow, structure, fence, walls or obstruction to
vision more than three (3) feet in height shall be placed or maintained within the triangular
area fonned by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting points on said
street lines, each of which points is 25 feet distant from the point of intersection.
2. Any obstruction to vision which in the opinion of the Cromwell Traffic Authority is a
traffic hazard shall be removed as a violation of these regulations.
VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS
5.8.B Driveways.
fn order to provide adequate room for emergency vehicles to tum into driveways and access all buildings and
parcels within the Town of Cromwell, all new driveways (including alleys, private roads, and other
accessways) shall provide the following minimum clearances for emergency vehicles, regardless of the paved
width of the driveways:
1. No building, fence, wall, lamp post, telephone pole, mailbox, or other structure, nor any
trees, boulders, or other obstructions shall be erected, placed or installed alongside any
driveway so as to reduce the access to less than 14 feet wide at any point.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25 .2015
BASIC ST AN DAROS
141
2. No building, fence, trees, boulders, or other obstructions shall be erected, placed or
installed within the triangular areas on either side of the driveway at its intersection with
the travel portion of the road, fonned by connecting the outer points of a line measured 25
feet on the road (centered on the driveway), and a parallel line 14 feet wide (centered on
the driveway) at a distance of 25 feet from the travel portion of the road.
3. Where there are automatic gates at driveways, an emergency means of opening the gates
shall be provided to the Fire Department, Police Department, and other emergency service
agencies .
.t. If all buildings on the parcel are within 50 feet from the traveled portion of the road and
can be easily accessed from the road, the Commission may exempt the parcel from the
requirements of this Section by Site Plan Approval/Special Penn it.
5. Road identification signs installed by the Town of Cromwell are exempt from this
requirement.
DRIVEWAY OBSTRUCTIONS
5.9 CONVERSION OF EXISTING ONE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
Existing single-family dwellings may be converted to two-family use, subject to issuance of Site Plan Approval
by the Commission provided that:
1. Such dwelling shall have been erected more than 20 years before proposed conversion.
2. Such dwelling shall have a lot area which is not less than the minimum lot area required for
the district in which it is located.
3. Any addition to the dwelling shall comply with all other requirements of the use district in
which such dwelling is located.
4. Each dwelling unit shall provide two (2) means of egress.
5. No new exterior stairways shall be located on a side of the building fronting any street.
6. The residential character of the building after conversion must be maintained.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
142
or garage space shall be provided for a minimum of one (I) vehicle per
!f the structure is not serviced by water and sewer, a certification of approval from
health office, attesting to the adequacy of the well and/or septic system to support
proposed use shall be required.
Buildings may be converted to more than two (2) family dwellings subject to issuance of a
Special Permit and Site Plan Approval by the Commission.
5.10 VENDING PERMITS
5.10.A Intent.
The intent of the regulation is to control the use of land by licensed peddlers and solicitors in the Town of
Cromwell.
5.10.B Permit.
The selling of merchandise from moveable sources whether moving or stationary including but not limited to
cars, trucks, wagons, or tables. or peddling or soliciting involving land use shall be permitted only upon
issuance of a Use Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission. All permits shall expire one (1) year after
the date ofissuance.
5.10.C Application.
The application shall be on a form provided by the Commission. The application form must be complete and
include the written signature of the property owner granting permission for the applicant to use his property.
The applicant must comply with all other local, State and Federal requirements.
5.10.D Restrictions.
No Use Permit shall be issued under this regulation for a location that:
1. Is in other than a Business District.
2. Is within a 1,000 feet radius (as measured from the center of the proposed vending use) of a
permanent business use (or other vending business use) location conducting what is
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be a similar business.
3. In the opinion of the Commission would have an adverse impact on the health. safety, and
welfare of the public or have a detrimental effect on the Town of Cromwell.
5.1 O.E Null and Void.
This pennit will be null and void upon written notification to the Commission from the owner revoking
permission for the vendor to use the property.
5.11 EXEMPTIONS
The following uses and activities are exempt from this regulation and require no prior Commission approval:
1. Cake. Bake and Tag Sales, and Auctions conducted by charitable organizations or
community groups shall be exempt from this regulation.
2. The selling of food and non-alcoholic beverages and the parking of vehicles on private
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
143
within one-half ( mile of the Tournament Players during the
the Greater Hartford Open golf tournament.
activity must be operated by the property owner or tenant. Persons who sell
food are for obtaining all local, State and Federal ,.,,,,.rr11r"
(2) Owners who permit or engage in any commercial activity should review their
property owner's insurance policy for liability considerations.
(3) Hawkers and Peddlers subject to regulation by ordinance in accordance with
Chapter 408 (Sections 21-36, et. Seq.) of the General Statutes.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
BASIC STANDARDS
144
6. SPECIAL PERMITS
l FILLING AND REJ\t10V AL OF EARTH MATERIAL
6.1.A Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the conditions and operations of excavating, grading, filling and
removal of earth, sand, stone, gravel, soil, minerals, loam, clay, peat moss and any other earth products. This
section further is intended to conserve and preserve water storage areas, assure that erosion and sedimentation
is minimized, that water pollution is prevented, that hazards inherent to open excavation areas and steep slopes
of loose earth are prevented, that nuisances such as excess traffic, noise. odor, dust are minimized, that visual
blight is controlled, and that the productive usage of land is maintained.
6.1.B Permits Required.
i
I
FILLING AMOUNT OF FILL ADDED I PERMIT REQUIRED
MINOR FILLING • Up to I 00 cubic yards of fill I Use Permit in accordance with
per year. Section 8.1.
I
I
In accordance with an approved
INCIDENTAL FILLING • More than 100 and less than Building Permit, Use Permit.
500 cubic yards of fill per year. Subdivision approval, Site Plan
Approval, or Special Permit.
• 500 or more cubic yards of fill; Special Permit in accordance with
SUBSTANTIAL FILLING • Greater than three (3) times the Section 8. 7 and the requirements
''Foundation Volume". of this section.
REMOVAL
AMOUNT OF MATERIAL
PERMIT REQUIRED
REMOVED
In accordance with an approved
INCIDENTIAL • Three (3) times the Building Permit, Use Permit,
REMOVAL ''Foundation Volume" or less. Subdivision approval, Site Plan
Approval, or Special Permit.
SUBSTANTIAL • Greater than three (3) times the
Special Permit in accordance with
Section 8. 7 and the requirements
REMOVAL "Foundation Volume".
of this section.
6.1.C Stripping of Topsoil.
1. Except for agricultural purposes or in connection with the development of an approved
subdivision or an approved site development plan, no firm, person or corporation shall
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
145
I
excavate or otherwise remove more than 300 yards of topsoil a Special
Permit from Planning and Zoning Commission.
The shall not grant such Special Permit if it finds that the proposed removal
will cause erosion or tend to depreciate the value of the subject property or the property
in the neighborhood, be unsafe or be otherwise detrimental to the neighborhood or alter its
essential characteristics.
3. The Commission may require setbacks, fencing, drainage and erosion control adequate to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
4. In all cases, material used for filling shall be limited to suitable earth material as approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Use of trash, garbage, or other junk material is
expressly prohibited.
6.1.D Excavation.
1. Substantial removal is permitted subject to a Special Permit issued in accordance with this
Section and Section 8. 7 of the Cromwell Zoning Regulations, when the removal is part of
an overall site development plan for a principal use allowed in the zone.
2. No Special Permit approved pursuant to this Section shall be issued by the Commission for
a period exceeding two (2) years, but upon application, the permit may be renewed by the
Commission for additional two (2) year periods.
3. No excavation shall take place within 50 feet of any lot line or of a street line if finished
grade would be below the established grade of the street.
4. When excavation operations are completed, the excavated area shall be graded so that
slopes in disturbed areas shall be no steeper than 1 :3 (vertical-horizontal) except for an
exposed rock surface. A layer of topsoil shall be spread over the excavated area, except
exposed rock surfaces, to a minimum depth of two (2) inches in accordance with the
approved final grading plan. The area shall then be seeded with suitable grass mixture
containing at least 50 percent permanent grasses and maintained until the area is stabilized
and approved by the Commission.
5. Removal of earth material in phases may be required by the Commission at its discretion. If
phases are required by the Commission, grading plans for each phase shall be submitted.
6. To encourage the completion of sections of the operation and to prevent erosion, and in
order to promote the rapid return of the land to its natural state, the Commission may
reduce the Performance Guarantee requirements as portions of the work are completed in
accordance with the foregoing provisions.
If the activity is abandoned for 12 months, or if no substantial activity takes place within 12 months after
granting of the Special Permit, the Special Permit may, upon notice to the permit holder and property owner
and the opportunity to be heard, be revoked.
6.1.E Incidental and Substantial Removal.
1. Incidental Removal Activities. The use of screeners and rock crushers in connection with
such activities is prohibited in residentially zoned districts.
2. Substantial Removal Activities. The use of rock crushers in connection with such activities
is prohibited in residentially zoned districts.
6.1.F Additional Site Development Plan Requirements.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8. 25. 2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
146
in addition to the Site Development Plan Submission Requirements listed
additional requirements:
and proposed contours at two foot intervals. Grading plans showing
existing and proposed contours in the area to be excavated, with appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures. Such plans shall include the area to be excavated as well as the
surrounding area within 50 feet of the excavation.
A Stormwater Runoff Control Plan prepared in accordance with Section 5.4, if applicable.
An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with Section 5.5, to
include a plan for stabilization and final seeding of the affected area once filling is
completed, if appropriate.
4. An estimate of the amount of material to be filled. excavated or removed.
5. Proposed truck access to the site. An estimate of the number and types of trucks and
machinery to be used on the site.
6. The proposed location and type of any portable or fixed machinery.
7. A re-use plan indicated how the finished grades would be suitable for the proposed ultimate
use of the property.
6.1.G Performance Guarantee.
The Commission shall require the posting of a Performance Guarantee to ensure compliance with the approved
plan, implementation of the erosion and sedimentation control plan, and completion of final seeding. By filing
an application under this section 6.1, the owner shall be deemed to have consented to access by the
Commission or its agents for purposes of implementing the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
6.1.H Additional Evaluation Criteria for Authorizing Excavation.
The Commission may grant the Special Permit only when it is satisfied that the following conditions will be
complied with in the undertaking of such excavation:
1. All activities shall be conducted in accordance with the plan submitted with the application.
2. All operations, including screening, sifting, washing, crushing, blasting, or other forms of
processing shall be conducted upon the premises between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. seasonal time only, Sundays and holidays excepted, except by special permission of
the Commission.
3. No fixed machinery shall be erected or maintained within l 00 feet of any lot or street line.
4. No buildings except a field office or temporary shelter for machinery shall be erected on
the premises except as may be permitted in the Zoning Regulations subject to approval by
the Commission.
5. At all stages of operations, proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the collection and
stagnation of water and to prevent harmful effects upon surrounding properties.
6. During the period of excavation and removal, barricades or fences shall be erected as are
deemed necessary by the Commission for the protection of pedestrians and vehicles. At no
time shall an overhang be permitted on any face and at no time shall slopes in excess of l :3
(vertical-horizontal) be present on any soil face except the face where active excavation is
being carried on. The Commission may authorize the use of retaining walls to exceed these
slope requirements.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
147
Truck access to the excavation shall be so to traffic and
nuisance to properties. That
shall be treated to minimize dust.
That proper measures will be taken to the nuisance of noise and flying dust or
rock. Such measures may include limitations upon the stock piling of excavated materials
upon the site.
Such other appropriate safeguards as the Commission deems necessary.
0. In considering an application the Commission shall consider the effect upon the premises
and upon the surrounding premises; upon property values, health and any effect upon the
future use of the premises involved. The Commission shall also consider the guidelines for
Special Permit approval enumerated in Section 8. 7 including traffic related to the
construction phase.
11. The application shall contain full information regarding the above conditions plus such
other information as the Commission may require.
12. Failure to comply with the plans and conditions as approved and any deviation therefrom
shall be a violation and the Commission may, upon notice to the permit holder and property
owner and an opportunity to be heard, revoke the Special Permit.
6.2 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES
6.2.A Purpose.
The intent of this regulation is to provide for the establishment of self-service storage facilities within certain
zoning districts in the Town of Cromwell while minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects through
careful design, siting and screening.
6.2.B Special Permit Required.
Self-service storage facilities may be permitted upon issuance of a Special Permit as provided for under
Section 8. 7 and this Section.
6.2.C General Requirements.
1. The use of the premises is restricted solely to the storage of goods or possessions by
persons, but specifically excluding any hazardous or flammable chemicals.
2. The use of the premises is restricted to interior use of the buildings.
3. The site shall have direct access to a State highway or Town road.
4. No two (2) similar uses shall be located within 1,500 feet from each other as measured
from the lot line to lot line.
5. The owner shall maintain suitable security measures to protect the integrity of the site and
reasonably assure that the use of the premises is being conducted within the limits of all
applicable local, State and Federal laws.
6. The owner shall at all times maintain reasonable insurance against damage, injury and
liability to protect the premises and surrounding properties from casualty or loss. The
owner shall annually file a certificate of insurance with the Commission, on or before the
anniversary date of Special Permit approval.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
148
6.2.E
Adwel for a resident caretaker and his or is permissible as an accessory use.
Bulk Requirements.
to develop a self-service storage facility shall be subject to the
contained in the Zoning District except as indicated below:
L Maximum Building Height: 20 feet.
2. Maximum Building Coverage:
(1) Industrial District - 50 percent.
yard
(2) Other Business Districts - 40 percent; however, the maximum may be increased to
50 percent by the Commission if warranted by excellence in building design or
proposed or existing landscaping.
Site Development Plan Requirements.
bulk
Additional Site Development Plan Requirements. The following elements are required in addition to the Site
Development Plan Submission Requirements listed in the Appendix and the following additional requirements.
The Commission may waive these requirements when warranted by excellence in building design or proposed
or existing landscaping:
1. Fencing and screening.
(1) A barrier must be provided around the perimeter of the development.
(2) If the barrier is to be provided by a fence, said fence shall be a minimum of six ( 6)
feet in height and shall be constructed of opaque materials that will prevent the
passage of light and debris. Examples include brick, stone, architectural tile,
masonry units, wood or similar materials, but expressly prohibiting woven wire.
2. Buildings shall be so situated and/or screened that overhead access doors are not visible
from the street.
3. No exterior wall of any storage structure or security fencing shall be visible from any
public road nor from any adjacent lot at a distance of more than 200 feet from the lot line.
Such compliance may be achieved through the use of earthen and/or vegetative buffers.
4. Exterior wall surfaces shall be finished in neutral or soft pastel colors to minimize negative
visual impacts on the environment.
5. Parking shall be provided by parking/driving lanes adjacent to the buildings. These lanes
shall be at least 26 feet wide when units open onto one (I) side of the lane only and at least
30 feet wide when units open onto both sides of the lane. Required parking spaces may not
be rented as, or used for, vehicular storage.
6.2.F Prohibited Uses.
Examples of prohibited activities include but are not limited to the following:
1. Auctions (other than those conducted by the operator in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes Sec. 42-164) commercial wholesale or retail sales or miscellaneous or
garage sales;
2. The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers,
appliances or other similar equipment;
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
149
operation of power tools, spray-painting table saws, compressors,
or other
a transfer and
use that or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations.
CAR WASH FACILITIES
6.3.A Purpose.
The intent of this regulation is to provide for the establishment of car wash facilities within certain zoning
districts in the Town of Cromwell while minimizing the adverse environmental and aesthetic effects through
careful design, siting and screening.
6.3.B Special Permit Required.
Car wash facilities may be pennitted upon issuance of a Special Permit as provided for under Section 8. 7 and
this Section.
6.3.C Site Development Plan Requirements.
Additional Site Development Plan Requirements. The following elements are required in addition to the Site
Development Plan Submission Requirements listed in the Appendix and the following additional requirements:
1. Buildings shall be situated and/or screened to minimize the visual impact.
2. Vehicle washing shall be performed in areas designed to collect and hold the wash and
rinse water or effluent generated. Wash water effluent shall be collected and discharged to
the sanitary sewer system or recycled on the premises.
3. Nearby municipal storm drain locations shall be shown, and the site designed to prevent
discharges into the storm drain system.
4. There shall be stacking space for four (4) cars for each stall, plus two (2) drying spaces for
each stall.
5. Parking shall be provided as deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
6.4 PUBLIC GARAGES, MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE AND MOTOR
VEHICLE REFUEL/RECHARGE STATIONS
6.4.A Purpose.
The intent of this regulation is to provide for the establishment of Public Garages, Motor Vehicle Service and
Motor Vehicle Refuel/Recharge Stations within certain zoning districts in the Town of Cromwell while
minimizing the adverse environmental and aesthetic effects of through careful design, siting and screening.
6.4.B Location Approval Required.
Location Approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals is required in accordance with Section I 0.
6.4.C Special Permit Required.
Public Garages, Motor Vehicle Service and Motor Vehicle Refuel/Recharge Stations shall be permitted upon
issuance of a Special Permit as provided for under Section 8. 7 and this Section. The Special Pennit may only
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
150
3.
the Location has been the Board of Appeals in accordance with
General Requirements.
use of a Motor Vehicle Refuel/Recharge Stations shall be restricted to the retail sale of
motor fuels. lubricants and other motor vehicle supplies and parts, the accessory parking
and storage of motor vehicles as hereinafter limited, and minor repairs and service
activities, not including body and fender work.
Motor vehicles may be parked and other mechanical equipment may be stored outside if
arranged in an orderly manner at all times. There shall be no outdoor storage in any
residential district of discarded vehicles, equipment or dismantled motor vehicles. Where
such storage of equipment or motor vehicles is authorized as part of the operation of a
garage or motor vehicle refuel/recharge stations in connection with the repair of vehicles or
equipment it shall be arranged in a side or rear yard and be suitably screened from a street
and nearby properties.
Sales of new or used automotive vehicles, storage of new or used automotive vehicles, are
permitted as an accessory use provided:
( 1) The outdoor storage is arranged in an orderly manner;
(2) No lighting is employed which would result in glare of adjoining residences or
adjoining residential districts;
(3) All side or rear yards are screened when abutting adjoining residences or adjoining
residential districts; and
( 4) There is no display at any time of partially dismantled or wrecked vehicles.
4. No gasoline filling appliance shall hereafter be located within 35 feet of a street line or
within 25 feet of an adjacent lot line in a business district, or within 50 feet of an adjacent
lot line in a residence district, unless the gasoline filling appliances are located in the side
or rear yard.
5. No public garage, motor vehicle service, or motor vehicle refuel/recharge station shall be
located within 2,600 feet of a property currently uses as a public garage, motor vehicle
service or motor vehicle refuel/recharge station.
6.4.E Site Design and Circulation.
The Commission may require additional information, including, but not limited to:
1. A traffic study,
2. A site egress/access management plan, and
3. A pedestrian circulation plan.
6.5 DRIVE-IN WINDOWS
6.5.A Purpose.
The intent of this regulation is to provide for the establishment of Drive-In Windows within certain zoning
districts in the Town of Cromwell while minimizing the adverse environmental, traffic and aesthetic effects
through careful design, siting and screening.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
151
6.5.B Special Permit Required.
windows may be authorized as a
standards are met.
Permit the use is allowed in the and
6.5.C Vehicle Queuing.
1. Queuing lanes (stacking lanes) are separated from other circulation lanes and are so
identified by pavement striping.
2. All queuing lanes shall minimize conflict with pedestrian traffic through the use of
pavement markings and signing, and may include internal walkways and speed bumps in
queuing lanes.
3. The distance from the pick-up window to the exit onto the street shall be a minimum of 60
feet.
6.5.D Site Access.
l. An exit or entrance for such lanes shall be as far away as possible from a street intersection.
2. Each entrance lane shall provide a minimum queuing often (10) 10 feet x 18 foetstations.
DISTANCE FROM PICK-UP WINDOW DIAGRAM
e Street right-of-way
6.5.E Pedestrian Access Across Drive Through Lane.
Distinguish walkways from driving surfaces by using varied paving treatments and by raising walkways to
curb level
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
152
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS DIAGRAM
6.5.F Screening.
1. Drive-in windows or lanes shall be located at least 50 feet from any residential property.
2. A solid wood fence, synthetic wood-like fence, or masonry wall at least six (6) feet in
height shall be installed.
(1) The fence, or wall, shall be augmented with suitable landscaping on both sides to
soften the visual impact of the fence, or wall.
(2) The Commission may allow screening to be located on an adjacent property(ies),
provided documentation regarding owner consent can be supplied to the
Commission.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
153
DRIVE THROUGH DESIGN CONCEPT DIAGRAM
,111~ .., ..._ <ll'\o->i.j hullo> r
h~ r~4um• J1
o;TREF.T
( •Ii .;tr~-<1
l \ ir1'...11~,\1t.-d
I omtl"if. ·~ l" "i l
l<Jd1hf
!...S l\_'1UU1...·J)
1'1 · ,f-~rt.m
WdJlWd\.
F r'\!r•*'"'r• ••' l''-ll:'lltb
I r.lfn pHhli. ~, ........
6.6 REAR LOTS
6.6.A Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to enable the subdivision of existing lots of relatively large size which, due to
their limited frontage, could not otherwise be subdivided. The intent is to minimize the length of new road
construction and preserve open space or some other existing natural or cultural resource of the Town.
6.6.B Special Permit Required.
Rear Lots may be authorized as a Special Permit provided the use is allowed in the district, and the following
standards are met.
6.6.C General Requirements.
1. No lot shall be divided into more than two (2) rear lots.
2. Each rear lot shall have double the minimum front yard setback required for that zone,
measured from the lot line which intersects the accessway and is perpendicular to the
accessway.
3. Each rear lot shall have at least double the minimum lot size required for that zone.
4. Each rear lot shall contain a "buildable square" of not less than the minimum lot size for
that zone. "Buildable square" is an area of roughly equal length and width which contains
no wetlands or watercourses as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-
38, as amended, and no slopes greater than 33 percent.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8. 25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
154
6.6.D
No portion lot between the street and lot line which intersects the accessway shall
be counted toward the minimum lot size.
rear lot in a Residential District shall have an accessway which has a continuous
width of at least 20 feet, which is owned in fee simple by the owner of the rear lot. and
which has frontage on a street.
Each rear lot in an Industrial District shall have an accessway which has a continuous width
of at least 30 feet which is owned in fee simple by the owner of the rear lot, and which has
frontage on a street
8. Each rear lot shall comply with all other lot and building requirements for the zone in
which it is located;
9. No two (2) rear lots shall have frontage on the same street any closer to each other than the
minimum lot width for that zone, except that two contiguous rear lots may be approved
sharing a common driveway, and the application for such rear lots shall include an
Agreement specifying that the owners of said driveway will share responsibility for its
maintenance;
I 0. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require that slope rights on an adjacent
frontage lot be provided to accommodate driveway construction, and that a proposed rear
lot share a common driveway with an adjacent frontage lot where appropriate.
11. The owner of the proposed rear lot shall obtain a Special Permit before submitting an
application for subdivision approval of a proposed rear lot.
Special Consideration.
The public benefit of rear lots is their potential to result in a subdivision with shorter roads and preserved
natural or cultural resources. Therefore, the applicant shall show how each proposed rear lot in a subdivision of
three (3) or more lots will enable one ( 1) or more of the following benefits:
1. Allow for the preservation of some existing natural or cultural resource of the Town;
2. Reduce the length of a new road, new sanitary sewer service, or other municipal
infrastructure:
3. Provide some other benefit to the community.
6.6.E Special Administrative Provision.
4. When a rear lot is part of a subdivision proposed in accordance with the Cromwell
Subdivision Regulations, the applicant may submit a joint application for a rear lot with the
subdivision application.
5. The Cromwell Planning and Zoning Commission should vote on the special permit
application separate from the subdivision application.
6.7 CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS
6.7.A Purpose.
The goals of these regulations are any of the following:
l. To preserve environmentally sensitive or culturally significant land in a manner that will
benefit present and future generations of Cromwell residents.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
155
open space
indirectly
use, either active or passive, which is compatible
in the opinion of will directly or
of the residents of the Town of Cromwell.
promote development of land in a way which is sensitive to the natural and cultural
environment, preserving important wetlands systems, farmland of local significance, and/or
areas containing significant natural features such as unusual terrain, vegetation, wildlife,
scenic vistas.
6.7.B Applicability.
l. This regulation shall apply to any parcel or adjacent parcels under the same ownership that
comprises 15 or more contiguous acres in a Residential District.
2. Parcels comprising less than 15 acres in a Residential District may, at the owner's request
and subject to a Special Permit from the Commission, be developed as a Conservation
Subdivision.
6.7.C Requirements.
1. Open space to be preserved shall comprise not less than 50 percent of the total parcel area.
2. The proportion of upland to wetlands and watercourses in the preserved open space shall be
roughly the same as the proportion of upland to wetlands and watercourses in the total
parcel.
3. Open space to be preserved shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
4. It is the intention of the Commission to provide open space parcels of significant size.
5. In general, the open space preserved under these regulations shall remain in private
ownership for the exclusive use of the residents of that development. However, the
Commission may require up to 20 percent of the proposed open space (i.e. I 0 percent of
the total parcel) be deeded to the Town for active or passive recreation use.
6. Where property to be developed as a Conservation Subdivision abuts other residentially
zoned property, the Conservation Subdivision shall be landscaped in such a manner as to
provide a screen or other suitable transition to lessen the visual impact of the Conservation
Subdivision, if any. The minimum width of any required landscape buffer area shall be not
less than 25 feet. The Commission shall review the proposed landscape buffer as part of its
Special Permit review. The landscape buffer requirement is intended to apply only at
Potential Development Areas of a Conservation Subdivision, and not to any area to be
preserved as open space.
6.7.D Method of Preservation.
1. The method chosen to preserve open space from future development shall be proposed by
the applicant during the special permit approval process and shall be approved or rejected
by the Commission at its discretion.
2. If a proposed method of open space preservation is rejected by the Commission, the
Commission may then determine an alternate method of preservation.
3. The applicant shall indicate his preference, at the time of the special permit application, as
to how the open space is to be maintained and preserved from development and shall
submit a form of legal instrument designed to ensure such preservation. Methods of open
space preservation acceptable to the Commission include the following:
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
156
Held in common a homeowners association incorporated as a not-for-profit
corporation in the State of subject. however. to legally binding
arrangements that include the recording of restrictive deed covenants. the
of conservation easements. or the transferring of development
to the Town or Land Trust or other non-profit organization dedicated to the
conservation of open space, that will preclude any and all future development;
(2) Held in single, partner, or corporate ownership by the applicant subject, however,
to the transfer of development rights to the Town of Cromwell;
(3) Deeded in fee simple to a land trust or other non-profit organization dedicated to
the conservation of open space;
(4) Deeded in fee simple to the Town.
4. Whatever preservation method is chosen and approved, the legal instruments of such
method shall be reviewed for legal sufficiency by the Town Attorney prior to final
subdivision approval. Such instruments shall be designed to:
(1) Ensure the continued use of open space area for its intended purposes;
(2) Provide for the maintenance of the open space area;
(3) Provide adequate insurance coverage;
(4) Provide that the Town of Cromwell's agents or employees may enter upon the
open space area to remove or correct any object or condition which may be
deemed a nuisance, a violation of these regulations or which presents an
emergency; and
(5) Provide that the Town of Cromwell may take legal action to enforce the terms and
provisions of the legal document creating the open space, if such open space is
to be held in common by a homeowners association.
5. Any subsequent change in the use of the open space area shall require approval of the
Commission pursuant to a Special Permit application.
6. 7.E Application Requirements and Procedures
The approval process is as follows:
1. The applicant shall submit an application for a Conservation Subdivision Special Permit in
accordance with Sections 6. 7 and 8.6;
2. ff the above special permit is approved, the applicant may then submit a subdivision
application in accordance with the applicable sections of the Cromwell Subdivision
Regulations.
6. 7.F Conservation Subdivision Special Permit.
1. Required Submissions: Before any parcel of land subject to this regulation may be
developed or subdivided as a Conservation Subdivision, the applicant shall receive a
Conservation Subdivision Special Permit. The application shall include the following items:
(1) A "Yield Plan" as described below. It is the intent of these Regulations that the
maximum number of lots in a Conservation Subdivision be approximately the
same number as could be created in a Conventional Subdivision development of
that site. To determine this number, the applicant shall prepare a conventional
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
157
6.7.G
plan (the "Yield Plan") in accordance with Section the Road
Specifications of the Town of Cromwell, and prudent and feasible engineering
No rear lots, shared driveways, or cul-de-sacs exceeding the
maximum aliowable length may be shown. The Yield Plan may show a
reasonable amount of regulated wetland activity.
(2) A description of how the land to be subdivided fits into the context of the
surrounding neighborhood. This description shall be presented in narrative and
graphic format.
(3) A detailed description of the proposed open space, its proposed function, and the
proposed method of preservation. This shall include the following:
a) Description of the physical characteristics of the proposed open space;
b) Description of the function or functions that the proposed open space wi II
perform (such as scenic view, active farmland, wildlife habitat, or
passive recreation);
c) Explanation of how the proposed open space's physical characteristics and
proximity to the Potential Development Area make it conducive for the
above function or functions;
d) Description of other adjacent or nearby open spaces and an explanation of
how the proposed open space relates to them.
(4) A series of layout plans prepared by a licensed landscape architect, representing an
analytical process to identify the areas appropriate for conservation and the
areas appropriate for development. These plans shall consist of the following:
a) Plan #I: All Primary Conservation Areas or Features.
b) Plan #2: All Secondary Conservation Areas or Features.
c) Plan #3: All Potential Developable Areas.
d) Plan #4: Approximate house sites within Potential Developable Areas
only. There shall be no more house sites than there are lots in the
verified Yield Plan.
e) Plan #5: A logical alignment for local streets to serve the house sites which
is in harmony with the natural topography of the parcel to minimize
cuts and fills. Preference shall be given to streets that have house sites
primarily on one side only, with open space on the opposite side.
f) Plan #6: Property boundaries delineating the proposed open space and the
proposed individual lots for each house, prepared in accordance with
the height, yard and bulk requirements indicated below:
Height, Yard, and Bulk Requirements.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
158
I
I
I
the mm1mum
I I I i
AR~ . ..._ ---- ...._
i
MINIMUM FRONT AGE (FRONT LOT) I 75 ft
I
75 ft 75 ft I I
I I
I !
MINIMUM FRONTA GE (REAR LOT) I I
15 ft I 15 ft 15 ft
I I I
MINIMUM FRONT YARD (PUBLIC STREET) I 20 ft 20 ft
I
20 ft
MINIMUM FRONT YARD (PRIVATE STREET OR REAR 15 ft
I
15 ft 15 ft
LOT)
I I
MINIMUM SIDE AND REAR YARD I 7.5 ft 7.5 ft 7.5 ft
I
MAXIMUM BUILDING COVERAGE 33% 33% 33%
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT1 35 ft 35 ft I 35 ft
MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS2
I 15 ft 15 ft 15 ft
MINIMUM LANDSCAPED BUFFER 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA Per Section 2.2.B
I. Chimneys. water tanks. church steeples. silos and similar features shall be erected only to such height as is necessary to
accomplish the purpose which they serve. Such features shall be reviewed as part of the Special Permit.
2. The distance between buildings shall be measured on a straight line between the two nearest points of adjacent buildings.
6.7.H Referral to Other Boards and Commissions.
The Applicant shall submit a complete set of the layout plans to the Conservation Commission and to the
Recreation Commission for their review and comment, no later than the date of receipt. Comments from the
Conservation Commission and the Recreation Commission will be accepted by the Commission up until the
close of the public hearing.
6. 7.I Decision Considerations.
In making its decision to issue a Conservation Subdivision Special Permit, the Commission shall consider:
1. The validity of the Yield Plan;
2. The purposes enumerated in Section 6.7.A;
3. The Guidelines for Special Permit Approval in Section 8.6;
4. The nature, function, and method of preservation of the proposed open space;
5. The access from major streets and highways to the proposed development;
6. The likely impact on the location and capacity of sanitary sewers, water lines, storm and
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
159
surface and other utilities;
likely on environmental systems such as watercourses,
wildlife communities; and
The presence of land characteristics that the Commission determines to be worthy of
preservation including, but not limited to, areas of steep topography, significant wetland
areas, areas with scenic vistas, farm lands of local significance, and the presence of or
potential provision of passive or active recreational facilities compatible with open space
preservation.
9. Conventional Subdivision Special Permit.
6.7.J Required Submissions.
If an applicant feels that the site possesses such characteristics that development as a Conventional Subdivision
would better promote one or more of the goals listed in this section, the applicant may apply for a special
permit to develop the property as a Conventional Subdivision. The special permit application shall include the
following:
1. A written statement explaining how developing the site as a Conventional Subdivision
would better further the purposes of Section 6.7.A than developing it as a Conservation
Subdivision.
2. The Yield Plan;
3. The layout plans;
4. A subdivision plat plan prepared in accordance with Article 404 of the Cromwell
Subdivision Regulations showing either:
(1) Lots that are at least twice the minimum lot size for that zone and none of the
parcel preserved as open space, or
(2) Lots that are at least the minimum lot size for that zone and at least 20 percent of
the parcel preserved as open space.
6.7.K Pre-Application Review.
1. Applicants are encouraged to submit their proposal and application documentation for a
preliminary review and comment by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the public
at a "Pre-Application" hearing.
2. Nothing that is said or presented at the hearing by any party shall be considered evidence
and shall not be binding on the Commission in any subsequent application presented to the
Commission.
3. Applicants are encouraged to submit all application documentation to the Conservation
Commission and Recreation Commission for their review and comment prior to
application.
4. Applicants are encouraged to submit the "Yield Plan" to the town staff for their review and
comment prior to application.
6.8 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS
6.8.A Purpose.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
160
I
I
i
medium-high density attached and detached dwellings. townhouses and multi-family units.
6.8.B Special Permit Required.
Dwelling Units may be authorized as a
and the following standards are met.
6.8.C Design Considerations.
MINIMUM DWELLING UNITS PER BUILDING
MAXIMUM DWELLING UNITS PER BUILDING
Permit provided the use is allowed in the
DISTRICTS
3 4
NIA I I 20
I MINIMUM BUFFER FROM ADJACENT RESIDENTIAL I ZONED PROPERTY
20 ft 35 ft
I
MINIMUM LANDSCAPED AREA 1.000 square feet I 2.000 square feet per
per dwelling unit dwelling unit
6.8.D Vehicular Accessways.
l. Driveways serving up to three (3) dwelling units.
(1) A minimum driveway width of I 5 feet with a two and one-half (2Yi) inch
bituminous concrete layer over eight (8) inches of processed gravel shall be
provided.
(2) Slopes shall not exceed I 2 percent grade at any point. Construction plans and
profiles prepared by a Connecticut-licensed professional engineer are to be
provided by the applicant.
(3) The Commission may allow an alternate surface if the Commission is satisfied
with maintenance provisions. Alternate surface means crushed stone, gravel, or
other materials deemed appropriate to the use.
2. Drives serving four ( 4) or more units.
(1) A minimum driveway width of twenty (20) feet with a two and one-half (2Yi) inch
bituminous concrete layer over eight (8) inches of processed gravel shall be
provided.
(2) Slopes shall not exceed ten (I 0) percent grade at any point. Construction plans and
profiles prepared by a Connecticut-licensed professional engineer are to be
provided by the applicant.
3. Ownership and Maintenance (ifapplicable).
(1) Common/shared driveways shall be owned and maintained by a homeowner's
association of the dwelling units within the development.
(2) Maintenance shall be permanently guaranteed by such association which shall
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
161
for assessments for maintenance expenses to each lot.
and the deed. trust or articles of incorporation. include
to effect these
Documents creating such association shall be submitted to the Planning and
Commission for approvaL and shall thereafter be recorded on the Land
Records.
(5) Town services will not be provided common/shared drives.
6.8.E Buffers.
To insure the protection of existing residences contiguous to a tract of land for which approval of a
multi-family residence is sought. the Commission may require that the multi-family residence buildings and
structures be separated from existing contiguous parcels by a distance equal to the rear yard requirement for the
district in which the tract is located, or by the introduction of buffer plantings.
6.9 DAY CARES
6.9.A Special Permit Required.
1. Any person providing day care in his/her own home as a Family Day Care Home for six (6)
or fewer children shall not be required to obtain a permit from the Commission.
2. A Special Permit shall be required for any property at which day care is provided for seven
(7) or more children or any number of adults, i.e. A Group Day Care Home or Day Care Center.
6.9.B General Requirements.
I. Parking. For those properties which are required to obtain a permit to operate a day care,
off street parking spaces shall be provided at a ratio of one ( l) space for every employee
on duty, and one ( l) space for every four ( 4) clients, based upon client capacity for the
facility. The Commission may reduce the parking requirement for good cause shown.
2. A vehicle turnaround space shall be provided on the site where the Day Care is located to
eliminate the need for vehicles to have to back out into a public right of way.
3. In addition, the Commission may require plans that identify:
(I) on-site or off-site bus drop-off (on-site is preferred),
(2) site lighting, and
(3) pedestrian circulation and safety.
6.10 BED AND BREAKFAST INN
6.1 O.A General.
The Commission may allow a Bed and Breakfast Inn accessory to a principal single-family dwelling in the
R-80, R-40, R-30 and R-20 districts subject to the following requirements in this section.
6.10.B Special Permit Required.
Bed and Breakfast Inns may be authorized as a Special Permit provided the use is allowed in the district, and
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
162
standards are met.
must meet the lot area requirement and be size and shape to accommodate
off-street parking. The business shall be conducted by the resident owner/occupant of the dwelling
and no more than one (I) non-resident employee.
6.10.D Requirements.
L One ( 1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest bedroom in addition to the
spaces required for the dwelling itself.
2. Only one ( 1) sign, not exceeding eight ( 8) square feet, is permitted which shall be approved
by the Commission as part of the application. Said sign shall be freestanding and
non-illuminated.
3. Where on-site water and sewage disposal systems are proposed, the Health District shall
certify that the systems are adequate to serve the proposed use.
-1. Such facilities shall not provide for cooking within the rooms, but may include meals
served by the owner to the guests.
5. No meals shall be served to non-guests.
6. Rooms shall be provided with access and egress from within the principal residenceonly.
7. Additions to a bed and breakfast inn for the purpose of providing additional guest rooms or
bed and breakfast facilities may be permitted where the addition shall be constructed in a
manner that is in keeping with the size and scale of the dwelling, maintains the residential
appearance of the structure and lot and blends with the existing neighborhood. In no case
shall an addition be permitted which would allow for more than four (4) guest rooms to be
provided.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
SPECIAL PERMITS
163
7.SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, BUILDINGS, AND I OR
STRUCTURES.
7.LA Non-Conforming Uses and Structures.
1. Any building or use lawfully existing, or for which a lawful permit was issued under the
provision of the Zoning Regulations in effect prior to the effective date of these regulations,
may be continued subject to compliance with the following conditions:
2. Any use of land or buildings which does not conform to the requirements specified by these
regulations shall not be changed to another non-conforming use without a Special Permit
from the Board of Appeals, and then only to one equally, or more nearly in conformity.
3. non-conforming use or structure shall be:
(1) Extended or enlarged.
(2) Moved to another location where such use continues to be non-conforming.
4. No non-conforming use which is changed to a conforming use shall revert to a nonconforming
use.
7.1.B Nonconforming Lots.
A parcel of land that fails to meet the area, shape or frontage or any other applicable requirements of these
Regulations pertaining to lots, may be used as a lot, and a building or other structure may be constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered if it meets one or more of the following
descriptions:
1. The lot was created by subdivision, is shown on a subdivision map approved by the
Commission and filed in the office of the Cromwell Town Clerk, and was approved for
building purposes by the Commission in connection with such subdivision approval (i.e., it
met all necessary subdivision and zoning criteria for building purposes that were applicable
when the subdivision wasapproved);
2. The lot is a parcel of land that was created by the first division occurring after September
27, 1954 (the date of first enactment of Subdivision Regulations in Cromwell) of a larger
parcel of land and that conforms to the current area, shape, frontage and other geometric
requirements of these Regulations for the establishment of a principal use;
3. The lot is a parcel of land that, since June 4, 1948 (the date of first enactment of zoning
regulations in Cromwell) has been owned separately from any adjoining parcel or parcels
as evidenced by deed or deeds recorded in the land records of the Town of Cromwell.
7.2 TEMPORARY PERMITS
1. Temporary permits may be issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission, under
conditions which will safeguard the character of the neighborhood, for a circus, carnival,
fair or similar type of entertainment for a period of not more than ten ( l 0) days.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
164
INTERVENING LOTS
deviate from the front setback new on an
may be the average of the setbacks for the buildings on the adjoining lots.
7.4 REDUCTION OF LOT AREAS AND YARDS
No lot area shall be so reduced that the total area or the dimensions of any of the yards or open spaces
shall be smaller than herein prescribed, except as provided for under Section 6. 7
7.5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
7 .5.A Permitted Zones and Distance Requirements.
l. The sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises or off the premises is
permitted in Business Districts only, with the exception of outdoor recreational facilities
located in non-residential zones which by Special Permit may serve beer, wine and liquor
in conjunction with a contained sit-down food service operation.
7.5.B Location Requirements and Limitations.
No building or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or structurally altered which 1s
arranged, intended, designed, or used for the sale of alcoholic beverages where:
1. A retail outlet for consumption of alcoholic beverages off the premises is located within
1.500 feet (measured as indicated below) of another outlet selling alcoholic beverages to be
consumed off the premises.
2. A cafe, tavern or similar outlet for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises is
located within 1,500 feet (measured as indicated below) of another cafe, tavern or similar
outlet for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
3. For consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a hotel or bowling
establishment the distance prohibition is 500 feet (measured as indicated below). In order
to qualify for this designation a hotel must meet the definition requirements of these
regulations and hold a hotel permit under Connecticut General Statutes Section 30-21, as
amended. In order to qualify for this designation a bowling establishment must:
(1) meet the definition requirement in Connecticut General Statutes Section 30-37c, as
amended,
(2) have direct interior access to the alcohol sales area, and
(3) contain and maintain a minimum of 24 operating lanes at all times.
(4) No restaurant or cafe may violate Section 30-6-8-28 of the General Regulations of
the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection.
4. For restaurants, there shall be no distance restrictions. A restaurant must meet the definition
of a restaurant under these Regulations and the Connecticut General Statutes Section 30-22,
as amended, and maintain valid restaurant permit from the Connecticut Department of
Consumer Protection.
5. The parcel containing such use is within 500 feet of any part of any lot used for the purpose
of a public school, a church/place of worship, a charitable institution (whether supported by
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
165
or a hospital or ).
Measurement Standards.
measurements to shall be made on a straight line the nearest lot line of the lot
the existing use to the nearest lot line of the lot containing the proposed use will be conducted and
be certified by a Land Surveyor I icensed by the State of Connecticut.
7.5.D Nonconformities.
The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be retroactive except that where premises file an
application for a Change of Use Permit under these regulations, the Commission may apply them to such new
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
166
I
I
8. PROCEDURES
1 APPLICATION TYPES
l. The following application types have been established for these regulations:
Kel' n::;w Ae:ency
I Planning and Zoning Zoning Board of
Application Type I Staff Commission Appeals
Use Pennit x
Certificate of Zoning Compliance x I
Change of Use x
Site Plan Application x I
Special Permit Application x I
Regulation Amendment x
Zoning Map Amendment x
Appeal x
Variance/Floodplain Variance x
Location Approval x
8.2 ZONING SIGNOFF (STAFF)
8.2.A Applicability.
No building, sign or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended or enlarged in whole
or in part for any purpose until a Zoning Signoff has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer:
1. showing confonnance with these Regulations, or
2. conforming to a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
8.2.B Application Required.
1. The Zoning Signoff shall be part of the Building Permit Application Process, managed by
the Cromwell Building Official.
2. No separate application fee is required.
8.3 USE PERMIT PROCEDURES (STAFF)
8.3.A Applicability.
No building or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose until a Use Permit has been issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer (or at his discretion by the Commission):
I. showing conformance with these Regulations.
2. conforming to a site plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission (if
applicable), or
3. conforming to a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
167
I
I
!
8.3.B Application Required.
a Use shall be for
the erection or alteration of any building, or structure is commenced in any district; or
2. the commencement of any other activity which requires a Use Permit or other permit as
required by these Regulations.
8.3.C Application Requirements.
Such application for a Use Permit shall be accompanied by:
l. a completed Use Permit application form;
2. the appropriate fee;
3. a Class A-2 boundary survey prepared, stamped with an embossed seal, and signed by a
Connecticut-licensed land surveyor showing the information required in the Appendix of
these Regulations;
4. a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan in accordance with Section 5.5 of these
Regulations for new all construction, and for any application where determined necessary
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer;
5. items required for compliance with other perm its (e.g. performance guarantee);
6. other drawings and documentation requested by the Zoning Enforcement Officer; and
7. written comments from the Town Engineer, the Zoning Enforcement Officer. the Cromwell
Fire District, the Chief of Police, and the Water Pollution Control Authority or Town
Sanitarian as applicable.
8. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may reduce the application requirements provided there is
sufficient documentation to determine compliance with the Regulations.
8.3.D Proceedings.
1. If the proposed activity or use is found from the Application to be in compliance with these
Regulations, the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall issue a Use Permit
setting forth the date on which the permit was issued.
2. The recipient of a Use Permit may provide notice of approval of such Use Permit in
accordance with Section 8.3.E.
3. If all of the requirements are met, the Use Permit shall be issued within 65 days, and the
applicant may consent to an additional 65 days; otherwise the permit shall be denied for
stated reasons.
4. An application for a Use Permit may be withdrawn, in writing, by the applicant at any time
prior to final action.
8.3.E Notice Provisions.
In accordance with CGS 8-3(f), the applicant may publish notice of the Use Permit in order to establish the
appeal period under CGS 8-7. Such notice shall:
1. Be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in Cromwell.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
168
Contain a description of the building, use or structure and its location. If the property does
have a street address assigned, the applicant shall provide additional information to
inform residents about the location of the property for which the Use Permit applies.
Contain the identity of the applicant.
4. Contain a statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals
within ten ( 10) days in accordance with the provisions of CGS 8-7 and the Cromwell
Zoning Regulations Section I 0.3.
8.3.F Foundation Survey Required.
l. Upon completion of the foundation of any new building or structure or addition thereto. no
further work shall be done on such building or structure until a Class A-2 boundary survey
prepared by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor has been filed with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer (ZEO) showing the foundation location of the new building, structure,
or addition.
2. The ZEO may waive the requirement for a foundation location survey when a building,
structure, or addition related to a single-family dwelling is less than 500 square feet in area
or when other conditions allow a clear determination of compliance.
8.3.G Use Permit Expiration.
1. Any Use Permit issued under the provisions of these Regulations shall become invalid if
the authorized work is not commenced within six (6) months after issuance of the Use
Permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months
after the time of commencing the work.
A permit may be renewed for one (l) year upon filing a written request to do so and paying the applicable
application fee.
8.4 CHANGE OF USE PERMIT (STAFF)
1. A Change of Use Permit Application shall be submitted when a land or building use is
proposed to be altered to a use that has different requirements in these Regulations for
setbacks, parking, building coverage, or other requirements.
2. A Change of Use Permit Application shall meet the same standards and be treated as a Use
Permit Application, unless the Regulations indicate that it should be treated as a Zoning
Map Amendment, Site Plan Approval, Special Permit Application, or similar application,
or the proposed use would require site modifications (such as the installation of additional
off street parking spaces) to comply with these regulations.
8.5 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES (STAFF)
8.5.A Applicability.
1. No structure. land or premises shall be occupied or used or converted to a new use until a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine that any use, building, structure or
alteration for which a Use Permit has been issued conforms in all respects to the zoning
regulations and any conditions imposed by the Commission or the Board of Appeals. and to
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURE5
169
approval including any or
of such applications.
Procedures.
Upon completion of any building, structure or addition for which Site Plan Approval has
been issued, the applicant shall submit the following information to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer before a Certificate of Compliance may be issued:
(1) a Class A-2 boundary survey prepared, stamped with an embossed seal, and signed
by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor showing the information required the
Zoning Enforcement Officer; and
(2) a certification by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor as to the location of the
completed building, structure or addition, the lot coverage, and building height,
where applicable.
2. As an alternative to foll project completion, the applicant may post a Performance
Guarantee for the remaining work.
(1) The applicant shall submit a breakdown of estimated remaining costs for the
project.
(2) The Performance Guarantee amount shall be established by the Town Planner after
reviewing the estimated breakdown of project costs. The Town Planner may
consult other profossionals to determine the accuracy of the applicant's estimate.
(3) Performance Guarantees shall be in accordance with Section 9.3. The Performance
Guarantee amount shall include costs incurred for administration should the
Performance Guarantee need to be called upon.
3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine if the project conforms to the zoning
regulations, the plans and other document approved in connection with any permit
application, and any conditions imposed by the Commission or the Board of Appeals.
4. In the event that any certificate of zoning compliance is issued based on incorrect
information or the specific conditions of approval are not adhered to strictly, such
certificate may, upon notice and the opportunity to be heard, be revoked by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
5. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall remain in effect as long as the specified uses and
conditional requirements are properly maintained but shall terminate whenever such
conditions and uses are no longer maintained.
8.5.C Notice Provisions.
In accordance with CGS 8-3(f), the applicant may publish notice of the Use Permit in order to establish the
appeal period under CGS 8-7. Such notice shall:
1. Be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in Cromwell.
2. Contain a description of the building, use or structure and its location. If the property does
not have a street address assigned, the applicant shall provide additional information to
inform residents about the location of the property for which the Use Permitapplies.
3. Contain the identity of the applicant.
4. Contain a statement that an aggrieved person may appeal within ten ( l 0) days to the Zoning
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8. 25. 2015
PROCDURES
170
the of CGS 8-7 the Cromwell
SITE PLAN APPLICATION PROCEDURES (COMMISSION)
8.6.A Objectives.
In any site plan under this section. the Commission shall be concerned with the following objectives:
1. To promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, amenity and other
aspects of the general welfare.
2. To ensure that the layout of the proposed use shall be in harmony with the surrounding
area. and shall contribute to its desirable and orderly development.
3. To ensure that traffic generated by the proposed use will not adversely affect the
surrounding area, and will not disrupt the orderly movement of vehicles and pedestrians in
the area.
4. To protect and preserve the supply of potable drinking water by protecting and preserving
subsurface aquifers.
8.6.B Application Requirements.
8.6.C
l. A Site Plan Application shall be submitted:
(1) for any new activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Site Plan Approval,
(2) in a Residential Zone, for any construction, development, expansion, or substantial
alteration of a multi-family use or non-residential use, or
(3) in a Business or Special Zone, for any substantial alteration of an existing site,
unless the underlying approval was a Special Permit, in which case any
substantial alteration will also require a new Special Permit application.
2. A complete Site Plan Application shall be accompanied by 15 full-size (24" x 36") and 12
reduced-size ( 11" x 17" or 12" x 18") copies of detailed Site Development Plans, signed
and sealed by an appropriate professional, for review by the Commission and its designees
that comply with the requirements in the Appendix of these Regulations.
3. A completed "developers performance bond spreadsheet" shall be submitted with the
application.
4. Fully dimensioned drawings of all sides of the proposed building shall be submitted with
the application.
5. The Commission may in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations and the
Appendix of these Regulations, require the submission of additional information as deemed
necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
6. If a Site Plan Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45
inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the
Commission.
Proceedings.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
171
the Site Plan shall be in accordance with
Site Application may be m
For new construction or other activity considered to
the Commission, the Commission:
Section 8. O.C.
significant in the sole judgment of
(1) may hold a public hearing on the application, and
(2) if such hearing is to be held, shall:
a) require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accordance
with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.G of these Regulations, and
b) post a sign in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.H of these
Regulations.
4. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.10.1
5. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8.10.J.
6. Notification to a regional planning agency may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.1 O.K.
7. Whenever a Site Plan Application is required in conjunction with another application
requiring a public hearing (such as a Special Permit Application or a Zoning Map
Amendment):
(l) the time period for acting on the Site Plan Application shall coincide with the time
period for acting on the related application, and
(2) a decision on the application shall be rendered within 65 days after the close of the
public hearing on such other application except that the applicant may consent
to one ( 1) or more extensions of such period provided the total period of any
such extension or extensions shall not exceed 65 days.
8. Whenever approval of a Site Plan is the only approval required, a decision on the
application shall be rendered within 65 days after the date of receipt of such Site Plan
Application except that the applicant may consent to one ( 1) or more extensions of such
period provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed 65
days.
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity
regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision by the
Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended
to 35 days after the decision of such agency.
10. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such
application.
8.6.D Decision Considerations.
1. On a Site Plan Application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to
22a-45 inclusive, the Commission shall:
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
172
render decision until the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
has submitted a report with its final decision. and
due consideration to any report of the Inland and Watercourses
Commission when making decision.
On a Site Plan Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Section
8. l 0.1 or notice to water companies under Section 8.1 O.J, the Commission shall give due
consideration to any report or testimony received.
3. Before the Commission approves a Site Plan Application, it shall determine that the
application is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations.
4. Before the Commission approves a Site Plan Application, it shall consider the following In
such review the Commission shall take into consideration such factors as the following:
(1) the adequacy of access, for fire and police protection and otherwise.
(2) the adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and storm water
management and for waste disposal.
(3) the location and the layout of accessory off-street parking and off-street loading
spaces, the width and grading of all entrances and exits to such spaces, the
locations of such exits and entrances, and degree of visibility and the direction
of major traffic flow, together with:
(4) the distance from street intersections,
(5) the likelihood of left-hand turns and other turning movements, and
(6) the likelihood of drawing vehicular traffic to and through local residential streets.
(7) the arrangements for safe and convenient pedestrian circulation, on the site and its
approaches.
(8) the impact of the proposed layout upon the surrounding area, and particularly upon
any nearby residences, including, but not limited to:
a) the location and height of buildings and the extent of their shadows,
b) the location, intensity and direction of any outdoor lighting and the
proposed times for its use,
c) the location of any overhead power lines,
d) the likelihood for any other nuisances, and
e) whether appropriate and adequate screening is provided.
(9) The size. location and type of any signs, and their appropriateness in the area
involved.
(10) The nature and arrangement of any outdoor display lighting and loudspeakers or
noise-making devices.
(11) the availability of adequate sewerage, water supply, drainage, and fire and police
protection.
(12) the proposed location and configuration of any outdoor storage areas including
trash receptacles and proposed screening.
(13) The proposed landscaping and its appropriateness in the area involved.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
173
Preservation of substantial trees and other important natural features is to be
encouraged to the maximum extent possible.
of buildings, structures and landscaped areas on the site.
in the judgment of the Commission, screening is necessary to protect nearby residential
areas from detriment, the Commission may require landscaping, fencing, or other
appropriate screens within any required front, side or rear yard.
6. All site plans shall confonn to appropriate sections of the Building Code of the State of
Connecticut which specify requirements for exterior access to all structures in order to
accommodate the physically handicapped.
7. During the review process, the Commission shall consider the design of the proposed use,
buildings or development; the relationship between buildings; the overall physical
appearance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the surrounding area.
Consideration shall also be given by the Commission concerning the following:
(1) the design, architecture, and aesthetics of any proposed development relative to
excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness, or poor quality of the
exterior appearance of the development which may adversely affect the
desirability for subsequent development in the area, and by so doing, may
impair the benefits of present or future occupancy of existing property;
(2) the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real property in the
surrounding area, which may produce degeneration of property with attendant
deterioration of conditions in the area affecting the health, safety and general
welfare of the community and which may diminish a proper ratio between the
taxable values of real property in the area and the cost of municipal services
provided therefore.
8.6.E Commission Decision.
1. In any submission under this section, the Commission may approve or disapprove the
proposed plan, or may approve it subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards designed
to further the general purposes of this regulation and the specific purposes indicated above.
Any Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall then be made explicitly subject to the
continued conformity with those conditions and safeguards, and with conformance to the
plans and other documents submitted to and approved by the Commission.
2. In approving a Site Plan Application, the Commission may impose conditions deemed
necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and property values.
3. The Commission shall require that a Performance Guarantee be posted in accordance with
Section 9.3.
4. The Commission shall not approve any Site Plan for any property on which there exists a
zoning violation, unless such Site Plan application will remedy such violation.
5. The Commission shall act upon any such proposal within 65 days from the time of its
referral, and if the Commission does not act within such period, the proposal shall be
deemed approved.
(1) However, if the owner (or developer) consents, the Commission's action may be
postponed for one (I) or more periods not to exceed 65 days each.
(2) The applicant or his representative shall appear before the Commission to present
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
174
proposal.
the Commission any such
"'"'r0 •0 ~ the Commission may hold a public hearing on such proposal upon due
notice as required for a Special Permit. NOTE: The public hearing must be
held, closed, and a decision made within the Site Plan Application review
timeframe.
8.6.F Action Documentation.
1. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission, shall send, by certified mail, a copy of
any decision to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
2. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission, shall publish notice of the approval or
denial of site plans in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Cromwell within 15
clays after such decision is rendered.
3. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15 day period after a decision
has been rendered, the person who submitted such plan may provide for the publication of
such notice within ten (I 0) days thereafter.
8.6.G Post Approval Actions (Pre-Construction).
1. Following approval of a Site Plan Application, the applicant shall submit four ( 4) sets of
Final Plans (24" x 36") to the Planning and Zoning Department bearing:
(l) a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town regulatory
agencies authorizing the activity, and
(2) containing a signature block where the Chairman, or Vice-Chairman, of the
Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission.
2. The Town Planner shall verify that the final plans are in accordance with the Commission's
approval.
3. The Applicant shall post a Performance Guarantee in accordance with Section 9.3 and
secure a Use Permit prior to commencing construction or use. Failure to post a bond prior
to commencing construction shall be a violation of these regulations.
8.6.H Construction.
A Use Permit application, in accordance with Section 8.2, must be approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer (ZEO) prior to the commencement of any construction or any use, or site preparation associated with
an approved site plan application.
8.6.I Site Plan Modifications.
Proposed modifications to approved site plans that are not substantial alterations shall be submitted to the
Town Planner for review. Such proposed modifications may be:
1. approved by the Town Planner, or
2. submitted to the Commission for additional review if they propose major changes (e.g.
additional building floor area or alteration of significant landscaping).
8.6.J Expiration and Completion.
1. All work in connection with a site plan shall be completed within five (5) years after the
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
175
and failure to complete all work within such five
expiration approval of such site plan, upon to
the permit holder and property owner and the opportunity to be heard. unless the
Commission shall have ~r,,~T~'" an extension of the time to complete work in connection
with such site plan.
2. The Commission may grant one ( l) or more extensions of the time to complete all or part
of the work in connection with the site plan provided the total extension or extensions shall
not exceed ten ( l 0) years from the date of approval of such site plan.
3. The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a determination of the
adequacy of any Performance Guarantee or other surety.
8.7 SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES (COMMISSION)
8.7.A Applicability.
1. A Special Permit application shall be submitted for any activity designated in the Regulations as
requiring Special Permit approval.
8.7.B Application Requirements.
l. A Special Permit Application shall be submitted for any activity designated in the
Regulations as requiring a Special Permit.
2. Each application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by a Site Plan containing the
information per Section 8.6.B of these Regulations unless the Commission finds that there
are no physical changes proposed to the site or any building or structure and the submission
of a Site Plan Application is not necessary for the Commission to evaluate the proposal.
3. A complete Special Permit Application shall be accompanied by 12 copies of the following
information:
(1) a detailed statement describing the existing and proposed use oruses,
(2) a detailed statement describing how the Special Permit criteria in Section 8.7E are
addressed, and
(3) evidence of any approvals from any local, regional, State or Federal agency or
department having jurisdiction over any aspect of the application (provided
Planning and Zoning Commission approval is not a prerequisite of that approval
process).
4. The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed
necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
5. If a Special Permit Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to
22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission not later than the day such application is filed
with the Commission.
6. Where the Commission determines that, because of the particular size, location or nature of
a proposal, the public interest would be best served by a three-dimensional (30) physical
representation or a computer simulation of the project, the Commission may require that
the applicant provide a digital model of the proposal or a physical model of the proposal at
such appropriate scale as the Commission may approve. The Commission may also require
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
176
the abutting where
to and understand the
The date of receipt of the Special Permit Application shall be determined in accordance
with Section 8.1 O.B.
An incomplete Special Permit Application may be denied in accordance with Section
8.10.C.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Special Permit Application and:
(1) Publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.F of
these Regulations,
(2) Inform the applicant of the deadline to provide notice to property owners in
accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.G of these Regulations,
(3) Confirm that the applicant has mailed notice to property owners in accordance with
these Regulations.
4. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.10.1.
5. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8.1 O.J.
6. Notification to a regional planning agency may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.1 O.K.
7. The Commission shall require that the applicant:
(1) post a sign in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 OH of these
Regulations, and
(2) give notice to nearby property owners in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8.1 O.G of these Regulations.
8. The Commission shall process the Special Permit Application within the period of time
permitted under CGS 8-7d:
(1) the public hearing shall commence within 65 days after receipt of the application,
(2) the public hearing shall be completed within 35 days after such hearing
commences,
(3) all decisions shall be rendered within 65 days after completion of such hearing, and
(4) the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein
provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65
days.
9. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity
regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45. inclusive and the time for a decision by the
Commission would elapse prior to the 35th day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to 35 days after
the decision of such agency.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
177
8.7.D
3.
at any to action withdraw
any
Decision Considerations.
On a Special Permit Application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to
22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall:
(1) wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission has submitted a report with its final decision, and
(2) give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission when making its decision.
On a Special Permit Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under
Section 8.1 O.I notice to water companies under Section 8.1 O.J, or notice to a regional
planning agency under Section 8.1 O.K the Commission shall give due consideration to any
report or testimony received.
Before the Commission approves a Special Permit Application, it shall determine that the
application:
(1) is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations,
(2) has, in the sole discretion of the Commission, satisfied any applicable Special
Permit criteria in these Regulations, and
(3) is in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations.
4. Before granting a Special Permit, the Commission shall determine that any accompanying
Site Plan application is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations.
5. In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may:
(1) stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to protect or promote the
public health, safety or welfare; property values; the environment; sound
planning and zoning principles; improved land use, site planning and land
development; or better overall neighborhood compatibility, and
(2) impose additional requirements, conditions or safeguards as a prerequisite to the
issuance of the Use Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, if it shall be
found necessary in order that the spirit of these Regulations may be observed,
public safety and welfare secured or substantial justice done.
6. Any condition or safeguard attached to the granting of a Special Permit:
(1) shall be binding upon the property as long as the Special Permit use is still m
operation, and
(2) shall continue to be m effect regardless of any change in ownership of the
property.
7. The Commission shall not approve any Special Permit for any property on which there
exists a zoning violation, unless such Special Permit application will remedy such violation.
8. 7 .E Special Permit Criteria.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
178
any application for a Special Permit, the Commission shall merit of the ication
Compatibility with the Plan of Conservation and Development.
Suitable Location for Use.
location and size of the site, the nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in
connection with the use, and the location of the site with respect to streets giving access to it are such
that the use shall be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development in the district in which it
located and shall promote the welfare of the Town.
3. Appropriate Improvements.
(1) The design elements of the proposed development will be attractive and
suitable in relation to the site characteristics, the style of other buildings in the
immediate area. and will enhance the existing and probable future character of
the neighborhood in which the use is located.
(2) The location, nature and height of bui !dings, walls, and fences, planned activities
and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site wi II be such that the use
shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent
land and buildings or impair the value thereof.
(3) The proposed use or activity shall have no adverse effect upon the neighboring
area resulting from the use of signs, exposed artificial lights, colored lights of
any nature, flashing lights, loudspeakers or other noisemaking devices.
(4) In cases where it is proposed to convert a structure designed and built originally for
other uses, the structure is adaptable to the proposed use from the point of view
of public health and safety.
4. Suitable Transportation Conditions.
(1) The design, location and specific details of the proposed use or activity shall not
adversely affect safety in the streets nor unreasonably increase traffic
congestion in the area nor interfere with the pattern of pedestrian, bicycle, or
vehicular circulation in such a manner as to create or augment unsafe traffic
conditions.
(2) Parking area or areas will be of adequate size for the particular use, shall be
suitably screened from adjoining residential uses, and entrance and exit drives
shall be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances.
(3) Streets and other rights-of-way shall be of such size, condition and capacity (in
terms of capacity, width, grade, alignment and visibility) to adequately
accommodate the traffic to be generated by the particular proposed use.
5. Adequate Public Utilities and Services.
(1) The provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, and storm water drainage
conform to accepted engineering practices. comply with all standards of the
appropriate regulatory authority, and shall not unduly burden the capacity of
such facilities.
(2) The proposed use or activity shall provide easy accessibility for fire apparatus and
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25. 2015
PROCDURES
179
police protection and 1s laid out and
emergency services.
Environmental Protection and Conservation.
to further the of
Appropriate consideration shall be given to the protection, preservation, and/or enhancement of
natural, scenic, historic, and unique resources including, where appropriate, the use of conservation
restrictions to protect and permanently preserve natural, scenic, historic, or unique features which
enhance the character and environment of the area.
7. Long-term Viability.
Adequate provision has been made for the sustained maintenance of the proposed development
(structures, streets, and other improvements).
8.7.F Commission Decision.
1. Following the public hearing, the Commission may approve, disapprove or approve with
modifications the proposed special permit use, provided such modifications do not increase
the scope of the Special Permit. Because of the variety and peculiarities of each special
permit use, the Commission may impose conditions and restrictions to any such use which
in its judgment is required to protect adjacent uses and the neighborhood in general.
2. In approving a Special Permit Application, the Commission may impose conditions
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and property
values.
3. The Commission shall not approve any Special Permit for any property on which there
exists a zoning violation, unless such Special Permitapplication will remedy such violation.
8. 7 .G Action Documentation.
1. The decision to grant a Special Pennit shall:
(1) state the name of the owner of record,
(2) contain a description of the premises to which it relates,
(3) identify the Section and/or Section of the Regulations under which the Special
Permit was granted or denied, and
(4) specify the nature of the Special Permit.
2. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission, shall send, by certified mail, a copy of
any decision to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
3. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission, shall publish notice of the approval or
denial of the Special Permit Application in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in
Cromwell within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
4. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15 day period after a decision
has been rendered, the person who submitted such plan may provide for the publication of
such notice within ten (I 0) days thereafter.
8.7.H Post Approval Actions.
1. Following approval of a Special Permit Application, the applicant shall submit the
following final plan to the Town Planner:
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
180
bearing the raised seal and signature of the appropriate professionals who prepared
the
bearing a copy the letter of the Commission and any other Tmvn
agencies authorizing the activity,
(3) a completed "'developers performance bond spreadsheet, and
(4) containing a signature block where the Chairman, or Vice-Chairman, of the
Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission.
The applicant shall also submit application documents in an electronic fonnat in
accordance with the Town Planner's requirements.
3. A Special Permit shall only authorize the particular use or uses specified in the
Commission's approval.
4. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards
approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a violation of these Regulations and the
Commission shall have the authority, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard, to revoke
the permit at any time the operation is found to be in noncompliance with the original
permit.
5. A Special Permit may be amended or modified in like manner as provided above for the
granting of a Special Permit except that amendments which shall be found to be of a minor
nature or which do not materially alter the Special Permit, as determined by the
Commission, may be authorized with Commission approval only, without another public
hearing.
8. 7 .I Expiration and Completion.
8.8
1. A Special Permit will expire for the following reasons:
(1) if it is not recorded on the land records within one (I) year of the date of the
expiration of the appeal period ..
(2) All work in connection with a site plan shall be completed within five (5) years
after the date of approval of the plan and failure to complete all work within
such five (5) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of
such site plan unless the Commission shall have granted an extension of the
time to complete work in connection with such site plan.
2. The Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions of the time to complete all or part
of the work in connection with the site plan provided the total extension or extensions shall
not exceed ten ( l 0) years from the date of approval of such site plan.
3. The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a determination of the
adequacy of any Performance Guarantee or other surety.
REGULATION AMENDMENT APPLICATION PROCEDURES
(COMMISSION)
8.8.A Application Requirements.
l. A Regulation Amendment Application shall be submitted for any proposal to amend.
change, or repeal any Section of these Regulations.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
181
Any such application shall be accompanied by l 2 copies the precise
proposed text and any supporting information.
The may require the submission of additional information as
necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
A Regulation Amendment Application shall only be submitted by:
(1) an owner of real property in Cromwell, or
(2) by the Commission on its own initiative.
the
The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition or petitions relating to the same
changes, or substantially the same changes. more than once in a period of 12 months unless
it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this
action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a
material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section.
8.8.B Proceedings.
1. The date of receipt for the Regulation Amendment Application shall be determined in
accordance with Section 8.1 O.B.
2. An incomplete Regulation Amendment Application may be denied in accordance with
Section 8.1 O.C.
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Regulation Amendment Application
and:
(1) shall publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.F.
of these Regulations.
(2) may publish the full text of such proposed regulation in full in such notice.
(3) file the proposed text in the Office of the Town Clerk.
4. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.1 O.I.
5. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8.10.J.
6. A copy of the proposed regulation shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Town
Clerk for public inspection at least ten (I 0) days before the public hearing.
7. The Commission shall process the Regulation Amendment Application within the period of
time permitted under CGS 8-7d:
(1) the public hearing shall commence within 65 days after receipt of the application.
(2) the public hearing shall be completed within 35 days after such hearing
commences.
(3) all decisions shall be rendered within 65 days after completion of such hearing.
(4) the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein
provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65
days.
(5) these provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission
regarding adoption or change of any Regulation.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
182
The applicant may. at any to Commission. withdraw
Decision Considerations.
The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Regulation Amendment
Application.
Any report from an adjacent municipality or a regional planning agency shall be made a
part of the record of such hearing.
On a Regulation Amendment Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities,
water companies, or a regional planning agency, the Commission shall give due
consideration to any report or testimony received.
4. In making its decision the Commission shall take into consideration the Plan of
Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS 8-23.
5. Before approving any Regulation Amendment Application, the Commission shall
determine that the proposed regulation change will aid in:
(1) protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and
(2) attaining the purposes of these Regulations.
6. Such Regulation(s) shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all
the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed
at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of
the area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within 500 feet in all
directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be
adopted except by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the Commission.
8.8.D Action Documentation.
1. Jn making its decision, the Commission shall state upon the record its findings on
consistency of the proposed establishment, change or repeal of such Regulations with the
Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended.
2. As part of approving a Regulation Amendment Application, the Commission shall establish
an effective date for the Regulation change provided that a notice of the decision of the
Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in
Cromwell before such effective date.
3. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission, shall send, by certified mail, a copy of
any decision on a Regulation Amendment Application to the applicant within 15 days after
such decision is rendered.
4. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission, shall publish notice of the approval or
denial of the Regulation Amendment Application in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in Cromwell within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
5. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15 day period after a decision
has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the
publication of such notice within ten ( 10) days thereafter.
8.8.E Effective Date.
Unless otherwise expressly provided for by the Commission, such Zoning Regulation Amendment shall
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
183
following the publication of such change in a newspaper having a substantial
that, prior to the date a copy of the Zoning Regulation Amendment
shall be filed in Town Clerk.
Post Approval Actions.
the Effective Date. the Commission shall file a copy of the adopted amendment in the Office of the
Town Clerk.
8.9 ZONING MAP AMENDMENT APPLICATION
(COMMISSION)
PROCEDURES
8.9.A Application Requirements.
1. A Zoning Map Amendment shall be submitted for any proposal to alter the zonmg
designation of any parcel( s) of land or part thereof.
2. A Zoning Map Amendment shall be:
(1) signed by the affected property owner(s);
(2) commenced by the Commission on its own initiative; or
(3) by the Commission in response to a petition, duly signed and acknowledged,
requesting change or modification of the official Zoning Map.
3. The following special zoning districts require the submission of a Master Plan at the time
of application for a Zoning Map Amendment:
(1) ACTIVE ADULT HOUSING DISTRICT (AA)
(2) INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (ID)
(3) MIXED-USE DISTRICT (MU)
(4) PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (PRO)
4. Applicants involved in a Master Plan process may elect to submit documentation that
satisfies both the Master Plan and Site Plan requirements at the time of submission for the
Zoning Map Amendment application.
5. The Commission shall not be required to hear a Zoning Map Amendment that has been
rejected within one ( 1) year from the date of rejection unless it finds, on facts presented in
writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership
of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for
the purpose of this Section.
8.9.B Proceedings.
1. The Zoning Map Amendment shall be submitted in accordance with Section 8.1 O.A.
2. The date of receipt of the Zoning Map Amendment shall be determined in accordance with
Section 8.1 O.J.
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Zoning Map Amendment.
4. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission, shall publish a legal notice in accordance
with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.F of these Regulations.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
184
8.9.C
on behalf of the
to property owners
Town Planner. on behalf the shall confirm that the applicant has
mailed notice to property owners in accordance with these Regulations.
Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.10.1.
8. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8.1 O.J.
9. Notification to a regional planning agency may be required m accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.10. K.
lO. The Commission shall require that all applicants:
(1) post a sign in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 OH of these
Regulations, and
(2) give notice to nearby property owners in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8.10. G of these Regulations.
11. A copy of the proposed Zoning Map Amendment shall be filed by the Town Planner in the
Office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten (I 0) days before the public
hearing.
12. The applicant may withdraw such Zoning Map Amendment at any time prior to action by
the Commission.
Timeframe for Action.
The Commission shall process the Zoning Map Amendment within the period of time permitted under CGS 8-
7d, except that these timeframe provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding
establishment, amendment, or change of any zone:
1.
2.
3.
4.
8.9.D
1.
the public hearing shall commence within 65 days after receipt of the application,
the public hearing shall be completed within 35 days after such hearingcommences,
all decisions shall be rendered within 65 days after completion of such hearing, and
the applicant may consent to one ( l) or more extensions of any period specified herein
provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days.
Decision Considerations.
On a Zoning Map Amendment, the Commission shall incorporate into the record, and give
due consideration to, any report or testimony received from:
(l) an adjoining municipality under Section 8.10.1,
(2) a regional planning agency under Section 8.1 O.K, and
(3) the Cromwell Fire District (public water company) and the Commissioner of
Public Health under Section 8.1 O.J.
2. Whenever it grants or denies a Zoning Map Amendment, the Commission shall state upon
its record:
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
185
8.9.E
(1) the reason(s) for its decision, and
the findings on consistency of the Zoning Map the Plan
Conservation and Development, as amended.
Commission Decision
In any submission under this section, the Commission may approve or disapprove the
proposed map amendment as presented, or may modify it, provided such modification is a
reduction in area and does not include properties, parcels or portions thereof that have not
been included in any require notice.
2. Any report from an adjacent municipality or a regional planning agency shall be made a
part of the record of such hearing.
3. On a Regulation Amendment Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities,
water companies, or a regional planning agency, the Commission shall give due
consideration to any report or testimony received.
4. In making its decision the Commission shall take into consideration the Plan of
Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS 8-23.
5. Before approving any Map Amendment Application, the Commission shall determine that
the proposed regulation change will aid in protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or
property values.
8.9.F Protest Petition.
Such Zoning Map Amendment shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the
members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed with the Commission at
or before a hearing, signed by all of the owners of record of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots affected
by such proposed change or of the lots within 500 feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed
change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission.
8.9.G Action Documentation.
1. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of
any decision on a Zoning Map Amendment to the applicant within 15 days after such
decision is rendered.
2. The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission shall publish notice of the approval or
denial of the Zoning Map Amendment in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in
Cromwell within 15 days after such decision is rendered and any such notice of approval
shall identify the effective date established by the Commission.
3. In any case in which such notice is not published within the I 5 day period after a decision
has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the
publication of such notice within ten (I 0) days thereafter.
8.9.H Effective Date
Unless otherwise expressly provided for by the Commission, such Zoning Map Amendment shall become
effective on the day following the publication of such change in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in
Cromwell provided that, prior to the effective date a copy of the Zoning Map Amendment approved by the
Commission shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk
8.9.I Post Approval Actions.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURE5
186
Amendment without a Master Before the Effective Date, the Town
on behalf of the Commission shall file a copy of the adopted amendment in the
of the Town Clerk.
Map Amendment With Master Plan. Following approval of a Master Plan, the
applicant shall submit the following final plan to the Town Planner:
(1) bearing the raised seal and signature of the appropriate professionals who prepared
the drawing( s ),
(2) bearing a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town
regulatory agencies authorizing the activity, and
(3) containing a signature block where the Chairman, or Vice-Chairman, of the
Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission.
3. The Town Planner shall verify that the final plans are in accordance with the Commission's
approval.
4. Following signature by the Chairman or Vice-Chairman, the applicant shall file said plans
in the office of the Town Clerk before any Use Permits are issued for the activities shown
on the approved plan. A Master Plan granted by the Commission shall only become
effective upon the filing of a copy, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the
Town
5. The applicant shall also submit application documents in an electronic format in
accordance with the Town Planner's requirements.
6. A Master Plan shall only authorize the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's
approval.
7. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards
approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a violation of these Regulations and the
Commission shall have the authority to revoke the permit at any time the operation is found
to be in noncompliance with the original permit.
8. The Applicant shall post a Performance Guarantee in Accordance with Section 9.3 when
required by the Commission.
8.9.J Adoption of a Master Plan.
1. When a Master Plan is required, the Commission shall act upon the application in
accordance with the procedures for a Zoning Map Amendment. The Master Plan, when
adopted, shall become the zoning map and regulations for the properties identified during
the application process.
2. The Master Plan shall be established as the district criteria for the subject parcel(s). The
specific bulk requirements, total building coverage and square footage, along with
proposed uses shall be depicted in a Table that is incorporated into the Master Plan
documents.
3. A Master Plan shall be accompanied by schematic drawings and documentation necessary
for the Commission to evaluate the proposal. The Master Plan should also include a Table
that identifies the following elements:
(1) proposed uses and amount of land use area (square feet or acres),
(2) proposed total amount of impervious surface in a land use area (square feet or
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
187
amount
proposed maximum permitted building height and locations where
requirements will be applied.
The applicant may submit more detailed information about these elements.
A Master Plan shall be accompanied by 12 copies of the following information:
(1) a detailed statement describing the existing and proposed use or uses.and
feet or
(2) the Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed
necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
6. Following approval of a Master Plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit two (2) fixedline
mylar copies of the approved plan(s) shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Department, with the following:
(1) Mylar documents shall comply with CGS 7-31, bearing the raised seal and
signature of the appropriate professionals which prepared thedrawing(s),
(2) bearing a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town
regulatory agencies authorizing the activity, and
(3) containing a signature block where the Chairman or Vice-Chairman, of the
Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission.
7. The Zoning Map shall be modified to reflect such change and shall contain a notation
giving reference to the Master Plan.
8. Following signature by the Chairman or Vice-Chairman, the applicant shall file said plans
in the office of the Town Clerk before any Use Permits are issued for the activities shown
on the approved plan. A Master Plan approved by the Commission shall only become
effective upon the filing of a copy, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the
Town
9. A Master Plan shall only authorize the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's
approval.
10. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards
approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a violation of these Regulations and, in
addition to any other remedies available at law, the Commission shall have the authority,
upon notice and an opportunity to be heard, to revoke the permit at any time the operation
is found to be in noncompliance with the original permit.
11. A Master Plan is not a Site Plan Approval and construction is not authorized under the
Master Plan. A Site Plan can be granted simultaneous to the authorization of a Master Plan,
provided the Site Plan Application requirements have been followed. Bonding is required
for a joint Master Plan/ Site Plan process.
8.10 PROCEDURAL
PROCESSING
REQUIREMENTS
8.10.A Application Submission Requirements.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
188
FOR APPLICATION
to the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals (Board) shall be submitted to
Zoning Department.
shall be submitted on forms obtained from the
Department for the type of application being submitted.
Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) except that the Commission or
the Town shall be exempt from any application fee.
4. Applications shall be submitted with such supporting plans, materials, and other
information as required by these Regulations.
Applications shall be signed by the applicant and. if different. the owner of the property
affected.
8.10.B Date of Receipt.
For the purposes of calculating statutory timeframes for processing applications, the date of receipt of an
app Ii cation to the Commission or the Board shall be:
1. the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission or the Board
immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Planning and Zoning
Department, or
2. 35 days after submission, whichever is sooner.
8.10.C Incomplete Applications.
1. Each application shall be reviewed by the Town Planner to determine whether the
application is complete.
2. An application requiring approval from the Commission or Board shall not be considered
actually complete until all of the information as required by these Regulations, the
Commission, or the Board has been received by the Commission or the Board at a regularly
scheduled meeting.
3. An incomplete application or an application submitted without the requisite fee are grounds
for denial.
4. Complete Application Checklist. A checklist will be developed for each application that is
required to have a ·'Complete Application" when the application is submitted.
8.10.D Sequence ofHearings.
Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the Commission or the Board may
conduct any public hearings simultaneously or in the order they deem appropriate.
8.10.E Consultations.
1. On any application, the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may seek the advice and
opinion of other officials, boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating applications.
2. On any application, the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may retain an architect.
landscape architect, professional land use planner, attorney, or other consultant to review,
comment, and guide its deliberations on any application, and require that the applicant:
(1) deposit funds with the Commission for the costs of any consulting review fees, or
(2) reimburse the Commission for the cost of such consulting review. Failure to
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25. 2015
PROCDURES
189
reimburse such costs shall
for the revocation
heard.
Notice Newspaper.
of these be
be
When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled by the Commission or
Board. the Town Planner shall publish notice of the hearing in a newspaper having a
substantial circulation in Cromwell.
2. Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the
first not more than 15 days, nor less than ten ( 10) days, and the last not less than two (2)
days before the date of the hearing.
Notification of Abutting Property Owners.
L For all applications to the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals which will require the
Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals to hold a public hearing, except amendments to
these regulations, the applicant shall mail notice to the following persons as required by
this section:
(1) The owner of all property which is the subject of the application.
(2) Owners of Abutting Properties - Notification to all persons owning property, any
portion of which is within 100 feet of the land that is the subject of the hearing.
2. Said notice shall consist of written notification of the public hearing, by mail, at least
fourteen ( 14) days prior to the public hearing. A Certificate of Mailing from the US Post
Office of said written notice shall be conclusive evidence of compliance with the
provisions of the section.
3. Property owners, for the purpose of this section, shall be as they appear on the property tax
map or on the last-completed grand list as of the date such notice is mailed.
4. Failure by the applicant to mail such notice to any person or persons shall not in any way
invalidate the public hearing.
8.10.H Public Hearing Sign Posting Requirements.
1. For any site which is the subject of a public hearing before the Commission or the Zoning
Board of Appeals, the applicant shall display a sign or signs on the subject property
indicating that a zoning application is pending.
(1) The sign or signs shall be not less than 16 square feet in size and shall contain the
name of the applicant, the application file number, and the date, time, and
location of the public hearing in letters that are not less than four ( 4) inches
high.
(2) One (I) sign shall be posted on every side of the property that has frontage on a
Town road, and shall be placed not more than five (5) feet from the edge of the
property.
(3) The sign shall be two-sided and its face shall be perpendicular to the street.
(4) The sign shall be in place continuously for 14 days prior to the public hearing and
shall remain in place throughout the public hearing.
(5) If the public hearing is continued, the date of the public hearing shall be revised to
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
190
state the date of the continued hearing.
shall be removed not later than three after the
At the public hearing the applicant must present an affidavit that the sign or
have been in place for the required period prior to the public hearing.
Once duly posted, the removal of a public hearing sign by someone other than the applicant
or its agent(s) shall not in any way invalidate the public hearing.
8.10.I Notification of Abutting Municipalities.
l. In accordance with CGS 8-7d(f), the Town Planner on behalf of the Commission or Board
shall notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application concerning any project
on any site in which:
(1) any portion of the property affected by a decision is within 500 feet of the
boundary of the adjoining municipality,
(2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project shall use streets within
the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site,
(3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project shall flow
through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the
adjoining municipality, or
(4) water runoff from the improved site shall impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
2. Such notice shall be made certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed
within seven (7) days of the day of the submission to the Planning and Zoning Department
of the application, petition, request or plan.
3. No hearing shall be conducted on any application, petition, request or plan unless the
adjoining municipality has received the notice required under this Section.
4. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any
hearing on any such application, petition, request orplan.
8.10.J Notification of Water Companies.
1. In accordance with CGS 8-3i an applicant shall provide written notice to the Cromwell Fire
District (water company) and the Commissioner of Public Health when an application,
petition, request or plan is filed with the Commission or Board concerning any project on
any site that is within:
(1) an aquifer protection area, provided such area has been delineated in accordance
with CGS 22a-354c, or
(2) the watershed of the Cromwell Fire District (water company), provided the
Cromwell Fire District(water company) or said Commissioner has filed a map
with the Commission or the Board and on the Cromwell land records showing
the boundaries of the watershed.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed
not later than seven (7) days after the date of the day of the submission to the Planning and
Zoning Department.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
191
Prior to the scheduled meeting
to the Planning and
incomplete:
(1) a copy of the complete ,,u-.•~'""v of
(2) proof of mailing.
and
the applicant shall submit the
application shall be considered
Such Cromwell Fire District (water company) and the Commissioner of Public Health may,
through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application,
petition, request or plan.
8.10.K Notification of Regional Planning Agency.
The Town Planner, on behalf of the Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency
when any portion of the land affected by a regulation change affecting the use of a district is located within 500
feet of the boundary of another municipality and:
1. such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested.
2. such notice shall be made not later than 30 days before the public hearing.
3. the regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the
Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be
presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal.
8.10.L Beneficiaries of a Trust.
Any person who makes an application to the Commission or Board pertaining to real property, the record title
to which is held by a trustee of any trust, shall file with said application a sworn statement disclosing the
name(s) of the equitable owner (s) of such real property or the beneficiary(ies) of the trust.
8.10.M Holders of Conservation or Preservation Restriction.
Jn accordance with Conn. Gen. Stats. §47-42d, no person shall file an application with the Commission or the
Board of Appeals for an activity which is restricted under the terms of a conservation or preservation restriction
without providing proof that the applicant has providing the party holding such restrictions, including any State
agency, with written notice of the application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than sixty
( 60) days prior to the filing of the such application. In lieu of such notice, the applicant may submit a letter
from the holder of such restriction or from the holder's authorized agent, verifying that the application is in
compliance with the terms of the restriction. If the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to this section
8.9.M, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the Commission or the Board of Appeals that granting
of the permit application will violate the terms of the restrictions and the Commission or Board of Appeals
shall not grant the permit. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the filing of an application or to
require such written notice when the activity that is the subject of the permit application will occur on a portion
of the property that is not restricted under the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
PROCDURES
192
9.ADMINISTRATION
1 ADMINISTRATION
9.LA Severability.
If a court competent jurisdiction shall declare any prov1s10n or part of these regulations to be invalid,
unconstitutional, or beyond the powers granted to the Commission by law, such action shall not affect the
validity any other provision or part hereof.
9.1.B When Effective.
These Regulations and any amendments hereto, shall be effective from and after the effective date established
by the Commission.
9.1.C Appointment.
The Commission shall appoint a Zoning Enforcement Officer and may appoint one ( l) or more Assistant
Zoning Enforcement Officer(s) who shall act as its agent(s) for administration and enforcement of these
Regulations in accordance with Sections 9. l and 9.1.
9.1.D Duties and Responsibilities of the Town Planner.
The Commission hereby delegates the following administrative duties and responsibilities to the Town Planner:
t. To maintain a proper record of all applications, approvals, site plans, legal documents (such
as deeds and easements), correspondence, notices, application fees levied and collected and
such other data and files as are required by these Regulations.
2. To report regularly to the Commission.
3. To serve as the formal recipient for all legal documents submitted by applicants. As the
formal recipient the Town Planner shall:
(1) review such documents for compliance with Commission decisions; and
(2) forward all such documents to the Town Attorney for review and filing.
4. To serve as the formal recipient for all performance guarantees (bonds) established by the
Commission. As the formal recipient the Town Planner shall:
(1) make recommendations of any and all Performance Guarantees, pursuant to input
from all appropriate agencies or departments,
(2) maintain a list of all active Perfonnance Guarantees and monitor them to prevent
expiration while a project is on-going,
(3) forward all documents to the Finance Department or Town Treasurer for proper
financial management, and
( 4) notify all appropriate departments of the receipt of the Performance Guarantee.
5. Any and all duties referred to in these Regulations.
6. Any other duties or responsibilities which the Commission chooses to delegate provided
administrative approval is granted by the direct supervisor.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ADMINISTRATION
193
9. Duties and Responsibilities of the Zoning EnforcementOfficer.
To issue or withhold use permits. as herein provided.
To issue or withhold certificates of zoning compliance, as herein provided.
To maintain a proper record of all certificates of zoning compliance. plans, complaints,
violations, orders. corrections, correspondence, notices. fees levied and collected and such
other data and files as are required by these Regulations.
4. To report regularly to the Commission and carry out its directives in all matters pertaining
to these Regulations.
9.2 ENFORCEMENT
9.2.A Authority.
These regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer(s) who are hereby authorized to cause
any building, place, premises or use to be inspected, and to order in writing the remedying of any condition
found to exist in violation of these regulations.
9.2.B Inspections Authorized.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer(s) shall have authority to cause an inspection to be made of any premises and
the building and structures thereon and the use of any land and any kind of work upon any building or structure
being erected or altered, whether or not such work is being done under authority of a Use Permit. Filing of a
permit application under these Regulations shall constitute authority from the owner for inspections by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or other municipal inspectors or agents for the purpose of determining, and
enforcing, compliance with these Regulations and the terms of any permit or other approval approved
hereunder.
9.2.C Enforcement Authorized.
The Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or any official having jurisdiction, in
addition to other remedies, may institute an action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection, alteration,
extension, reconstruction, maintenance or use of any building, structure, or lot or to correct or abate any
unlawful act or to prevent the illegal occupation of buildings, structures, or land or to prevent any illegal act in
or about such premises.
9.2.D Penalties.
9.2.E Notice of Violation.
1. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) shall find a violation of these Regulations, he or
she may serve upon the owner, lessee, tenant, architect, engineer, builder, contractor,
manager, or any agent, a violation notice and an order to discontinue such work and
violation and to correct or abate the condition complained of within ten ( l 0) days from
service of such notice and order, or earlier in the case of earth removal, grading, erosion or
sediment control, or other matters requiring more immediate attention.
2. The ZEO shall have the authority to order the removal of any sign erected on, attached to,
Cromwell Zoning Regulations 18.25.2015
ADMINISTRATION
194
on or displayed on any in any district where no permit has been issued
accordance with these or where such 1s violation of any
these
The ZEO have the authority to remove permit has been issued
and where the sign is located within a public street right-ofway or is located on Town
property.
9.2.F Further Action.
Any person violating any of the provisions of these Regulations shall be subject to the
fines. injunctive procedures, and any other penalties prescribed by Chapter 124 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, including, when warranted. a separate violation
for each day that a violation exists.
2. Where it is alleged that there is an error in any enforcement order, requirement or decision
made by the ZEO, an aggrieved party may file an Appeal with the Zoning Board of
Appeals (ZBA) in accordance with Section l 0.3.
9.3 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS
9.3.A General.
9.3.B
I. The Commission will require the applicant to post a Performance Guarantee to cover any
or all site improvements described in Section 9.3.C.2.
2. Such Performance Guarantee shall be executed on a form approved by the Commission and
shall include the requirement that both cash and/or other collateral be provided.
3. Such Performance Guarantee shall set a time limit following its issuance for all the
improvements stated therein to be completed.
4. In addition to proposed site improvements, said Performance Guarantee may also cover any
required site cleanups of debris, abandoned vehicles or any other material which would
cause a deterioration of conditions in the area.
5. The amount of the Performance Guarantee shall be established by the Commission.
(1) The applicant shall itemize the costs associated with the elements that are required
to be bonded.
(2) The Town Planner will request that the Town Engineer review the applicant's cost
estimates and compare these numbers to known construction costs at the time
the performance guarantee is posted.
(3) The Town Planner shall provide a recommendation to the Commission regarding
the establishment or modification of a Performance Guarantee.
Performance Guarantee Format.
Where a Performance Guarantee is required by any Section of these Regulations, it shall be in one of the
following forms and the Town Planner shall require evidence of compliance with the following standards
before accepting any Perfonnance Guarantee:
1. Cash deposited with the Town.
2. Certified check to the order of the Town when the amount of the check is fully insured by
Cromwell Zoning Regulations J 8.25.2015
ADMINISTRATION
195
9.3.C
the FDIC.
Bank
insured by the FDIC.
evergreen letter of
and
naming
to the Town when the amount of the
Town as sole beneficiary.
(1) Such evergreen letter credit shall be issued by, and drafts thereunder presentable
at, a branch of a bank in Connecticut provided that:
a) such bank is included in the most recent list issued by the Securities
Valuation Office of the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (or any successor office or organization, ·'NAIC") as a
bank meeting NAIC standards for issuing letters of credit for
remsurance purposes;
b) the long-term unsecured debt of such bank (or the long-term unsecured
debt of its holding company) is rated BBB or better by Standard &
Poor's rating service or Baa or better by Moody's rating service.
c) the terms and conditions of such letter of credit shall be acceptable in form
and substance to the Town and substantially in the form of the model
letter of credit in the Appendix, or
d) if and when such letter of credit shall, through the passage of time. have
less than thirty (30) days remaining until its expiration or lapse date,
and such date shall not have been extended, the First Selectman may
draw under said letter of credit the full amount thereof and the proceeds
may be retained by the Town as the Performance Guarantee.
(2) A Letter of Credit shall be issued by a bank licensed to conduct such business in
the State of Connecticut and of appropriate financial soundness and stability.
The Letter must meet Evergreen Bond Standards. The period to expiration of a
Letter of Credit shall be not less than one (I) year, with a provision for
automatic renewal at increments of not less than one (I) year. The Town of
Cromwell must be informed of the intention not to renew or the bond shall
automatically be renewed.
Activities to be Covered by Performance Guarantees
Performance guarantees shall be required by the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer for the
following:
1. Site Clearing and Restoration. A Performance Guarantee shall be provided to restore a site
to a stable environment to prevent soil erosion and stormwater management issues.
Elements to be covered include, but are not limited to:
(1) Erosion and sediment control features, including silt fencing, and site revegetation.
Site re-vegetation funds shall include an estimate to restore top soil
to the site.
(2) Stormwater management elements related to managing stormwater impacts from
site clearing activities.
(3) Site Clearing and Restoration elements shall be covered with a Cash Bond.
2. Site Improvements. A Performance Guarantee shall be provided to cover the replacement
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ADMINISTRATION
196
costs improvement
but are not limited to, any roads (public or
stormwater management system. sidewalk. and any structure or facility
located within the Road or Street Right of may be as a
result of construction.
(2) Site improvement elements may be covered by any of the Perfonnance Guarantee
Formats listed in Section 9.3.B above.
9.3.D Performance Guarantee Initiation and Term.
9.3.E
L Should the Performance Guarantee not be posted within 180 days of the Commission's
approval, the site plan approval shall. upon notice and an opportunity to be heard, become
null and void. The Commission may grant, for good cause, an extension of the established
time limit if, in its opinion, unusual circumstances prohibit the posting of the Performance
Guarantee within the required timeframe. The Performance Guarantee shall be posted prior
to any site work.
2. A Performance Guarantee shall remain in force until all of the terms and conditions of the
subject Permit have been successfully met, or six (6) months beyond the date the Town
Planner becomes aware that the subject Permit ceases to be in effect, whichever is earlier.
The suspension of a Permit does not in any way affect the term of any associated Security.
Project Performance
Any such Performance Guarantee may be called by the First Selectman at the request of the Commission when,
it is deemed by the Commission that:
1. The permittee is, to any extent, not complying with the provisions of the Permit and/or
these Regulations,
2. Such non-compliance has caused, is causing, and/or has the reasonable potential to cause
conditions that are counter to the purposes of these Regulations,
3. In making such determination, the Commission may consider, to varying degrees deemed
thereby to be appropriate to the situation, and amongst other factors, in no particular order:
(1) the compliance-related history of the permittee with respect to the subject Permit,
and, for critical situations, a broader scope may be considered,
(2) the scope and magnitude of realized and potential adverse impacts,
(3) time-critical factors, and,
( 4) the status of the project.
4. For purposes of this Section, not adequately progressing on completing work or conducting
activities associated with the Permit in a timely manner with respect to various applicable
requirements is considered non-compliance with the permit.
5. The term ·'non-compliance" is to be interpreted as generally or specifically as is most in
keeping with the purposes of these Regulations.
6. The permittee shall be given a minimum of ten (I 0) calendar-days notice of the intent of
the First Selectman to call a Letter of Credit Performance Guarantee prior to the First
Selectman actually notifying the issuing bank of such. Cash Performance Guarantee is
subject to call at the sole discretion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Notice that the
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ADMINISTRATION
197
permittee is in default with respect to the commitments covered by Performance
Guarantee and the First Selectman or Zoning Enforcement is calling the
the Guarantee be sent certified
Town Planner and/or any other Town official and/or administrator acting on behalf of
the same. may use the proceeds from the forfeiture of a Performance Guarantee in any
manner deemed thereby to be in keeping with the purposes of these Regulations with
respect to the subject default and any potential or realized adverse effects associated
therewith, allowing for the consideration of the amount of funds available, as well as to
cover any expenses incurred in association with the process of obtaining the forfeiture of
the Performance Guarantee . Proceeds may be applied to events, actions, improvements,
and work that are located off-site as well as on-site. are of a temporary as well as a
permanent nature, that occur or occurred at any time subsequent to the Town Planner
becoming aware of the subject default, and that were incurred by the Town of Cromwell
acting on the Town Planner's and/or Town Engineer's behalf: including staff and
equipment time.
8. Nothing herein shall be construed to in any way limit or restrict the Town of Cromwell,
acting through the Town Planner, from pursuing any legal remedy afforded it to recover
damages for expenses incurred by it in any way associated with the default of a permittee
with respect to the permittee's obligations and commitments associated with a Permit.
9. Any cost of collecting a Performance Guarantee, including without limitation, attorney,
bank and other collection fees and expenditures, shall be the responsibility of the applicant
and may be deducted from the Performance Guarantee ..
9.3.F Performance Guarantee Reduction.
At the request of the developer, the Commission may reduce the required Performance Guarantee
commensurate with the items completed and found acceptable to the Town Planner. Said Performance
Guarantee may be reduced to not less than 15 percent of the original Performance Guarantee until all
improvements are completed and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is granted.
9.3.G Performance Guarantee Release.
Any required Performance Guarantee shall not be released by the Commission, or agent until:
1. The release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant,
2. The Town Planner has submitted a letter stating that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed and that all conditions and requirements of the Commission's
approval have been satisfied, and
3. The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission, or agent, through
submission of a set of detailed "As Built" plans or sufficient documentation, that all
improvements and other work are in accordance with submitted site plans.
9.4 IMPACT STATEMENT
When required by these regulations, the impact statement is intended to be a structured narrative prepared by
the applicant that addresses the specific items requested below.
9.4.A Special Permits.
Each application for a Special Permit shall include an Impact Statement that contains the following
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ADMINISTRATION
198
features.
facilities.
The proposed activity and results of proposed action in reference to
zoning, character of the area and existing facilities.
3. Alternatives and possible mitigating measures.
4. The commitment of irretrievable resources.
5. The location and amount of blasting anticipated as part of the project.
traffic.
6. Existing and proposed utilities and public facilities including sewers or sanitary disposal,
surface drainage, water supply, fire protection, and other issues of consequence. The
Commission may require implementation of the information into the findings of fact or
onto the Site Plan.
7. Existing and proposed hours of operation for each use on the site.
9.4.B Zoning Map Amendments.
1. Each statement will compare the proposed project developed to the maximum extent
permitted by the proposed amendment, to the maximum development of the same land as
permitted by the existing zoning regulations and other land capacity limitations, such as
sanitary sewerage, wetlands, steep slopes, etc.
2. Municipal Fiscal Impact. A professional real estate economic analyst with experience in
fiscal analyses, will prepare and submit a statement covering the following factors:
(1) the property and other municipal tax and fee revenue that may be generated,
(2) the municipal expenses and burdens that may be generated.
(3) if there are residential components, the anticipated number of school-aged children
and the impact on existing and planned schools, and
(4) The impact of ancillary services to be generated in existing business centers by the
population of and visitors to the project, and the demand for ancillary
development to be generated.
3. Public Safety and Traffic. A licensed professional engineer specializing in traffic and
highway topics will prepare and submit a statement covering the following factors:
(1) the feasibility and safety considerations for the automobile and pedestrian traffic to
be generated and the capacity of intersections, proposed parking, and
(2) access to highways and public streets to carry the traffic without undue congestion.
4. Public Works. A licensed professional engineer specializing in site engineering, drainage,
and the design of municipal roads, highways, infrastructure and improvements will prepare
and submit a statement covering the following factors:
(1) the design and impact of the storm and other drainage systems at the project,
(2) the design and shading of proposed lighting,
(3) the design and layout of parking and its feasibility and safety for use by the public.,
and
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ADMINISTRATION
199
capacity of the wastewater, water and other utility
and used by the project.
proposed to be built
Aesthetic or Heritage. A licensed or landscape architect experienced in
the design and development of historic structures and the evaluation of structures and
places for submission to the National or State Registries of Historic Sites and Buildings
will prepare and submit a statement covering the following factors:
(1) the design and placement of buildings and landscaping,
(2) the maintenance of public amenities and the impact on heritage and character of
the Town of Cromwell.
(3) the compatibility with public views and character of the surrounding
neighborhood,
(4) the reinforcement of existing street and building massing patterns and open space
patterns. in the vicinity of the development,
(5) protection of and compatibility with locally significant or historic sites, vistas or
features, and
(6) archeologically -significant resources.
6. Natural Resources. A licensed or certified professional specializing in environmental topics
will prepare and submit a statement covering the following factors:
(1) views and view sheds,
(2) wetlands, aquifers, and watercourses critical to natural resources,
(3) trees, endangered or critical plant species or forms and woodland habitats,
( 4) endangered or critical animals and natural habitats,
(5) land forms, slopes and soils,
(6) current agricultural production capability, and
(7) air quality.
7. Waiver Provision. If requested, the Commission may waive any of the Impact Statement
Requirements provided a written waiver request has been submitted at the time the
application is filed with the Commission.
9.5 AMENDMENTS, VALIDITY, EFFECTIVE DATE
1. AMENDMENTS - These regulations may from time to time be amended, changed, or
repealed as provided by Chapter 124 of the General Statutes, 1958 revision, as amended.
2. VALIDITY - Should any section of these regulations be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these regulations as a
who le, nor of any part not declared to be invalid.
3. EFFECTIVE DA TE - The effective date of these regulations shall be May 1, 2011.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ADMINISTRATION
200
10. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
POWERS AND DUTIES
of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties all of which shall be exercised, subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and m
accordance with the public interest and the most appropriate development of the neighborhood:
L To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement or decision made by the official charged with the enforcement of the Zoning
Regulations.
2. To hear and decide all matters including Special Permits upon which it is required to pass
by the specific terms of the Zoning Regulations.
3. To determine and vary the application of the Zoning Regulations in harmony with their
general purpose and intent and with due consideration for conserving the public health,
safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land,
where, owing to conditions specially affecting such parcel not affecting generally the
district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such regulations would result in
exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and the
public safety and welfare secured. Establishment of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be
allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconforming
uses in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining district.
4. To hear and decide requests any application for a change of non-conforming use. The
current use must be legal non-conforming in that it must have lawfully existed prior to the
zoning change that made it non-conforming and at the time of application (this requirement
does not apply to subsequent ZBA-approved changes for the same property). The new
non-conforming use must be no more non-conforming than the current non- conforming
use.
5. To consider applications for, and determine the suitability of, location of any establishment
which intends to deal in or repair motor vehicles under the provisions of the Connecticut
General Statutes Section 14-54, as amended.
6. To consider applications for, and determine the suitability of, location of any establishment
which intends to sell gasoline or any other product under the provisions of the Connecticut
General Statutes Section 14-3 19, as amended.
10.2 PROCEDURE
1. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on all applications and appeals, except
applications under Section 10.5.D. The Board shall publish a notice in a newspaper of
general circulation as required by the General Statutes.
2. Notification of abutting property owners shall be provided in accordance with Section
8.10.G.
3. On any parcel proposed for a variance, DMV location approval, special permit, appeal or
other action by the Board, the applicant shall post a sign or signs as required in Section
8.10.H.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
201
All applications and appeals shall be accompanied by a fee to cover the cost of advertising
process mg.
variance from the Use District Requirements
the Town Planner. to the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals.
The Board shall adopt such procedures as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
this section.
10.3 AN APPEAL OF ORDER OR DECISION. (ZONING BOARD OF
APPEALS)
10.3.A Authority.
In accordance with CGS 8-7, an appeal may be taken to the Board by any person aggrieved, where it is alleged
that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
10.3.B Application Requirements.
1. Any such appeal shall be taken by filing an application with the Zoning Board of Appeals
and a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
2. An appeal shall be taken within ten (I 0) days of the issuance of the order by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
10.3.C Effect of Appeal.
1. An appeal of an order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
which prohibits further construction or expansion of a use in violation of the Zoning
Regulations shall not be cause for such construction or expansion to continue except to
such extent that the Board may allow.
2. An appeal from any other order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall stop all enforcement and proceedings with regard to such order, requirement
or decision unless the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the
Board after the appeal has been filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property.
3. If the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board that a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property, enforcement and proceedings shall only be
stayed by a Restraining Order granted by a court of record, on notice to the Commission or
the Zoning Enforcement Officer and on due cause shown.
10.3.D Proceedings.
1. The date of receipt of the Appeal of Order shall be determined in accordance with Section
8.10.B.
2. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the Appeal of Order and:
(1) publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.F of
these Regulations, and
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
202
give notice to property owners in accordance with the
'"'''Tlrm 8.10.G
any may appear in person or may be represented or
Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8 .10. I.
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8.1 O.J.
6. An incomplete Appeal of Order may be denied in accordance with Section 8.1 O.C.
7. The Board shall process the Appeal of Order within the period of time permitted under
CGS 8-7d.
(l) The public hearing shall commence within 65 days after receipt of the appeal.
(2) The public hearing shall be completed within 35 days after such hearing
commences.
(3) All decisions shall be rendered within 65 days after completion of such hearing.
(4) The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified
herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer
than 65 days.
(5) The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Board, withdraw such
application.
10.3.E Decision Considerations.
1. The Board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal has been taken
but only in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
2. The application of a regulation affirming a statute shall not be subject to an appeal of order.
3. The Board shall make such order, requirement, or decision as in its opinion should be made
concerning the premises.
4. The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify any order, requirement or
decision appealed from.
5. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, or decision of the official charged with the enforcement of the
Regulations.
10.3.F Action Documentation.
1. Whenever it grants or denies an Appeal of Order, the Board shall state the reason( s) for its
decision upon the record.
2. Notice of the decision of the Board shall be sent by certified mail to any person who
appeals to the Board within 15 days after such decision has been rendered.
3. Notice of the decision of the Board shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in Cromwell within 15 days after such decision has been rendered.
4. In any case in which such notice is not published within such 15 day period, the person
Cromwell Zoning Regulations J 8.25.2015
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
203
may for the publication such notice ten (l 0) days
0.4 VARIAN CE PROCEDURES (ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS)
10.4.A Authority.
In accordance with CGS 8-6, the Board shall have the power and duty to determine and vary the application of
the Regulations solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such
parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of these Regulations
would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
10.4.B Application Requirements.
1. A Variance Application shall be accompanied by ten ( 10) copies of sufficiently detailed
plans showing actual site conditions for review by the Board and itsdesignees.
2. The Board shall require the filing of an up-to-date survey prepared by a Connecticutlicensed
land surveyor when the variance is dimensional in nature or such survey is integral
to the understanding of the application.
3. The Board may fix a reasonable fee to be paid by the applicant and may include therein the
cost of any newspaper advertisement necessary in connection with such appeal.
4. The Board shall not be required to hear any application for the same variance or
substantially the same variance for a period of six ( 6) months after a decision by the Board
or by a court on an earlier such application.
10.4.C Proceedings.
1. The date of receipt for the Variance Application shall be determined in accordance with
Section 8.10.B.
2. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the Variance Applicationand:
(1) Publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.F. of
these Regulations,
(2) Inform the applicant of the deadline to provide notice to property owners in
accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.G of these Regulations,
(3) Confirm that the applicant has mailed notice to property owners in accordance with
these Regulations.
3. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.1 O.I.
4. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of
Section 8.10.J.
5. Notification to a regional planning agency may be required in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.1 O.K.
6. The Board shall require that the applicant:
(1) post a sign in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.H of these
Cromwell Zoning Regulations I 8.25.2015
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
204
Regulations, and
notice to nearby owners m accordance with the
Section 8. l O.G of these Regulations.
such hearing, any party may appear in person or may be represented
attorney.
agent or
An incomplete Variance Application may be denied in accordance with Section 8.1 O.C.
The Board shall process the Variance Application within the period of time permitted under
CGS 8-7d:
10. The public hearing shall commence within 65 days after receipt of the application.
11. The public hearing shall be completed within 35 days after such hearing commences.
12. All decisions shall be rendered within 65 days after completion of such hearing.
13. The applicant may consent to one ( l) or more extensions of any period specified herein
provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days.
14. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Board, withdraw such application.
10.4.D Decision Considerations.
1. Whenever a Variance Application is joined with an Appeal of Order Application, the Board
shall first decide the issues presented by such Appeal of Order.
2. The application of a regulation affirming a statute shall not be subject to variance.
3. The Board shall find that a literal enforcement of these Regulations would result m
exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship:
(1) solely with respect to the parcel of land that is the subject of the application,
(2) owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the
district in which it is situated
4. The Board shall only grant the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the exceptional
difficulty or unusual hardship:
(1) in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Regulations.
(2) with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convemence,
welfare and property values, and
(3) so that substantial justice shall be done and the public safety and welfare secured.
5. The concurring vote of four ( 4) members of the Board shall be necessary to vary the
application of the Zoning Regulations.
l 0.4.E Additional Considerations for Use Variances.
1. No use variance shall be granted where a dimensional variance would relieve the
exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
2. No use variance for a business use or an industrial use shall be granted in a Residential
Zone.
3. No use variance shall be granted for an industrial use in any Business or Special Zone.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
205
A use variance shall
would be rendered
be granted where. without the use variance, the property
any Use Variance application, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall refer the application
to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Board shall provide the Planning and
Zoning Commission with 35 days to review and comment on the application.
10.4.F Action Documentation.
1. Whenever it grants or denies a Variance Application, the Board shall state upon its records:
(1) the Regulation which is varied in its application, and
(2) a general description of the exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship on which its
decision is based.
2. Notice of the decision of the Board shall be sent by certified mail to any person who
appeals to the Board within 15 days after such decision has been rendered.
3. Such notice shall:
(1) state the name of the owner ofrecord,
(2) contain a description of the premises to which it relates,
(3) state the nature of the hardship claimed, and
(4) specify the nature of such variance including the Regulation which is varied in its
application.
4. Notice of the decision of the Board shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in Cromwell within 15 days after such decision has been rendered.
5. In any case in which such notice is not published within such 15 day period. the applicant
may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (I 0) days thereafter.
10.4.G Following Approval.
1. A variance granted by the Board shall only become effective upon the filing of a copy,
certified by the Board, in the land records of the Town in accordance with the provisions of
CGS 8-3d.
2. A variance shall only authorize the particular activity specified in the Board's approval.
10.5 MOTOR VEHICLE LOCATION APPROVAL (BOARD)
10.5.A Application Requirements Dealing and Repairing Motor Vehicles.
Jn accordance with CGS 14-54, an application for a Certificate of Location Approval shall be submitted to the
Board by any person who desires to obtain a license for dealing in or repairing motor vehicles in Cromwell
except that this requirement shall not apply to:
1. a transfer of ownership to a spouse, child, brother, sister or parent of a licensee;
2. a transfer of ownership to or from a corporation in which a spouse, child, brother, sister, or
parent of a licensee has a controlling interest; or
3. a change in ownership involving the withdrawal of one ( 1) or more partners from a
partnership.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
206
1. an a
desires to obtain a license
9, including the alteration or
purposes, except that this requirement shall not apply:
1. in the case of a renewal of a license by the holder of the license;
2. to the transfer of the last issued license from one person to another provided no more than
one ( 1) year has elapsed since the expiration of such license; or
3. in the case of the addition or discontinuance of pumps.
10.5.C Proceedings.
to the
In reviewing a Certificate of Location Approval application, the Board acts as an agent of the State of
Connecticut, not in a zoning capacity, and the notice provisions and other provisions of CGS Chapter 124 not
apply. As an agent of the State of Connecticut, the Board serves solely to determine whether a Certificate of
Location Approval should be issued based upon such considerations as:
1. whether the use is permitted in the zoning district;
2. the suitability of the location in view of traffic, intersecting streets, width of highway,
effect on public travel, and other conditions;
3. the relationship of the proposed use or operation with respect to schools, churches, theaters,
playhouses or other places of public gathering;
4. whether the proposed use of the location would imperil the safety and welfare of the public;
5. whether the proposed use of the location would have a detrimental effect on the value of
nearby properties or development thereof; or
6. whether there has been a material change in conditions which might reverse a decision of
granting or denying a previous application.
10.5.D Public Hearing May Be Held.
The Board may hold a public hearing on the Certificate of Location Approval application and, if such hearing
is to be held:
1. shall publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.1 O.F of these
Regulations, and
2. may require that the applicant give notice to nearby property owners in accordance with the
requirements of Section 8.1 O.G of these Regulations.
3. Shall require the applicant to post a sign in accordance with Section 8.1 O.H of these
regulations.
10.5.E Withdrawal of Application.
The applicant may withdraw such Certificate of Location Approval Application at any time prior to action by
the Board.
Cromwell Zoning Regulations j 8.25.2015
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
207
