THE CODE OF ENFIELD, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
Adopted February 21, 2006 
Effective March 23, 2006 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the Town Council 
> 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
ENFIELD, CONNECTICUT 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Patrick L. Tallarita 
Mayor 
____________ 
Brian H. Peruta, District I 
William J. Edgar, Jr., District II 
Scott R. Kaupin, District III 
Douglas C. Maxellon, District IV 
District Councilmen 
____________ 
Patrick Joseph Crowley 
Kenneth Hilinski, Deputy Mayor 
William F. Lee 
Cynthia Mangini 
Kenneth Robert Nelson, Jr. 
William Ragno 
Councilmen At Large 
____________ 
Scott A. Shanley 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Christopher W. Bromson 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Suzanne F. Olechnicki 
Town Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
ENFIELD, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
Scott R. Kaupin 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ken R. Nelson Jr. 
Deputy Mayor 
____________ 
Joseph C. Bosco, District I 
William J. Edgar, Jr., District II 
Thomas Edmund Kienzler, II, District IV 
District Councilmen 
____________ 
Thomas Arnone 
Patrick Joseph Crowley 
Carol A. Hall 
William F. Lee 
Cynthia Mangini 
Gregory T. Stokes, Sr. 
Councilmen At Large 
____________ 
Matthew W. Coppler 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Kevin M. Deneen 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Suzanne F. Olechnicki 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Enfield, Connecticut. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1967 Code, as supplemented through September 8, 1998, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Senior Code Attorney, and William B. Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Suzanne F. Olechnicki, Town Clerk, and Ms. Maria N. Stavropoulos, Assistant Town Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Enfield, Connecticut. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Enfield, Connecticut. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Enfield, Connecticut. 2005. ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 06-1 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Town Of Enfield, Connecticut; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective 
Be it Ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Enfield, Connecticut: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Enfield, Connecticut," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 86, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 17, 2005, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any other ordinance or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the town under authority vested in him or it by law or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $25.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 17, 2005, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective on the 23rd day of March 2006. 
    Passed and adopted by the town council of the Town of Enfield, Connecticut this 21st day of February, 2006. 
Town of Enfield 
/s/ ___________ 
  Christopher W. Bromson, 
  Acting Town Manager 
ATTEST: 
/s/ ___________ 
  Suzanne F. Olechnicki, 
  Town Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. XZA 10-02  4- 1-2010 Included 5 10-5  6-21-2010 Included 5 10-6 11- 8-2010 Included 5 XZA 10-06  4- 1-2010 Included 5 XZA 10-11  7- 8-2010 Included 5 XZA 11-01  3- 3-2011 Included 5 11-1  6-20-2011 Included 6 XZA 11-10  6-16-2011 Included 6 XZA 11-23  1-19-2012 Included 6 XZA 11-24  1-19-2012 Included 6 XZA 11-25  1-19-2012 Included 6 12-1  3-19-2012 Included 6 XZA 11-26  3- 1-2012 Included 7 XZA 12-02  5- 3-2012 Included 7 XZA 12-05  6-21-2012 Included 7 PH 2747  7- 5-2012 Included 7 XZA 12-08 11- 1-2012 Included 7 13-1  3- 4-2013 Included 7 XZA 13-03  3-21-2013 Included 7 13-2  6- 3-2013 Included 8 13-3 10-21-2013 Included 8 Ord. of  2-24-2014 Included 8 14-1  3-17-2014 Included 8 14-2  7- 7-2014 Included 9 14-3  9-15-2014 Included 9 14-4 10- 6-2014 Included 9 14-5 10-20-2014 Included 9 Ord. of 11- 4-2014 Included 9 XZA 14-12 12- 8-2014 Included 9 14-6 12-15-2014 Included 9 14-7 12-15-2014 Included 9 XZA 15-01  1-22-15 Included 9 15-1 10- 5-2015 Included 10 XZA 15-11 12-10-2015 Included 10 16-1  2- 1-2016 Included 10 16-2  3-21-2016 Included 10 16-3  3-21-2016 Included 10 XZA 16-02  5- 9-2016 Included 11 XZA 16-03  5- 9-2016 Included 11 16-4  8- 1-2016 Included 11 16-5 10-17-2016 Included 11 17-1  1- 3-2017 Included 11 17-2  6- 5-2017 Included 12 17-3  6- 5-2017 Included 12 XZA 17-01  7-14-2017 Included 12 XZA 17-02  7-14-2017 Included 12 17-4  9-18-2017 Included 12 17-5 12-18-2017 Included 12 18-1  1- 2-2018 Included 12 18-2  4-16-2018 Included 12 Ord. of  9-21-2018 Included 12 18-3 12-17-2018 Included 12  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
CHARTER FOR THE TOWN OF ENFIELD 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the town Charter, as approved by referendum November 4, 2014 , and effective on November 10, 2014. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Changes pursuant to instructions by the town have also been made. Part I of the 1967 town Code originally contained the revised Charter approved by referendum on November 2, 1982. The Enfield Town Charter was originally approved by the voters on December 5, 1962, and was revised as approved by referendum on November 5, 1968; November 5, 1974; November 2, 1982; and November 5, 1996. 

CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS 

Section 1. - Incorporation. 
    All the inhabitants dwelling within the territorial limits of the Town of Enfield, as heretofore constituted, shall continue to be the body politic and corporate under the name of "The Town of Enfield", hereinafter called the town, and as such shall have perpetual succession and may hold and exercise all powers and privileges heretofore exercised by said town and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, the additional powers and privileges herein conferred and all powers and privileges conferred upon towns under the general law of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 2. - Rights and obligations. 
    All property, both real and personal, all rights of action and rights of every description and all securities and liens vested or inchoate in said town as of the effective date of this Charter are continued in said town and said town shall continue to be liable for all debts and obligations of every kind for which said town shall be liable on said date, whether accrued or not. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the rights of said town to collect any assessment, charge, debt or lien. If any contract has been entered into by said town prior to the effective date of this Charter or any bond or undertaking has been given by or in favor of said town which contains provisions that the same may be enforced by any commission, board, department or officer therein named which is abolished by the provisions of this Charter, such contracts, bonds or undertakings shall in no manner be impaired but shall continue in full force and effect and the powers conferred and the duties imposed with reference to the same upon any such commission, board, department or officer shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, thereafter be exercised and discharged by the manager of said town. 
Section 3. - General grant of powers. 
    In addition to all powers granted to towns under the Constitution and General Statutes, the town shall have all powers specifically granted by this Charter and all powers fairly implied in or incident to the powers expressly granted and all other powers incident to the management of the property, government and affairs of the town, including the power to enter into contracts with the United States or any federal agency, State of Connecticut or any political subdivision thereof for services and the use of facilities, the exercise of which is not expressly forbidden by the Constitution and General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. The enumeration of particular powers in this and any other chapter of this Charter shall not be construed as limiting this general grant of power but shall be considered as an addition thereto. 
CHAPTER II. - OFFICERS AND ELECTIONS 

Section 1. - General. 
    Nomination and election of federal, state and local officers, state senators and representatives, judge of probate, two (2) registrars of voters and constables, shall be conducted, and the registrars of voters shall prepare lists of electors qualified to vote therefor, in the manner prescribed in the Constitution and the general laws of the State of Connecticut, except as hereinafter provided. 
Section 2. - Municipal elections. 
    A meeting of the electors of the Town of Enfield for the election of municipal officers shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1969, and biennially thereafter. 
(a)  At such meeting there shall be elected eleven (11) members of the Enfield town council for terms of two (2) years as hereinafter provided: one (1) councilor for District One (1), one (1) councilor for District Two (2), one (1) councilor for District Three (3), one (1) councilor for District Four (4), and seven (7) at-large, no more than four (4) of whom shall be of the same political party. 
(b)  In 1973, and biennially thereafter, at such meeting there shall be elected nine (9) members of the Enfield board of education, no more than five (5) of whom shall be of the same political party, for terms of two (2) years. 
(c)  All elective officers shall hold office until their successors have been chosen and qualified. 
Section 3. - Eligibility. 
    No person shall be eligible for election to any town office who is not at the time of their nomination and election qualified to vote for that office and any person ceasing to be a resident and elector of said town, or in the case of district councilor, their district, shall thereupon cease to hold such elective office in the Town of Enfield. 
Section 4. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in any elective town office, including the board of education, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the town council within sixty (60) days of the date of the vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term or until the next biennial municipal election, whichever shall be sooner, provided that when the person vacating the office shall have been elected as a member of a political party, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment of a member of the same political party. 
Section 5. - Altering district boundaries. 
(a)  Council districts. The council shall, from time to time, or as required by law, alter the boundaries of the council districts by resolution approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at a town referendum, held for that purpose. Such change shall not take effect until the next municipal primary or election. Any change in the boundaries of council districts made within ninety (90) days prior to any election or primary shall not apply with respect to such primary or election. 
(b)  Voting districts. The council may divide and from time to time re-divide the town into voting districts, hereinafter called precincts, within the provisions of G.S. § 9-169. Precinct lines shall not be drawn as to conflict with the lines of council districts as established by the council in section 5, part (a) of this chapter. 
CHAPTER III. - THE TOWN COUNCIL 

Section 1. - The council. 
    There shall be a town council consisting of eleven (11) members, hereinafter referred to as the council, the members of which shall serve without compensation except for the reimbursement of actual expenses incurred in the performance of official duties for two (2) years. 
Section 2. - Chair. 
    The council shall meet on the second Monday in November, 1969, and biennially thereafter for an organizational meeting. At such meeting, the council shall choose one of its members to preside as chair over the council, who shall bear the title of Mayor. At the same meeting, the council shall choose one of its members to act as chair of the council during the absence of the Mayor, who shall bear the title of Deputy Mayor. The holding of either of such offices shall not deprive the council member of a vote on any questions. The Mayor, or the Deputy Mayor, in the mayor's absence, shall preside over all meetings of the council, perform such other duties as are consistent with the office and be recognized as the official head of the town for ceremonial purposes, military purposes, and for the purpose of serving civil process. 
Section 3. - Town clerk. 
    The town clerk shall act as clerk of the council and shall keep a public record of all proceedings of the council, including roll call votes. At the meeting of the council on the second Monday in November, 1969, and biennially thereafter, the town clerk shall preside until the council has elected a chair. 
Section 4. - Procedure. 
    At the first meeting of the council following the town election, the town council shall fix the time and place of its regular meeting, which shall not be less than once each month and shall provide a method for the calling of special meetings. It shall determine its own rules of procedure. All meetings of the council for the transaction of business shall be open to the public and the votes shall be recorded as prescribed in the General Statutes, as revised. Six (6) members shall constitute a quorum, but no ordinance, resolution, or vote, except a vote to adjourn or to fix the time and place of the next meeting, shall be adopted by less than six (6) affirmative votes. All ordinances and resolutions shall be confined to one subject which shall be clearly stated in the title. The council shall keep for public inspection a record as required in section 3 of this chapter which shall be the official record of its proceedings. The record so kept shall be authenticated for each meeting by the signature of the chair or the clerk of the council. 
Section 5. - General powers and duties. 
    The council shall have the powers and duties which on the effective date of this Charter were conferred by law upon boards, officers and commissions of said town existing immediately prior to such date except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter. The legislative power of the town shall be vested exclusively in the council. Said council shall have the power to enact, amend, or repeal ordinances not inconsistent with this Charter or the General Statutes of the state; to create or abolish boards, commissions, departments, and offices; and the council may, upon recommendation of the manager, contract for services and the use of facilities of the United States or any federal agency, the State of Connecticut or any political subdivision thereof, or may, by agreement, join with any such political subdivisions to provide services and facilities. The council is authorized, in adopting ordinances, to incorporate any nationally recognized code, rules and regulations that have been printed in book form, or any code officially adopted by any administrative agency of the state, or any portion thereof, by reference thereto in such ordinance; provided, upon adoption of any such ordinance wherein any such code, rules and regulations or portions thereof have been incorporated by reference, there shall be maintained two (2) copies of such code, rules and regulations in the office of the town clerk for examination by the public. Said council may regulate the internal operation of boards, commissions and offices which it fills by appointment, and fix the compensation of the registrars of voters and the officers and employees appointed by it. Said council may fix the charges, if any, to be made for services rendered by the town or for the execution of powers vested in the town as provided in Chapter I of this Charter. Said council may further establish a hearing procedure for the removal of any of its appointees. 
Section 6. - Public hearing on and publication of ordinances. 
    At least one (1) public hearing, prior notice of which shall be given, not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than five (5) days, by publication electronically or as required by law, and in a newspaper having a circulation in said town, and by posting a notice and the full text of the ordinance in public places, including, but not limited to, Town Hall and the Central Library, shall be held by the council before any ordinance shall be passed. Every ordinance after passage shall be given a serial number and be recorded by the town clerk in a book to be kept for that purpose which shall be properly indexed. Within ten (10) days after final passage, all ordinances shall be published once in their entirety electronically or as required by law, and in a newspaper having a circulation within the town. Every ordinance, unless it shall specify a later date, shall become effective on the fifteenth day following its final passage, provided an ordinance stated to be a public emergency measure and stating the facts constituting such public emergency shall become effective immediately after such publication and no public hearing or notice of public hearing shall be required for any public emergency measure. 
Section 7. - Power of initiative. 
(a)  The electors shall have the power to propose to the council any ordinance or repeal of a vote, resolution or ordinance except an ordinance or resolution appointing or removing officials, specifying the compensation or hours of work of officials and employees, appropriating money, authorizing the levy of taxes, or fixing the tax rate. 
(b)  If the council fails to adopt such ordinance or other measure within thirty (30) days after a petition, as set forth in section (c) below, making such a proposal shall have been filed with the council, the electors may adopt or reject the same at any election held within ninety (90) days after such proposed ordinance or measure was originally filed with the council. 
(c)  Such petition shall contain the full text of the vote, resolution or ordinance proposed to be passed or repealed and shall be signed in ink or indelible pencil by qualified electors of the town equal in number to at least seven (7) percent of the registered voters eligible to vote at the last biennial municipal election. Said petition shall be accompanied by affidavits signed and sworn to by each circulator of such petition certifying to the authenticity of the signatures on such petitions. 
(d)  Prior to circulating any such petition, an elector may, but is not required to, submit such proposed ordinance, repeal of a vote, resolution or ordinance to the Town Attorney's Office to be examined by the Town Attorney before being circulated. The Town Attorney is authorized to correct the form of such proposed petition for the purpose of avoiding repetitions, illegalities and unconstitutional provisions and to assure accuracy in its text and reference and clearness and preciseness in its phraseology but not materially changing its meaning and effect. If the Town Attorney should determine that the proposed petition is in violation of this Charter, the general statutes or constitution of the State of Connecticut or of the United States, the Town Attorney shall return said petition to the elector together with a statement of the reason or reasons for such determination. 
(e)  The registrar of voters shall determine the sufficiency of the petition and the affidavits and certify the same to the town clerk as clerk of the council within ten (10) days of receipt thereof. Certification to the town clerk shall be deemed to be filing with the council for the purposes of this section. 
(f)  Unless at least twenty (20) percent of the electors entitled to vote on the question shall have voted, such proposed ordinance or measure shall not become effective and the result shall be construed as against adoption. No ordinance or other measure which shall have been adopted in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be repealed or amended by the council except by petition and vote of the electors. 
Section 8. - Investigation. 
    The council shall have the power to investigate any and all departments, offices, and agencies of the town and for such purposes shall have the power to issue subpoenas. At the request of the council, any judge may issue a capias for the appearance of witnesses and the production of books and papers. 
Section 9. - Relation to administrative service. 
    Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to any office or employment, or direct or request the removal of any person from any office or employment which office or employment, by the provisions of this Charter, the manager or any of his appointees are empowered to fill by appointment, provided the manager may seek advice from the council regarding appointments and provided further the council may prefer charges in writing against any officer or employee appointed by the manager in the manner hereinafter prescribed for the removal of officers and employees. The council and its members deal with the administrative service solely through the manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the manager either publicly or privately, provided a properly constituted meeting of the council, which the manager has been invited to attend, may call before it any employee or officer for the purpose of investigation. Any councilor violating the provisions of this section, upon a finding thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction shall cease to be a councilor. 
Section 10. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the town shall be July first to June thirtieth, inclusive. 
Section 11. - Audit report. 
    The council shall annually designate an independent public accountant or firm of independent public accountants to audit the books and accounts of the town as provided in the General Statutes, as revised, of the State of Connecticut. Such independent public accountant or firm of independent public accountants shall not serve for more than three (3) consecutive years. 
CHAPTER IV. - THE TOWN MANAGER 

Section 1. - Appointment and removal. 
(a)  The council shall appoint a town manager hereinafter referred to as the Manager who shall be the chief executive officer of the town to serve for an indefinite period, who shall be a graduate, with a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university, whose major field of study shall have been public administration or government and who shall have a minimum of five (5) years' experience in public administration. At the time of appointment, said manager need not be a resident of the Town of Enfield or the State of Connecticut. The manager shall devote full time to the duties of the office, and during the term of office, shall reside in said town. The compensation of the town manager shall be fixed by the council and shall not be decreased except at the beginning of a fiscal year of the town by a vote of the council taken at least one month prior to that date. 
(b)  The manager may be removed by a majority vote of all the members of the council as herein provided. At least thirty (30) days before the proposed removal of the manager, the council shall adopt a resolution stating its intention of removal, and reasons therefor, a copy of which shall be served forthwith on the manager who may, within ten (10) days, demand a public hearing in which event the manager shall not be removed until such public hearing has been held. Such public hearing shall be held within ten (10) days of the proposed removal date. Upon passage of such a resolution the council may suspend said manager from duty provided the salary of said manager shall continue until removal from office. In the event of such removal the manager shall be given termination pay equivalent to one month's salary. 
Section 2. - Resignation, death or removal. 
    In the event of a termination of the town manager by resignation, death or removal, the council may appoint an acting manager to serve at the pleasure of the council for a period of ninety (90) days. If the position is not filled at the expiration of this ninety (90) day period, the acting manager's term may be renewed for one additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
Section 3. - Duties. 
    The town manager shall be directly responsible to the council for the administration of all departments, agencies and offices in charge of persons or boards appointed by the manager and shall supervise and direct the same. The manager shall see that all laws and ordinances governing the town are faithfully executed; shall make periodic reports to the council; shall attend its meetings with full right of participation in its discussion but without a right to vote; shall prepare and cause to be printed, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year, an annual town report; shall recommend to the council such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; shall keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition of the town; shall prepare and submit to the council an annual budget; and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance or by resolution of the council and not inconsistent with this Charter. 
Section 4. - Appointments. 
    The manager shall appoint all department heads and other officers and employees of the town except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter and except employees in the offices of elected officers and boards appointed by the council. In lieu of any appointment by the manager or any of the manager's appointees to any office under their jurisdiction, the manager, subject to the approval of the council, may perform the duties of any office under the manager's jurisdiction except those of town treasurer, provided in case the town treasurer is absent or unable to act, the manager may countersign checks in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The manager shall designate one of the manager's appointees to serve as acting manager during the manager's absence. 
CHAPTER V. - APPOINTMENTS BY THE TOWN COUNCIL AND THE MANAGER 

Section 1. - Town attorney. 
    The council shall, by majority vote at a meeting to be held, by the second Monday in December following the council elections, appoint a town attorney to serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of their appointment, January first. The town attorney shall be an attorney admitted to practice law in the state of Connecticut for a minimum of five (5) years. The town attorney shall be head of the town legal department and shall appear for and protect the rights of the town in all actions, suits or proceedings brought by or against it or any of its departments, officers, agencies, boards or commissions. The town attorney shall be the legal advisor of the council, the town manager and other town officers, boards and commissions in all matters affecting the town and shall upon written request furnish them with a written opinion on any questions involving their respective powers and duties. The town attorney shall prepare or approve the legality of contracts and other instruments to which the town is a part or in which it has an interest except the issuance of bonds for which special counsel is retained. The town attorney shall have power, with the approval of the town manager, to appeal orders, decisions, and judgments and, subject to the approval of the council, to compromise or settle any claims by or against the town. The town attorney shall receive a compensation set by the council. 
Section 2. - Planning and zoning commission. 
    The council shall, by a majority vote at a meeting to be held by the second Monday in December following the council elections, appoint a planning and zoning commission to take office the following January first, consisting of seven (7) electors who shall be regular members of the commission, and three (3) electors who shall be alternate members of the commission, all of whom shall be residents of said town in accordance with the following provisions: No more than four (4) of the regular members shall be of the same political party and no more than two (2) of the alternate members shall be of the same political party; and at said meeting the council shall appoint three (3) regular members for a term of two (2) years, four (4) regular members for a term of four (4) years, one (1) alternate member for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) alternate members for a term of four (4) years, and thereafter the council shall fill the vacancies occurring on said commission. Said commission shall have all the powers and duties not inconsistent with this Charter, which are prescribed in the General Statutes. 
Section 3. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The council shall, by a majority vote at a meeting to be held by the second Monday in December following the council elections, appoint a zoning board of appeals to take office on the following January first, consisting of five (5) electors, who shall be regular members of said board, and three (3) electors, who shall be alternate members of said board, all of whom shall be residents of said town, in accordance with the following provisions: No more than three (3) of the regular members shall be of the same political party and no more than two (2) of the alternate members shall be of the same political party; and at said meeting the council shall appoint two (2) regular members for a term of two (2) years, and three (3) regular members for a term of four (4) years, one (1) alternate member for a term of two (2) years and two (2) alternate members for a term of four (4) years, and thereafter the council shall fill the vacancies occurring on said board. No member of the planning and zoning commission shall be eligible for appointment to the zoning board of appeals as a regular or an alternate member. Said board shall have the powers and duties, not inconsistent with this Charter, which are prescribed in the General Statutes, as revised. 
Section 4. - Board of assessment appeals. 
    The council shall, by a majority vote at a meeting to be held by the second Monday in December following council elections, appoint a board of assessment appeals to take office on the following January first, consisting of three (3) electors for terms of three (3) years, except that of those first appointed; one (1) shall be for a term of one (1) year, one (1) for a term of two (2) years, and one (1) for a term of three (3) years. Annually thereafter, the council shall appoint one member to succeed the member whose term expires. Said board shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed by the General Statutes on boards of assessment appeals. 
Section 5. - Library, board of library trustees. 
    The council shall, by a majority vote at a meeting to be held by the second Monday in December following elections appoint a library board of trustees to take office on the following January first, consisting of five (5) electors for terms of three (3) years, except that of those first appointed; two (2) shall be for a term of one (1) year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years, and one (1)- for a term of three (3) years. Annually thereafter the council shall fill the vacancy occurring. Said board shall be empowered to receive legacies and gifts on behalf of the library endowment funds and shall administer said endowment funds and grants that may be made to the libraries by the State of Connecticut. The department of finance shall have charge of financial record-keeping for the board of library trustees. Said board shall not take part in the administration and operations of libraries. 
Section 6. - Town clerk. 
    The manager shall appoint and may remove a town clerk for an indefinite term. The town clerk shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed by law on town clerks, shall act as clerk of the town council, and shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed in this Charter or by the council. The town clerk shall appoint and remove, subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to the merit system provisions of this Charter, all deputies, assistants or employees in their office. The town clerk shall receive a compensation fixed by the council and fees collected by the town clerk shall be paid into the town treasury. 
Section 7. - Administrative departments. 
    There shall be the following administrative departments: A department of finance, a department of public works, a department of public safety, a department of social services and a department of libraries. Such departments shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, have the powers and duties prescribed by law and by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
Section 8. - Department of finance. 
    The department of finance shall be responsible for the keeping of the accounts and financial records, the assessment and collection of taxes, special assessments and other revenues, the custody and disbursement of town funds and money, the control over expenditures and such other powers and duties as may be required by ordinance or resolution of the council. Accounts shall be kept by the department of finance showing the financial transactions for all departments and agencies of the town. Forms for such accounts shall be prescribed by the director of finance with the approval of the town manager. Financial reports shall be prepared for each quarter and for each fiscal year and for such other periods as may be required by the town manager. 
(a)  The director of finance; powers and duties. Except as provided in Chapter IV, section 3 of this Charter, the manager shall appoint and may remove a director of finance who shall have direct supervision over the department of finance and the administration of the financial affairs of the town. The director of finance shall appoint and may remove, subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to the merit system provisions of this Charter, a tax collector, an assessor, a town treasurer, a purchasing agent, and all other employees of the department of finance. Subject to the approval of the manager, the director of finance may perform the duties of any office under the director's supervision except that of the treasurer and may consolidate one or more such offices under one person, provided the town treasurer shall not also be the tax collector, or the purchasing agent. 
(b)  The tax collector, assessor, and treasurer shall have the powers and duties imposed by law on such officers and shall have such other powers and duties as the council may prescribe, provided the treasurer in addition shall be the agent of the town deposit fund. 
(c)  The purchasing agent of the town shall purchase all supplies, materials, equipment and other commodities required by any department, agency, board or commission of the town, except the board of education and the probate court, on requisitions signed by the head of the department, office or agency or chairman of the board or commission, or a responsible representative appointed by the purchasing agent. 
(d)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the town purchasing agent from serving to the extent requested as the purchasing agent for the board of education or the probate court upon request of the chairman of the board or judge of such court. Purchases shall be made under such rules and regulations as may be established by the council provided, if any purchase or contract for purchasing, including a continuing order or contract for the purchase of the same commodity over a period of time involves the expenditure of fifteen thousand ($15,000.00) dollars or more unless it can be procured through a competitive bid process conducted by Federal or State agency, or consortium of local governments, or more, the purchasing agent, unless it shall be determined by the council to be against the best interests of the town, shall invite sealed bids or proposals, given ten (10) days' public notice thereof by publication electronically or as required by law, and at least once in a newspaper having circulation in the town and shall let the purchase or contract to the lowest responsible bidder thereon or may reject all such bids or proposals with a detailed explanation provided for such action. All such sealed bids or proposals shall be opened publicly and read aloud. Wherever substantial savings can be realized the purchasing agent may enter into cooperative biddings. 
Section 9. - Department of public works. 
    The department of public works shall have supervision and control of maintenance of all town owned structures, except such structures as are under the control of the board of education, and of the planning, surveying, constructing, reconstructing, altering, paving, repairing, maintaining, cleaning, lighting and inspection of highways, sidewalks and curbs, sewers, sewage disposal, public and private drains and other public improvements, town buildings, and the preservation, care and removal of trees within highways or public places, all engineering work of the town and all solid waste collection and disposal, recycling, and solid waste division. The department shall have supervision and control of all parks and grounds used for park purposes belonging to the town, and of buildings, structures, apparatus and equipment used in connection therewith and shall have such other powers and duties as the council may prescribe. Any provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the department of public works may maintain and care for school buildings and grounds, but only if and to the extent and for the period requested by the board of education and as approved by the council. 
(a)  The director of public works; powers and duties. Except as provided in Chapter IV, section 4, of this Charter, the manager shall appoint and may remove a director of public works who shall be a professionally qualified by education and experience, who shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department and who in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to the merit system provisions of this Charter shall appoint and may remove such deputies, assistants and employees as deemed necessary and shall prescribe their duties. The director of public works shall be the ward and have all the powers and duties thereof as provided by the General Statutes. The director of public works shall exercise these powers and discharge these duties under the supervision of the manager. The director of public works shall organize the work of the department in an economical and efficient manner. 
Section 10. - Department of public safety. 
    The department of public safety shall have supervision and control of the division of police, the division of fire, the division of emergency medical services and the division of emergency management. Except as provided in Chapter IV, section 4, of this Charter, the manager shall appoint and may remove a director of public safety who shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department. The Director of Public Safety shall be responsible to the Town Manager for all fiscal, administrative, personnel and operational matters for all divisions within the Department of Public Safety. The division heads shall consult with the Director on all such matters. In the event that the Director of Public Safety has not been appointed or is temporarily absent or disabled, the Town Manager shall serve as the Director of Public Safety. Said director, or with the director's approval, the appropriate division head in said department, in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to the merit system provisions of this Charter, shall appoint and may remove such assistants and employees as are authorized within said department. The director of public safety shall be the traffic authority as defined in the General Statutes. Said director shall appoint and also may remove the animal control officer. 
(a)  Division of police. There shall be a division of police consisting of the chief of police and such other officers and employees of such ranks and grades as the council may determine. The division of police shall be responsible for the preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, regulation of traffic, protection of rights of persons and property and enforcement of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the town and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith. All members of the division of police shall have the same powers and duties with respect to the service of criminal process and enforcement of criminal laws as are vested in police officers by the General Statutes. The appointment and removal of the chief of police shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter and of the General Statutes as revised. The chief of police shall be the executive officer of the division of police. The chief of police shall assign all members of the division to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. The chief of police shall be responsible for the care and custody of all property used by the division and for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of its members. The chief of police shall make rules for the operation of the division and the conduct of the police work, subject to the approval of the director of public safety. The violation of these rules by any member of the division shall be punishable by appropriate disciplinary action which may include loss of pay, suspension from duty and removal, provided that no member of the division shall be suspended by the chief for more than ten (10) days without approval of the director of public safety and no suspension for more than thirty (30) days or removal shall be made except in accordance with the provisions relating to the merit system. 
(b)  Division of fire. It is the intent of this Charter that fire protection shall continue to be provided by the fire districts heretofore established in the town by State law. The town reserves the right to establish a town fire department for any part of the town not within a fire district, in accordance with the General Statutes. 
(c)  Appointment of a fire chief. In the event of the establishment of a fire department under the provisions of this Charter, the director of Public Safety shall appoint, with the approval of the town manager, a fire chief who shall be the executive head of the fire department and as such shall have charge and control under the direction of the director, of the administration and discipline of the fire department and of the buildings, property and apparatus and equipment thereof. The appointment and removal of the fire chief shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter and of the General Statutes, as revised. 
(d)  Power of director for portions of town not included within any fire district. The director of the department may, if the interests of the town shall so require, with the approval of the town manager, with respect to all portions of the town not included in the limits of any fire district, make rules and regulations relating to fire protection therein and enter into agreement with any municipality, fire district or districts for aid in extinguishing fire in the town outside of any fire district. All sums payable under such agreement, rules or regulations, shall be paid by the town treasurer upon order of the director. 
(e)  Assumption of fire protection service. If the interest of the town shall so require, the council may enter into agreement with any fire district, prior to the termination of said district, whereby the fire protection service of said district, or any other service or functions thereof, shall be assumed by the town, in which event the provisions of this Charter with respect to such service shall take effect in the same manner as though said fire district or districts were terminated. 
(f)  Division of Emergency Medical Services. There may be a division of emergency medical services consisting of the director of emergency medical services and such other officers and employees of such ranks and grades as the council may determine. The Division of Emergency Medical Services shall perform such functions and have such powers and duties as are conferred and imposed by the General Statutes. The appointment and removal of the director of emergency medical services shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter and of the General Statutes as revised. The director shall be the executive officer of the division. The director shall make rules for the operation of the division and the conduct of the medical work, subject to the approval of the director of public safety. The violation of these rules by any member of the division shall be punishable by appropriate disciplinary action which may include loss of pay, suspension from duty and removal, provided that no member of the division shall be suspended by the director for more than ten (10) days without approval of the director of public safety and no suspension for more than thirty (30) days or removal shall be made except in accordance with the provisions relating to the merit system. 
(g)  Division of Emergency Management. There shall be a division of emergency management consisting of the director of emergency management (which may be the director of public safety) and such other officers and employees of such ranks and grades as the council may determine. The Division of Emergency Management shall perform such functions and have such powers and duties as are conferred and imposed by the General Statutes. The appointment and removal of the director of emergency management shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter and of the General Statutes as revised. The director shall be the executive officer of the division. 
Section 11. - Department of social services. 
    The manager shall appoint and may remove a director of social services who shall be professionally qualified by education and experience and who shall be responsible to the town manager. The director of social services shall be the head of the social services department, and shall have the duty of assisting and advising the town manager and working with all departments to answer to social, health and welfare needs of the community. The director shall appoint and may remove, subject to such rules and regulations as are adopted pursuant to the merit system provisions of this Charter, all other officers and employees of the department. 
Section 12. - Department of libraries. 
    The manager shall appoint and may remove a library director for an indefinite term, who shall be professionally qualified by education and experience and who shall be skilled in library science. Said library director shall have charge of the public libraries of the town. The director shall appoint and may remove, subject to such rules and regulations as are adopted pursuant to the merit system provisions of this Charter, all other officers and employees of the department. 
Section 13. - Official bonds. 
    The town manager, town clerk, director of finance, treasurer, agent of the town deposit fund, tax collector, and such other officers and employees as may be required to do so by the council shall, before entering on their respective official duties, executed to the town in the form prescribed by the council and approved by the town attorney, file with the town clerk a surety company bond in the penal sum to be fixed by the council, conditioned upon the honesty and/or faithful performance of such official duties. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the council, if it deems it to be in the best interest of the town, from prescribing a name schedule bond, schedule position bond, or blanket bond or from prescribing which departments, offices, agencies, boards, or commissions shall be covered by specific types of the aforementioned bonds. Premiums for such bond shall be paid by the town. 
Section 14. - Salaries. 
    Salaries of all directors and other employees of the classified service of the town shall be determined by the council in conformity with a systematic pay plan for the positions involved upon recommendation of the manager, provided nothing herein shall be construed to limit the power of the board of education to fix the compensation of the employees of the school system. 
CHAPTER VI. - FINANCE AND TAXATION 

Section 1. - General form of budget presentation. 
    The manager may or, at the request of the council, shall require each department, office or agency of the town, including the board of education, supported wholly or in part by town funds, or for which a specific town appropriation is made, to set forth in such form as the manager may prescribe a program or programs showing services, activities and work accomplished during the current year and to be accomplished during the ensuing year. 
Section 2. - Departmental estimates. 
    The manager shall compile preliminary estimates for the annual budget. The head of each department or office or agency of the town as described in Section 1, including the board of education shall, at least one hundred and twenty (120) days before the end of the fiscal year, file with the manager on forms prescribed and provided by the manager a detailed estimate of the expenditures to be made by the department or agency and the revenue other than tax revenues to be collected thereby in the ensuing fiscal year and such other information as may be required by the council or the manager. 
Section 3. - Duties of the manager on the budget. 
    Not later than seventy-five (75) days before the end of the fiscal year, the manager shall present to the council a budget consisting of: 
(a)  A budget message outlining the financial policy of the town government and describing in connection therewith the important features of the budget plan. 
(b)  Estimates of revenue, presenting in parallel column itemized receipts collected during the current fiscal year prior to the time of preparing the estimates, total receipts estimated to be collected during the current fiscal year and estimates of receipts, other than from the property tax to be collected in the ensuing fiscal year. 
(c)  Itemized estimated of expenditures, presenting in parallel columns the actual expenditures from each department, office, agency or activity, including the board of education, for the last completed fiscal year and for the current fiscal year prior to the time of preparing the estimates, total expenditures as estimated for the current fiscal year, the requests of the several departments, offices and agencies for the ensuing fiscal year, and the manager's recommendations of the amounts to be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year for all items and such other information as may be required by the council. The manager shall present reasons for all the recommendations. The chairman of the board of education shall have the same duties and follow the same form and procedure with respect to the budget of the board of education as provided in this chapter for department estimates. 
(d)  As part of the annual budget or as a separate report attached thereto the manager shall present a program, previously considered and acted upon by the town planning and zoning commission in accordance with the provisions of the general statutes concerning municipal improvements, of proposed capital projects for the ensuing fiscal year and for the five fiscal years thereafter. Estimates of the cost of such projects shall be submitted by each department, office or agency annually in the form and manner prescribed by the manager. The manager shall recommend to the council those projects to be undertaken during the ensuing fiscal year and the method of financing same. 
Section 4. - Duties of the council on the budget. 
    The council shall hold one or more public hearings not later than sixty (60) days before the end of the fiscal year at which any elector or taxpayer may have an opportunity to be heard regarding appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year. Following receipts of the estimates from the manager, and the chairman of the board of education, the council shall cause sufficient copies of said estimates to be made available for general distribution in the office of the town clerk and at least (5) five days prior to the aforementioned public hearing the council shall cause to be published electronically or as required by law, and in a newspaper having circulation in the town a notice of such public hearing and a summary of said proposed budget estimates showing anticipated revenues by major sources and proposed expenditures by functions or departments in the same columnar form as prescribed for budget estimates in section 3 of this chapter and shall also show the amount to be raised by taxation. Within twenty (20) days after holding the final such public hearing or hearings, the council shall adopt by resolution a budget and file the same with the town clerk. At the time when the council shall adopt the budget it shall also fix the tax rate in mills which shall be levied on taxable property in the town for the ensuing year. Should the council fail to adopt a budget within the specified twenty (20) days, the budget as transmitted by the manager in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of this chapter shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by said council. The tax rate shall forthwith be fixed by the manager and thereafter expenditures shall be made in accordance with the budget so adopted. For the purposes of the general statutes, as revised, the council shall be deemed to be the budget-making authority and the legislative body and duties contained in said chapter for the creation of a "reserved fund for capital and non-recurring expenditures". Appropriations for construction or for other permanent improvements from whatever source derived shall not lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, provided any project shall be deemed abandoned if three (3) fiscal years elapse without any expenditure from or encumbrance of the appropriation therefor. Any portion of an annual appropriation remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the budget year shall lapse. 
Section 5. - Emergency appropriations. 
    Emergency appropriations not exceeding one (1) percent of the current budget in any one fiscal year may be made upon the recommendation of the manager and by a vote of not less than six (6) members of the council for the purpose of meeting a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of the citizens, provided a public hearing at which any elector or taxpayer of the town shall have an opportunity to be heard shall be held prior to making such appropriation, notice of which hearing shall be given electronically or as required by law, and in a newspaper having circulation in the town not more than ten (10) nor less than five (5) days prior to such hearing. Such hearing and notice of hearing may be waived, if the council by a vote of eight (8) of its members shall decide that a delay in making the emergency appropriation would jeopardize the lives, health or property of citizens. In the absence of an available unappropriated and unencumbered general fund cash balance to meet such appropriations, additional means of financing shall be provided in such manner consistent with the provisions of the General Statutes and of this Charter, as may be determined by the council. 
Section 6. - Tax bills. 
    It shall be the duty of the tax collector to prepare and mail tax bills in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, as revised. 
Section 7. - Assessment and collection of taxes. 
    Except as specifically provided in this Charter, the assessment of property for taxation and the collection of taxes shall be carried on as provided in the General Statutes. 
Section 8. - Expenditures and accounting. 
(a)  Purchasing. No purchase shall be made by a department, board, commission or officer of the town other than the board of education or the probate court except through the purchasing agent. The director of finance shall record the amount of authorized purchases and contracts for future purchases as encumbrances against the appropriation from which they are to be paid. 
(b)  Vouchers and charges. No voucher, claim or charge against the town shall be paid until the same has been audited by the director of finance or the director's agent and approved for correctness and validity. Checks shall be drawn by the director of finance for the payment of approved claims which shall be paid only when countersigned by the treasurer. 
(c)  Disability or absence of treasurer. In the absence or the inability to act of either the director of finance or treasurer with respect to the above duty, the manager is authorized to substitute temporarily for either but not both of them. In the absence of the treasurer, the manager is also authorized to countersign checks issued by a duly authorized representative of the board of education. 
(d)  Receipt of funds. The director of finance shall prescribe the time at which and the manner in which persons receiving money on account for the town shall pay the same to the town treasurer. 
(e)  Excess expenditure. The several departments, commissions, officers and boards of the town shall not involve the town in any obligation to spend money for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated therefor until the matter has been approved and voted by the council and each order drawn upon the treasurer shall state the department, commission, board or officer and the appropriation against which it is to be charged. 
(f)  Transfer of funds. When any department, commission, board or officer shall desire to secure a transfer of funds set apart for one specific purpose to another, before incurring any expenditure therefor, such department, commission, board or officer shall make application to the council whose duty it shall be to examine into the matter and upon approval of the council such transfer may be made but not otherwise. Upon the request of the manager, but only within the last six (6) months of the fiscal year, the council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered appropriation, balance or portion thereof from one department, commission, board or office to another. No transfer shall be made from any appropriation for debt service and other statutory charges. 
(g)  Additional appropriations. Additional appropriations over and above the total budget may be made from time to time by resolution of the council upon recommendation of the manager and certification from the director of finance that there is available an unappropriated and unencumbered general fund cash balance to meet such appropriations. 
(h)  Illegal payments. Every payment made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be deemed illegal and every official authorizing or making such payment or taking part therein and every person receiving such payment or any part thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to the town for the amount so paid or received. If any officer or employee of the town shall knowingly incur any obligation or shall authorize or make any expenditure in violation of the provisions of this Charter or take any part therein, such action shall be cause for their removal. 
Section 9. - Referendum on capital expenditure. 
    The council may, by a vote of six (6) or more members, adopt a resolution appropriating money for capital improvements. Any such appropriation that exceeds in any fiscal year 0.0002 (2/100's of one percent) of the current grand list shall not be effective until it shall be submitted to and approved by a referendum. 
Section 10. - Borrowing. 
    The town shall have the power to incur indebtedness by issuing its bonds or notes as provided by the General Statutes, as revised, subject to the limitations thereof and the provisions of this section. The issuance of bonds and notes shall be authorized by resolution in the manner provided herein for the adoption of ordinances only insofar as a public hearing is concerned and, if any such bond issue or issuance of notes in any fiscal years shall exceed 0.0002 (2/100's of one percent) of the current grand list, said bond issue or issuance of notes shall be approved by a referendum vote. 
Section 11. - Contributions. 
    The town shall make no contribution to any organization or private corporation unless so authorized by the General Statutes, as revised. No such contribution of more than five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars shall be made to any such organization or corporation unless the town is represented on its board by one or more members nominated thereto by the council. 
CHAPTER VII. - THE MERIT SYSTEM 

Section 1. - Merit system established. 
    All officers and employees in the classified service of the town as described in section 2 of this chapter, shall be appointed on the basis of merit and in conformity with recognized principles of public personnel administration. 
Section 2. - The classified service. 
    The classified service shall include appointees to all positions now or hereafter created except the following: elective officers and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices, members of the boards and commissions and other persons employed in a professional capacity to make or conduct a temporary and special inquiry, study or investigation, the judge of probate and personnel of the probate court, and persons employed for a temporary period not exceeding three (3) months. It shall be the duty of the manager to cause to be prepared a statement of the duties and responsibilities of each position in the classified service and of the minimum qualifications for appointments to such position. The statements shall comprise the classification plan of the town, which shall become effective upon recommendation of the manager by resolution of the council. New or additional positions in the classified service may be created and changes in the duties and responsibilities of existing positions may be made by resolution of the council upon recommendation of the manager. All appointments and removals in the classified service shall be subject to the approval of the town manager. The manager shall also cause to be prepared a set of personnel rules which shall provide, among other things, for the method of holding competitive examinations, administration of classification plan, probationary periods of employment, hours of work, vacations, sick leave and other leaves of absence, removals and such other rules as may be necessary to provide an adequate and systematic procedure for the handling of the personnel affairs of the town. Such rules and any amendments thereto shall become effective upon being filed by the manager with the town clerk. Copies of such rules and any amendments thereto shall be distributed to all members of the classified service. 
Section 3. - Retirement of municipal employees. 
    The council may provide by ordinance a system of retirement allowances for the town's regular full time paid employees and for the contributions by employees and the town to a fund from which such allowances shall be paid. The town may enter into a contract with any company authorized to do business in the state for the purpose of insuring the whole or any part of its retirement plan, may elect to participate in any applicable Connecticut Municipal Employees Retirement Fund or elect to participate in the old age and survivor insurance system under Title II of the Social Security Act in accordance with the General Statutes, as revised, or may elect any combination thereof. The council may by ordinance provide for compulsory retirement at an age permitted by state statutes. 
CHAPTER VIII. - TRANSITION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - Transfer of powers. 
    The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon any commission, board, department, or office under the General Statutes or special acts concerning the town or any ordinance or regulation in force at the time this Charter shall take effect, if such commission, board or department or office is abolished by this Charter, shall be thereafter exercised and discharged by the commission, board, department or office upon which are imposed corresponding or like functions, powers, and duties under the provisions of this Charter. All commissions, boards, departments or offices abolished by this Charter, whether elective or appointive, shall continue in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made for the discontinuance of such commissions, boards, departments, or offices and the performance of their duties by other commissions, boards, departments or offices created under this Charter and until the town clerk shall have notified the members of such commissions, boards, departments or offices as are abolished by this Charter that their successors have been appointed. All appointive powers now or hereafter conferred by the General Statutes upon boards of selectmen shall be exercised by the town council unless otherwise specifically provided in this Charter. The town council in the Town of Enfield shall continue in office until their successors have been duly elected and qualified at the next municipal election. 
Section 2. - Legal proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending on the effective date of this Charter brought against the town or any commission, board, department or office thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything herein contained, but all such actions or proceedings may be continued notwithstanding that functions, powers, and duties of any commissions, boards, departments or offices party thereto may by or under this Charter be assigned or transferred to another commission, board, department or office but in that event the same may be prosecuted or defended by the head of the commission, board, department, or office to which such functions, powers, and duties have been assigned or transferred by or under this Charter. 
Section 3. - Existing laws and ordinances. 
    All general statutes in their application to the town and all ordinances of the town shall continue in full force and effect, except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. All special acts or parts of special acts relating to the Town of Enfield, except those expressly retained by the provisions of this Charter and those dealing with the establishment of a police benefit fund and police reserve, are hereby repealed. 
Section 4. - Amendment of charter. 
    Ten (10) years following the adoption of these amendments, and every ten (10) years thereafter, unless the council recommends the charter be reviewed sooner, the council shall appoint a commission whose duty it shall be to review the existing charter and make such recommendations as it may see fit for revision. This Charter may be amended in the manner prescribed by law. 
Section 5. - Saving clause. 
    If any section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part thereof so held invalid may appear except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of a section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Section 6. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this Charter is November 10, 2014. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum 
Date Effective 
Date  Section 
this Charter 11- 5-1996 12- 5-1996 Chs. I-VIII 11- 4-2014 11-10-2014 Chs. I-VIII  
PART II - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The related laws set forth in this part are still in effect and are reproduced in chronological order, except for certain amendments, as enacted by the legislature. They remain unchanged except for changes or additions in catchlines, adding section numbers where none appeared and other minor changes for editorial conformity. 

ARTICLE 1. - ESTABLISHING A FIRE DISTRICT IN HAZARDVILLE 
[2]
Footnotes: 

Sec. 1. - School district designated as fire district; powers. 
    That school district number 13 of the Town of Enfield, as now established, including the Village of Hazardville, is hereby constituted a fire district, and is authorized and empowered to provide, maintain, and renew hydrants, pipes, hose, and apparatus for protection from fire of all property situated within its limits; and may rent or purchase land and erect buildings for storage and other purposes; and shall have power to levy taxes on the polls and ratable estate within said district to carry out the purposes of this act. 
(Sp. Acts 1893, No. 495, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Board of fire commissioners-Composition; term; duties. 
    A meeting of the legal voters of said district, to be warned by the present school district committee in the manner now provided by law, shall be held on the third Monday in June, 1893. At said meeting three freeholders and legal voters of said district shall be chosen by ballot, and shall be known as the board of fire commissioners, and shall hold office for one year next following their election, and until their successors are duly chosen; and shall manage all affairs relating to the business made necessary by this act. 
(Sp. Acts 1893, No. 495, § 2; Sp. Acts 1893, No. 533) 
Sec. 3. - Same-Officers. 
    Said board shall choose one of its number as president, and another member of said board as its secretary and treasurer, and shall choose a collector to collect any tax which shall have been levied, and who, after receiving a warrant from said board for the collection of taxes, signed by a justice of the peace, shall have the same powers as collectors of town taxes have, and shall be accountable to said board in the same manner as collectors of town taxes are by law accountable to the selectmen. 
(Sp. Acts 1893, No. 495, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Same-Annual and special meeting. 
    The annual meeting of said district shall be held on the first Monday in June, at which meeting there shall be an election by ballot of three legal voters and freeholders of said district, who shall constitute the board of fire commissioners. Said board shall warn each annual and special meeting of said district by having a copy of the warning inserted in some newspaper printed in Enfield, and by posting a copy of said warning upon the signpost in said district at least five days previous to holding the meeting. 
(Sp. Acts 1893, No. 495, § 4) 
ARTICLE 2. - AN ACT CONCERNING SIDEWALKS AND CURBS 
[3]
Footnotes: 

Sec. 1. - Power of selectmen of Enfield to construct, maintain, etc.; cost to town and abutting owners; lien. 
    The selectmen of the Town of Enfield may construct, maintain, and repair curbs and sidewalks upon the sides of any highway in the Village of Thompsonville which has been, or may hereafter be graded, paved, macadamized or otherwise hardened, and shall assess one-third of the cost of constructing, maintaining, and repairing such curbs and sidewalks, including any damages caused thereby, upon said town, and the other two-thirds thereof upon the owners of the land abutting upon either side of such highway who may be specially benefited thereby. If any assessment of such cost upon any such owner is not paid within sixty days after the completion of said work, it shall become a lien upon said property, which lien shall attach from the time of the commencement of said work, provided a certificate to that effect be filed with the town clerk within ninety days after the completion of said work. Said lien may be foreclosed by the selectmen in the same manner as provided by law for the foreclosure of tax liens. 
(Sp. Acts 1909, No. 129, § 1; Sp. Acts 1911, No. 122) 
Sec. 2. - Disagreement between selectmen and abutting owners as to damages or benefits. 
    In case said selectmen are unable to agree with any abutting landowner as to the amount of damages or benefits, said selectmen, or any landowner interested in the determination of that question may bring a petition to the town court of Enfield setting forth therein the nature of the question in dispute, and said court, after notice to all parties in interest to appear and be heard thereon, shall adjust and determine the amount of damage to be paid and the amount of special benefits accruing to each party interested therein, and shall render judgment and may issue execution for the recovery of the same as in an action at law. Either party aggrieved thereby may appeal to the court of common pleas for Hartford County. 
(Sp. Acts 1909, No. 129, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Area of Thompsonville for purpose of act. 
    For the purposes of this act the Village of Thompsonville shall be considered to embrace all that portion of the Town of Enfield bounded north on Grape Brook, so-called, east on Maple and Enfield Streets, south by the south line of the tract known as Fairview, and west by the Connecticut River, including, however, abutting landowners on both sides of Maple and Enfield Streets. 
(Sp. Acts 1909, No. 129, § 3) 
ARTICLE 3. - AN ACT INCORPORATING THE SHAKER PINES LAKE ASSOCIATION, INCORPORATED 

Sec. 1. - Establishment. 
    This is a special act setting up a certain portion of the Town of Enfield known as "Pine Point Lake" as a body politic and corporate by the name of "Shaker Pines Lake Association, Incorporated." For further provisions relating to the incorporation of this association, see special acts number 375. 
(Sp. Acts 1935, No. 375) 
ARTICLE 4. - AN ACT INCORPORATING THE THOMPSONVILLE FIRE DISTRICT AND CREATING A BOARD OF FIRE COMMISSIONERS THEREIN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Original act approved June 13, 1935. Amendments to section 4 herein were approved April 28, 1937, and July 1, 1953, respectively. Such amendments change the date of the annual meeting of the board of commissioners. 
Charter reference- For charter provisions as to fire protection, ch. V, § 11. 

Sec. 1. - Board of fire commissioners-Composition; terms; election of auditors. 
    At the annual meeting of the Thompsonville Fire and Sewer District in June, 1935, three electors of said district shall be chosen by ballot as a board of fire commissioners. One of said commissioners shall be chosen to serve until February, 1936, one until February, 1937, and one until February, 1938, and, at each subsequent annual meeting of said district to be held as hereinafter provided, one member of said board shall be elected who shall serve for a term of three years and until his successor shall be elected. At said annual meeting and annually thereafter, there shall be elected two auditors for said district who shall audit the records of the tax collector and treasurer of said district and report to the succeeding annual district meeting. 
(Sp. Acts 1935, No. 460, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Same-Officers; meetings generally; appointment of tax collector. 
    Said board of fire commissioners shall, after the annual district meeting in June, 1935, and annually thereafter, elect its own chairman and a secretary, who shall be the secretary and treasurer of the district. Said board of commissioners shall hold at least one regular meeting quarterly and such other special meetings as it shall determine. Said board of commissioners shall annually appoint a district tax collector for said district. Said district tax collector and said district treasurer, before entering upon their duties, shall furnish bonds for the proper performance of their duties, which shall be approved by said board. 
(Sp. Acts 1935, No. 460, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Same-Powers and duties generally. 
    Said board of fire commissioners shall have the authority formerly granted by special legislative acts to The Thompsonville Fire District and to "School District No. 2 of Enfield," and shall reorganize the fire department and make all necessary rules and regulations for the control of the same and the discipline of the members thereof. All apparatus, equipment, buildings and machinery owned and used by The Thompsonville Fire District for protection of property from fire shall be under the control and management of said board. Said board shall appoint a chief of the department, a deputy chief and a superintendent of fire alarms, who shall be subject to such orders, rules and regulations as the board may, from time to time, enact, and may be discharged or removed by said board whenever it shall deem such action for the best interests of the district. 
(Sp. Acts 1935, No. 460, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Date of annual meeting; calling of meetings; district is body politic; powers and duties emanating therefrom. 
    The annual district meeting of The Thompsonville Fire District shall be held on the second or third Thursday of May of each year beginning May, 1954, and notices of such annual meetings and any special meetings which may be called shall be made in the manner prescribed for town meetings. The said Thompsonville Fire District is created a body politic and corporate by the name of The Thompsonville Fire District, and through said board of fire commissioners shall have perpetual succession and shall be a person in law capable of suing and being sued, pleading and being impleaded, purchasing, holding and conveying real and personal estate requisite for the purposes of maintaining a department and for the protection of property within said district from fire and making appropriations for the same, and may, at regular meetings, lay taxes upon ratable estate within the limits of said district for the purposes and objects authorized by this act. 
(Sp. Acts 1935, No. 460, § 4; Sp. Acts 1937, No. 161; Sp. Acts 1953, No. 481) 
Sec. 5. - Description of fire district; qualified electors. 
    The Thompsonville Fire District shall include that area of the Town of Enfield formerly known as "School District No. 2," and all of that land lying south of a line commencing on the bank of the Connecticut River at the south bank of Grape Brook, so called; thence easterly along the south bank of said Grape Brook, so called, to the west line of land formerly of George Rutherford; thence southerly along the west line of land formerly of the said George Rutherford, continuing in a straight line to the north side of Hazard Avenue, so called; thence westerly along said north side of Hazard Avenue to the west side of Enfield Street, so called; thence southerly along the west side of Enfield Street to the north line of land formerly of John Nolan; thence westerly along the north line of land formerly of said John Nolan to the Connecticut River, and the qualified electors of this state residing within said limits and qualified to vote in town affairs shall be electors of said district. 
(Sp. Acts 1935, No. 460, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Fire protection outside fire district. 
    The Thompsonville Fire District, through its board of fire commissioners, is authorized and empowered to furnish and provide protection of property within the Town of Enfield not included within the limits of any organized fire district, upon a petition signed by not less than twenty taxpayers of any area within said town, and upon approval at an annual district meeting, may include such area within the limits of said The Thompsonville Fire District and levy a tax upon property at the same rate and in the same manner as property within the limits of said fire district. 
(Sp. Acts 1935, No. 460, § 6) 
ARTICLE 5. - AN ACT PROVIDING FOR PENSIONS FOR THE PAID MEMBERS OF THE THOMPSONVILLE FIRE DEPARTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- This act was approved May 27, 1947. 

Sec. 1. - Creation of fund; annual minimum appropriation. 
    There is created in The Thompsonville Fire District a fund to be known as the firemen's pension fund. Said fire district shall annually appropriate to said fund a sum of not less than five hundred dollars, the first appropriation to be made at the time of the passage of this act. 
(Sp. Acts 1947, No. 147, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Contributions by firemen. 
    Each member of the Thompsonville fire department who shall be permanently employed by the fire district as a full-time fireman shall pay into said fund a sum equal to five percent of his yearly salary, prorated monthly, which sum shall be deducted from his pay and transmitted to said fund in addition to the annual appropriation of the fire district. 
(Sp. Acts 1947, No. 147, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Control, use, etc., of fund. 
    Said fund shall be under the control of the board of fire commissioners of The Thompsonville Fire District. Said board shall make rules and regulations for the control, investment and deposit of said fund, and are empowered to accept and receive all contributions and donations specifically given to said fund. The secretary-treasurer of said fire district shall receive and deposit all moneys paid into said fund, and shall make such payments as are ordered by said board. 
(Sp. Acts 1947, No. 147, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Eligibility for retirement and pension. 
    When any member of the Thompsonville Fire Department has attained the age of sixty-five years, has served for a period of not less than twenty years as a full-time paid member of said department and has contributed to said fund as provided herein, he shall be retired upon his request on a monthly allotment equal to one-half of the average regular monthly pay received by him during the three years immediately preceding the time of his retirement, or said board of fire commissioners may retire any such member on such monthly allotment by a vote of three of its members in legal meeting assembled. Any full-time paid member of the department may retire as herein provided on account of illness or total or partial incapacity resulting from injury incurred in the discharge of his duty if, after examination by three reputable physicians, any two of them certify in writing that such fireman is unable to perform his duties as a fireman to the full extent. 
(Sp. Acts 1947, No. 147, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Pension in event of death or resignation; discontinuance of fund. 
    In the event of the resignation or death of a full-time paid member of the department prior to the commencement of such retirement, the board of fire commissioners shall pay to him or to his representative an amount equal to his total contributions paid under this act and any amendments thereto. Upon the death of a full-time paid member of the department after retirement, the amount of any excess of such total contributions made by him over the monthly payments made to him shall be paid to his representative. In the event of the discontinuance of the pension fund provided for by this act, each employee shall be paid an amount equal to his total contributions. No employee shall have a vested interest in the funds of the pension fund, or in the amount of any portion thereof of the contributions of the fire department, or in any contributions except his own. 
(Sp. Acts 1947, No. 147, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Right of action against fund. 
    No action for any amount due under the provisions of this act shall be brought but within two years after the right of action shall accrue. All amounts not claimed within said period shall remain a part of said fund. 
(Sp. Acts 1947, No. 147, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Tax exemptions. 
    Said fund and the right of any person under the provisions of this act to any payment from said fund shall be exempt from any state, municipal, transfer or inheritance tax, and shall be unassignable. 
(Sp. Acts 1947, No. 147, § 7) 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 
Year chapter Section Article/Section 
this Code 1893 495 1-4 Art. 1, § 1- 
Art. 1, § 4 533 Art. 1, § 2 1909 129 1-3 Art. 2, § 1- 
Art. 2, § 3 1911 122 Art. 2, § 1 1935 375 Art. 3, § 1 460 1-6 Art. 4, § 1- 
Art. 4, § 6 1937 161 Art. 4, § 4 1947 147 1-7 Art. 5, § 1- 
Art. 5, § 7 1953 481 Art. 4, § 4  
PART III - SPECIAL ACTS CONSIDERED OBSOLETE[1] 
Year No. 1881 54 Dividing town into three voting districts ..... Approved March 16, 1881 1883 185 Incorporating the public library of Thompsonville ..... Approved May 1, 1883 1886 133 Authorizing the second school district of Enfield to make certain appropriations ..... Approved March 23, 1886 1887 67 Authorizing school district number two of Enfield to make appropriation for protection from fire ..... Approved March 8, 1887 1889 286 Empowering school district number two of Enfield to construct sewers, and creating a board of sewer commissioners ..... Approved May 15, 1889 1895 233 Validating a vote of the town ..... Approved May 9, 1895 1895 236 Amending a special act empowering school district number two of Enfield to construct sewers, and creating a board of sewer commissioners ..... Approved May 18, 1895 1897 293 An act establishing the Town Court of Enfield 1897 434 Amending a resolution empowering school district number two of Enfield to construct sewers, and creating a board of sewer commissioners ..... Approved June 9, 1897 1905 303 Empowering school district number two of Enfield to transact business relating to sewers at its annual meeting, reducing board of sewer commissioners, and annexing certain territory to said school district ..... Approved June 13, 1905 1907 459 Annexing certain territory to school district number two of the Town of Enfield ..... Approved July 31, 1907 Zoning in certain cities and towns* Returns by the presiding officers in Enfield Return of vote in Enfield 1911 96 An act authorizing the Thompsonville Fire and Sewer District to regulate the construction of buildings Approved March 31, 1911 1913 183 An act concerning a footpath on the bridge between Enfield and Soffield ..... Approved May 13, 1913 1925 118 An act dividing the second voting district of the town into precincts ..... Approved April 2, 1925 1931 303 An act creating a board of police commissioners in the Town of Enfield ..... Approved May 1, 1931 1931 372 An act authorizing the Town of Enfield to provide for town planning 1931 614 An act including a highway in the town in the trunk line system ..... Approved May 25, 1931 1932 Appx. p. 2 Town voting districts 1933 376 An act reimbursing the town for unpaid taxes upon land purchased by the state ..... Approved June 1, 1933 1935 50 An act validating a bond issue of the Town of Enfield 1939 251 An act concerning the abatement of taxes on certain real estate in the Town of Enfield ..... Approved May 16, 1939 1939 493 An act authorizing the board of directors of the Connecticut State Prison to purchase property in the Town of Enfield ..... Approved June 15, 1939 1939 528 An act amending an act authorizing the Town of Enfield to provide for town planning ..... Approved June 20, 1939 1941 234 An act including a highway in the Towns of Enfield and East Windsor in the trunk line system ..... Approved May 26, 1941 1945 12 An act amending an act empowering school district number two of Enfield to transact business relating to sewers and changing the date of its annual meeting ..... Approved April 16, 1945 1945 375 An act validating acts of certain officials of the Town of Enfield ..... Approved August 9, 1945 1947 521 An act validating acts and deeds, valid except for certain irregularities and omissions 1947 522 An act authorizing the town to establish a police benefit and police veteran reserve ..... Approved July 9, 1947 1951 7 An act extending the time within which the board of assessors and the board of tax review of the Town of Enfield may complete their duties ..... Approved January 18, 1951 1953 541 An act establishing an expressway in the Towns of Windsor Locks, East Windsor and Enfield ..... Approved June 30, 1953 1955 267 An act concerning the extension of a state highway through the Town of Enfield ..... Approved June 3, 1955 1957 359 An act concerning validating of notice given by May F. Kane to the Town of Enfield concerning injuries sustained by defective highway ..... Approved May 17, 1957 1957 674 An act concerning a sewerage system for the town ..... Approved June 19, 1957 1959 406 An act providing for the authorizing of bonds of the state for capital improvements and other purposes ..... Approved June 2, 1959 1959 530 An act concerning taxes paid by Enfield Housing Authority to the town and the Enfield Fire District ..... Approved June 29, 1959 1961 133 An act establishing a zoning and planning commission for the Town of Enfield ..... Approved October 11, 1961  
*Editor's note- This act originally printed as chapter 279, public acts of 1923, printed as a special act in volume XXI, page 18 (appendix). 
Editor's note- This act originally printed as a public act is now by provision of chapter 258, public acts of 1929, printed as a special act in volume XXI, page 3 (appendix). 
Editor's note- This act originally printed as a public act is now by provision of chapter 258, public acts of 1929, printed as a special act in volume XXI, page 3 (appendix). 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The special acts listed in chronological order in this part are set out by title only due to their obsolescence. 

CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Date Date  Section 
this Charter 11- 5-1996(Ref.) 12- 5-1996(Eff.) Chs. 1-VIII  
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and the Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 
Year chapter Section Article/Section 
this Code 1893 495 1-4 Art. 1, § 1- 
Art. 1, § 4 533 Art. 1, § 2 1909 129 1-3 Art. 2, § 1- 
Art. 2, § 3 1911 122 Art. 2, § 1 1935 375 Art. 3, § 1 460 1-6 Art. 4, § 1- 
Art. 4, § 6 1937 161 Art. 4, § 4 1947 147 1-7 Art. 5, § 1- 
Art. 5, § 7 1953 481 Art. 4, § 4  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Incorporation and general powers, ch. I; transition and miscellaneous provisions, ch. VIII. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The codification consisting of this chapter and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Enfield, Connecticut," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1967, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the town, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislative body or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Building code. The term "building code" shall mean the state building code as adopted by the town for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location and occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the town, as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is referred to without further qualification, it shall mean The Code of Enfield, Connecticut, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    Council, town council. The term "council" or "town council" shall mean the town council of the Town of Enfield, Connecticut. 
    County. The term "the county" shall mean the County of Hartford, in the State of Connecticut. 
    Director of health. The term "director of health" shall mean the director of health of the North Central District Health Department. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
    General Statutes. The term "General Statutes" or abbreviation "G.S." shall mean the revision of 1958 of the General Statutes of Connecticut and all amendments thereto. 
    Individual. The term "individual" shall mean a natural person. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give a joint authority to several persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of them. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things, and words importing the plural number may include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall mean and include affirmations in cases where by law an affirmation may be used for an oath, and, in like cases, the word "swear" shall include the word "affirm." 
    Officers, agencies. Any reference to an officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency is construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Enfield, Connecticut." 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person " shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, company, limited liability company, public or private corporation, business, union, committee, club, society, association, trustee, executor, administrator or other fiduciary or custodian. 
    Preceding, following, succeeding. The words "preceding," "following" and "succeeding," when used by way of reference to any section or sections, shall mean the section or sections next preceding, next following or next succeeding, unless some other section is expressly designated in such reference. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street, usually lying on either side thereof, between the curb and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" or "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Connecticut. 
    Street. The term "street" includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares in the town, and means all that part thereof from property line to property line of the premises abutting thereon. 
    Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Town. The term "the town" shall mean the Town of Enfield in the County of Hartford, in the State of Connecticut. 
    Written, in writing. The terms "written" or "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1967, §§ 1-2, 5A-2) 
State Law reference- Construction of statues, words and phrases, G.S. § 1-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Validity of separate provisions of Code. 
    If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Code. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 1-3. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the sections and subsections of this Code, printed in boldface or italic type, and the chapter, article and division headings, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, subsection, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles or a substantive portion of any such section, subsection, chapter, article or division, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, subsections, chapters, articles or divisions, including their catchlines or headings, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or heading. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are only intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-6. - Editor's notes and references. 
    The editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are only intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Repeal not to revive former ordinances. 
    When an ordinance repealing another ordinance is repealed, and first shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1967, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 1-1(s). 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain rights, penalties, suits, not affected by repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment, penalty or forfeiture incurred before the repeal takes effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed, or for the recovery of a penalty or forfeiture incurred under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 1-1(t). 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain acts and ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Code; 
(3)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the town; 
(4)  The annual tax levy; 
(5)  Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the town on any person or corporation; 
(6)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; 
(7)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to the salaries of the officers or employees; 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the town; 
(10)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the town; 
(11)  Any ordinance adopting a preliminary plan or development plan; any ordinance or regulation dedicating or accepting any plan or subdivision; or any ordinance or regulation rezoning specific property. 
and all such acts and ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1967) 
Sec. 1-10. - Signpost in Thompsonville. 
    The signpost erected by the town in front of the Town Building in Thompsonville is hereby designated as a legal public signpost of the town. 
(Code 1967, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to make them a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(b)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into the unified Code. For example the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplemental or already in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, or in any other ordinance or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the town under authority vested in him or it by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor either by this Code or state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code, or any other ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $25.00. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance or regulation of the town continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Violations of municipal ordinances, regulations and bylaws, G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(10)(A), 51-164p. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Incorporation and general powers, ch. I; officers and elections, ch. II; town council, ch. III; town manager, ch. IV; appointments by the town council and the manager, ch. V; merit system, ch. VII; transition and miscellaneous provisions, ch. VIII. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL 

Secs. 2-31-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-61-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS 

Sec. 2-81. - Adoption of state law; inclusion of town. 
    The town adopts G.S. §§ 4-124i-4-124p, inclusive, providing for the creation of a regional council of governments within any planning region of the state as defined or redefined by the secretary of the state office of policy and management or his designee, and joins such regional council of governments when and as such council is duly created in accordance with such statutes, by not less than 60 percent of all towns, cities and boroughs within such planning region entitled to membership on such council as provided in G.S. § 4-124j. 
(Code 1967, § 2-47) 
Secs. 2-82-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGIONAL COUNCIL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS 

Sec. 2-101. - Joining. 
    The town does hereby join with such of the towns, cities or boroughs within its planning region as defined or redefined by the secretary of the state office of policy and management, or his designee, under the provisions of G.S. § 16a-4a, as may enact a similar ordinance, to create a regional council of elected officials, as such council is defined by G.S. §§ 4-124c-4-124f. 
(Code 1967, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-102. - Local representative. 
    The town representative to the regional council of elected officials shall be a member of the town council as chosen by the town council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-103. - Powers and duties. 
    The regional council of elected officials shall have such powers, purposes, responsibilities and duties as stated in G.S. §§ 4-124c-4-124f. 
(Code 1967, § 2-30) 
Secs. 2-104-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ETHICS COMMISSION; CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Close relative means the parents, grandparents, brother, sister, (including in-laws), spouse, child, grandchild, step-child, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, and also any person who is domiciled in the individual's household. 
    Commission means the ethics commission. 
    Conflict of interest means a public official or municipal employee has an interest which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties or employment in the public interest if he has reason to believe or expect that he or a close relative of his will derive a direct monetary gain or suffer a direct monetary loss, as the case may be, by reason of his official activity. A public official or municipal employee does not have an interest which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest if any benefit or detriment accrues to him as a member of a business, profession, occupation or group to no greater extent than any other member of such business, profession, occupation or group. Conflict of interest exists if: 
(1)  A public official or municipal employee or a close relative of such official or employee has a financial or personal interest in the outcome of any matter under consideration before him in his official capacity within or before his department or a board or commission of which he is a member. 
(2)  A public official or municipal employee accepts employment which will either impair his independence or judgment with regard to his official duties or require him to disclose confidential information acquired by him in the course of his public duties. 
    Criminal misconduct means a violation of the law as defined in G.S. title 53. 
    Financial interest means any interest in the result of a discretionary public action in which an individual derives or expects that he will derive economic and/or pecuniary gain or loss to himself or a close relative of the individual or to any organization in which said individual and his close relatives hold a five percent or more ownership interest. 
    Gift means a payment, subscription, advance, forbearance, rendering of service, deposit of money, or anything of value unless consideration of equal or greater value is transferred in its place. The term "gift" shall not include a political contribution otherwise reported as required by law; services provided to support a political candidate or political party without compensation by persons volunteering their time; a commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than loans made in the ordinary course of business; anything of value received because of a family or other close personal relationship with the donor; food or beverage or both, consumed on a single occasion, the cost of which is less than $50.00 per person per calendar year; an occasional non-pecuniary gift, insignificant in value; an award publicly presented in recognition of public service or any gift which would have been offered or given to him if he were not a public official or municipal employee. 
    Municipal employee means an individual working for salary or wages from the town, including board of education employees, whether on a part-time or full-time basis and whether a member of the classified or unclassified service but does not include the town manager or the town attorney. The services performed by this individual are controlled by the town not only as to result to be accomplished by work but also as to details and means by which result is accomplished. 
    Person means an individual, a business, corporation, union, association, firm, partnership, committee, club or other organization or group of persons. 
    Personal interest means an interest in either the subject matter or a relationship with the parties involved in a matter before the commission, board of department which may impair the impartiality expected of any such employee or official. 
    Public official means any elected town officer and any individual, including the town manager and the town attorney, appointed to any town office, commission, board or department by the town council, board of education or the town manager. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9(a)-(e), (g), (i), (k); Ord. No. 14-7 , 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 2-122. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
(a)  The proper operation of the municipal government of the town requires that all public officials and municipal employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, shall be impartial and responsive to the public interest; that public office and employment should not be used for personal gain or advantage; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of municipal government. Public office is a trust conferred by public authority for a public purpose. Public officials and municipal employees should not place themselves in positions where private interests conflict with public duty. The administration of legislative or quasijudicial power demands the highest public confidence. Anything which tends to weaken such confidence and to undermine the sense of security of individual rights which the citizen is entitled to feel is against public policy. 
(b)  In recognition of these principles and pursuant to G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(10)(B) and 7-148h there is hereby established a code of ethics for all public officials and employees, paid or unpaid, of the town. 
(Code 1967, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-123. - Establishment of ethics commission. 
(a)  Commission created; general powers. In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 7-148h there is hereby created an ethics commission. This commission is empowered to investigate allegations of unethical conduct, corrupting influence, illegal activities or other behavior that would reflect adversely against the town levied against any municipal official, officer or employee. Allegations of criminal misconduct or violations of the state penal code will be referred to the division of police or state attorney's office upon receipt by the commission. This commission may issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum, enforceable upon application to the superior court, to compel the attendance of persons at hearings and the production of books, documents, records and papers. 
(b)  Composition. The commission shall be comprised of seven resident electors, none of whom shall serve the town in any other capacity, either as an elected or appointed member of a commission or board or be town employees or employees of the town board of education. Two of the appointed members will be designated as alternates by the town council. All members shall be appointed by majority vote of the town council. Of the five regular members, no more than two shall be of the same political party. 
(c)  Appointments. All appointments to the commission shall be for overlapping terms of two years. Any regular member having served three consecutive two-year terms shall be ineligible for reappointment to the board for a period of two years. For individuals filling a vacancy, consecutive years of service shall commence with the beginning of the next appointment term. The two alternate members may fully participate in all hearings and discussions but may not vote unless a regular member steps aside or is not present at the time of the vote. No more than five members shall ever vote on any decision of the commission and, to be eligible to vote, the members must have been in attendance at all meetings at which relevant testimony was presented. A person will not be disqualified from serving on the commission if he has a member of his immediate family employed by the town or the town board of education; however, if an accused person is a family member or family member's supervisor or employed in the same department as a member of his family the commission member will be disqualified from voting and participating in the probable cause and formal hearing process on that particular matter. No member of the commission shall (i) hold or seek any public office or any office in a political party or political committee or be a paid lobbyist or salaried employee of any organization or association organized primarily for the purpose of influencing legislation or decisions of public agencies, nor (ii) shall have been so employed or engaged for a one-year period prior to his appointment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-124. - Adoption of rules of procedure. 
    The commission shall adopt rules of procedure and regulations which it deems necessary to carry out the intent of this ordinance and the same and any amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the town clerk and be available for public inspection. The discussions of the commission held in executive session are to be confidential. The minutes of the commission are public information and will be made available to the public through the town clerk's office. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8.1) 
Sec. 2-125. - Procedure for receiving and hearing complaints. 
(a)  Generally. The commission shall receive complaints from any person of any alleged violation of the code of ethics. Any complaint received by the commission must be in writing on a form prescribed by the commission and signed under oath by the individual making said complaint before: 
(1)  A judge of a court of record or a family support magistrate; 
(2)  A clerk or deputy clerk of a court having a seal; 
(3)  A commissioner of deeds or town clerk; 
(4)  A notary public; 
(5)  A justice of the peace; or 
(6)  An attorney admitted to the bar of this state. 
If the person intentionally makes a false written statement under oath or pursuant to a form bearing notice, authorized by law, to the effect that false statements made therein are punishable, which he does not believe to be true and which statement is intended to mislead a public servant in the performance of his official function, he shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  Notices and investigations. Upon receiving a complaint of an alleged violation of the code of ethics, the commission shall, within ten business days (excluding weekends and holidays), notify in writing the person about whom said complaint has been filed, advising the concerned person of the specific nature of the complaint made and being investigated by the commission, and enclosing therewith a copy of the complaint. The commission shall make a probable cause investigation of the validity of the complaint including interviews or discussions with the complainant, town personnel or members of other public or private agencies. This probable cause investigation shall be held in compliance with G.S. § 7-148h. and § 1-82a. Not later than three business days after termination of the investigation, the commission shall inform the complainant and the respondent of its finding and provide them a summary of its reasons for making the finding. At any time after the receipt of a complaint, the commission may dismiss the complaint after finding there is no justification for such complaint; such notice of dismissal outlining its finding and summary of its reasons for making that finding, shall be given, in writing, to the complainant and the respondent. If the investigation finds that there is probable cause to believe that a provision of this article has been violated, the commission shall set a date for a hearing held in accordance with rules of procedure adopted by the commission. 
(c)  Hearings. In the event a hearing is held, the person against whom such complaint is filed shall have the right to counsel, to confrontation of all witnesses, to cross examination and to present evidence on his behalf. The hearing will be held in open session. The hearing shall be conducted with no less than four members of the commission in attendance. 
(d)  Enforcement officer and hearing officer. The ethics commission may retain an ethics code enforcement officer, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state and who shall be selected by the town attorney. Such enforcement officer shall be available to assist the ethics commission by investigating complaints. In the event that a hearing is held after a finding of probable cause, the commission may retain a hearing officer, who, as in the case of the enforcement officer, shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state and who shall be selected by the town attorney. Such hearing officer shall attend the hearing and rule on all matters concerning the application of the commission's rules of procedure and the scope of the inquiry, as well as such other questions as may arise during the course of the hearing. Both the enforcement officer and the hearing officer shall be compensated on a per diem, case by case, basis. Neither of the above described officers shall have a vote in any decision of the commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8.2; Ord. No. 14-7 , 12-15-2014; Ord. No. 16-1 , 2-1-2016) 
Sec. 2-126. - Report of recommendations to town council. 
(a)  If an elected official or a council-appointed individual is the subject of the hearing, the commission shall report to the town council its findings as to a violation of the code of ethics, together with recommendations as to the disposition to be made. 
(b)  If a municipal employee under the supervision of the town manager or a manager-appointed official is the subject of the hearing, the commission shall report in writing to the town manager its findings as to a violation of the code of ethics, together with recommendations as to disposition to be made. 
(c)  If an employee or public official under the supervision of the board of education is the subject of the hearing, the commission shall report in writing to the board of education its findings as to a violation of the code of ethics, together with recommendations as to disposition to be made. 
(d)  The town council, town manager or board of education shall meet with the commission to consider such findings in open session. The council, town manager or board of education shall then determine what disposition shall be made; such decision shall be made within 30 days of the issuance date of the ethics commission's findings and recommendations. Violation of any provisions of this division should raise conscientious questions for the council member or other public official or municipal employee concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best interests of the town. 
(e)  Violations by members of the classified service constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action by the town manager. Sanctions shall include, but not be limited to, suspension, censure, recommendations to the town manager of dismissal of an employee, removal of an appointed official by the appointing authority and public recommendation to an elected official that he resign from office. Notification of such disposition shall be given orally immediately to the person about whom said complaint has been filed and in writing by certified mail, to said person within 30 days after receipt of the report by the town council, town manager or board of education from the commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8.3) 
Sec. 2-127. - Notice. 
(a)  All notices required under this division shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  The mailing address of the ethics commission shall be c/o Town Manager 820 Enfield Street, Enfield, CT 06082 and forwarded unopened to the chair of the ethics commission. Correspondence may be opened only by the commission chair or his designee. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8.4; Ord. No. 14-7 , 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 2-128. - Conflicts of interest. 
    Any public official or municipal employee who, in the discharge of his official duties, would be required to take an action that would affect a financial interest of himself or a close relative of his or a business in which he and his close relatives have an ownership interest of five percent or more, shall be excused from voting or deliberating or taking action on the matter if he so requests, but if he does not make such request, he shall, if he is a member of a legislative body, town commission or board, prepare a written statement signed under penalty of false statement describing the matter requiring action and the nature of the potential conflict and explaining why, despite the potential conflict, he is able to vote and otherwise participate fairly, objectively and in the public interest and deliver the original written statement to the town manager who will forward it to the ethics commission and enter a copy of the statement in the minutes of the body, commission or board of which he is a member. If he is not a member of a legislative body or board or commission, he shall prepare a written statement signed under penalty of false statement describing the matter requiring action and the nature of the potential conflict and deliver a copy of the statement to his immediate superior who shall assign the matter to the ethics commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9(c)) 
Sec. 2-129. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Generally. The requirements herein set forth shall constitute a code of ethics establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of public officials and municipal employees. Such ethical conduct may separately involve the effect of a particular action and the intent of the parties involved, with the commission investigating and reporting on both. The following enumeration of certain activities does not eliminate unethical activities not listed in this division. Allegations of unethical conduct, corrupting influence or illegal activities levied against any municipal official, officer or employee except as hereinafter mentioned will be investigated by the commission. All professional employees and officials of the town including, but not limited to, accountants, attorneys, engineers and school teachers, shall also be required to conform to the canons or code of ethics of their profession. Allegations or complaints concerning sworn police officers and animal control officers, excluding all officers above the rank of lieutenant, received by the commission will be referred to the director of public safety for investigation and disposition in accordance with the procedures authorized in the Enfield Police Manual and Chapter V, Section 10 of the Town Charter. A record of such referrals will be maintained by the commission. The chief of police will notify the director of public safety and the commission of the results of such investigation and final disposition of the matter. 
(b)  Interest in contract or transaction. No public official or municipal employee having the power or duty to perform an official act or action related to a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the town shall: 
(1)  Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or transaction; 
(2)  Have a financial interest in any business entity representing, advising or appearing on behalf of any person involved in such contract or transaction; 
(3)  Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a person or business entity involved in such contract or transaction; 
(4)  Have solicited, accepted or granted a present or future gift, favor, service or thing of value from or to a person involved in such contract or transaction; or 
(5)  Have encouraged, made or accepted any ex parte or unilateral application or communication where a determination is to be made after a public hearing and such public official or municipal employee fails to make the contents of the communication a part of the record. 
(c)  Preacquisition of interest. No public official or municipal employee with respect to any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the town shall acquire an interest in or affected by such contract or transaction at a time when the public official or municipal employee believes or has reasons to believe that it will directly or indirectly be affected by an official act or action of the town. 
(d)  Disclosure of information. No public official or municipal employee with respect to any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the town, shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the town, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others. All matters discussed in executive session shall be confidential information. 
(e)  Incompatible service. No public official or municipal employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render service, for private interest, when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law. 
(f)  Appearances. No public official or municipal employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself, his spouse, parents or minor children before any town agency, board or commission except, in the case of municipal employees, with the written approval of the town manager when the manager deems such appearance to be in accordance with the employee's employment responsibility and in accordance with established town council policies. However, a member of the town council may appear before town agencies, boards or commissions on behalf of his constituents in the course of his duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. Neither the town manager nor any municipal employee shall use his position in behalf of any political party. 
(g)  Public contracts. No public official or municipal employee who, in his capacity as such official or employee, participates in the making of a contract in which he has a financial interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on his part, shall enter into any contract with the town unless: 
(1)  The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitive bidding; or 
(2)  The town manager waives the requirement of this section after determining that it is in the best interest of the town to do so and immediately notifies the town council of said waiver. 
(h)  Public property. No public official or municipal employee shall request or permit the unauthorized use of town owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit. 
(i)  Special treatment. No public official or municipal employee shall seek or grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. No member of the classified service shall seek any special consideration regarding his employment from a member of the town council. 
(j)  Later case interest. No public official or municipal employee shall, for a period of one year, after the termination of service or employment with the town, appear before any board, commission, committee or agency of the town in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which he personally participated during the period of his service or employment, or which was under his active consideration. 
(k)  Disclosure of interest in legislative action. Any member of the town council or other town board or commission who has a financial interest or personal interest in any proposal before the council or a town board or commission shall disclose on the record of the council, board or commission existence of such an interest. Any other public official or municipal employee who has a financial or personal interest in any proposed legislative action of the council or the commission and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the council or the commission, shall disclose on the record of the council or the commission the nature and extent of such interest. 
(l)  New public official and employees to receive copy of this division. Prior to any public official taking office or municipal employee beginning employment he shall receive from the town clerk, and give written receipt for, a copy of this division and he shall immediately read and otherwise familiarize himself with the terms of this division. Where any public official or municipal employee has a doubt as to the applicability of any provisions of this division to a particular situation or as to the definition of terms used herein, he may apply, in writing, to the town's ethics commission for an advisory opinion. Such opinion until amended or revoked shall be binding on the town, public officials and municipal employees in any subsequent actions concerning the public official or municipal employee who sought the opinion and acted on it in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion. Any advisory opinion issued by the ethics commission shall be made publicly where such disclosure will not violate the law. 
(m)  Town manager to establish procedure. The town manager shall cause to be established a procedure to familiarize elected and appointed officials with the duties and responsibilities of their positions. The town manager shall prepare a written report outlining such activities for the prior year and plans for the coming year and submit said report to the town council during the month of January each year. 
(Code 1967, § 2-10; Ord. No. 14-7 , 12-15-2014) 
Secs. 2-130-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FAIR RENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-151. - Established; composition. 
    There shall be a fair rent commission comprised of seven residents of the town. 
(Code 1967, § 2-36; Ord. No. 02-1, § 2-36, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 2-152. - Appointments; terms of office; chair; quorum; compensation. 
(a)  Generally. The town manager shall appoint seven members of the fair rent commission, who shall make studies, conduct hearings and receive complaints relative to rental charges on housing accommodations, except those accommodations rented on a seasonal basis, within their jurisdiction, which term shall include mobile manufactured homes and mobile manufactured home park lots, in order to control and eliminate excessive rental charges on such accommodations, and to carry out the provisions of G.S. §§ 7-148b-7-148f, inclusive, 47a-20 and 47a-23c(b). The fair rent commission shall not investigate complaints submitted to commission members but shall designate this power to complaint investigators. 
(b)  Appointment of other members. The town manager, with the approval of the town council, shall appoint as members to the fair rent commission, two persons who are tenants, two persons who are landlords and three persons who are neither landlords nor tenants. 
(c)  Terms; vacancies. Members of the fair rent commission shall be appointed for overlapping terms of two years. Vacancies on the fair rent commission shall be filled in the manner of original appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. Any member of the fair rent commission may be reappointed for an additional term in the manner of original appointment. 
(d)  Chair. The fair rent commission shall annually designate one member to serve as chair. 
(e)  Quorum. A quorum for voting purposes shall consist of four members. 
(f)  Compensation. The members shall receive no compensation as such for their services as members. 
(Code 1967, § 2-37; Ord. No. 02-1, § 2-37, 8-26-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-148b. 
Sec. 2-153. - Complaint investigators. 
(a)  Within 14 days after his appointment of the fair rent commission, the town manager shall appoint three persons to serve as complaint investigators. The investigators shall serve for a term of one year and may be reappointed by the town manager. 
(b)  At no time shall any investigator privately report any matter relative to any investigation to any hearing officer or any other person. Investigation reports shall be submitted in writing to each hearing officer before a fair rent commission hearing or orally at the commission meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 2-38; Ord. No. 02-1, § 2-38, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 2-154. - Authority, powers, responsibilities, duties. 
    The fair rent commission shall have all the authority, powers, responsibilities and duties vested in such commissions pursuant to G.S. § 7-148b et seq. 
(Code 1967, § 2-39; Ord. No. 02-1, § 2-39, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 2-155. - Complaint and hearing procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complaint by any fair rent commission member, the chair shall order one or more investigators to investigate the complaint. Each complaint shall be investigated within 30 days from its receipt by any fair rent commission member. In their investigations, investigators shall consider the criteria for determining excessive rents established by G.S. § 7-148c. 
(b)  The fair rent commission chair shall cause a hearing to be held on each such complaint not later than 45 days from its receipt by a commission member. 
(c)  A memorandum of decision shall be filed by the fair rent commission not later than 21 days from the date of the hearing. Should the commission fail to file a memorandum of decision within the 21-day period, the complaint shall fail and any action taken by the fair rent commission with respect to the particular case involved shall be null and void. The memorandum shall state the reasons for the fair rent commission's decision. The decision must be ratified or rejected at the next meeting of the fair rent commission in accordance with the procedure established by the fair rent commission. Each memorandum of decision shall be kept on file by the fair rent commission in the office of the town clerk, and from the moment of filing shall be open to the public. 
(d)  Each complainant and each respondent may be represented by one or more attorneys of his choice or by any persons so authorized in writing by him. 
(e)  Testimony before the fair rent commission shall be under oath and a verbatim tape (audio/video) recording of each hearing be preserved in accordance with state and town policy. Minutes of each fair rent commission meeting shall also be taken and preserved as a public record. 
(f)  The fair rent commission shall provide the services of an interpreter, whenever needed, free of charge. 
(Code 1967, § 2-40; Ord. No. 02-1, § 2-40, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 2-156. - Holding rents in escrow. 
    The fair rent commission may hold rents in escrow in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 7-148d, but only upon recommendation of the building official and upon submission by him to the commission of a report to the effect that the housing accommodation in question fails to comply with chapter article, or any state statute or regulation relating to health and safety. 
(Code 1967, § 2-41; Ord. No. 02-1, § 2-41, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 2-157. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any order of the fair rent commission may appeal to the superior court for the judicial district in which the town is located. Any such appeal shall be considered a privileged matter with respect to the order of trial. 
(Code 1967, § 2-42; Ord. No. 02-1, § 2-42, 8-26-2002) 
Secs. 2-158-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COMMISSION ON AGING 

Sec. 2-181. - Established; purpose. 
    The town hereby establishes a commission on aging to study the needs of and coordinate the programs for the aging. 
(Code 1967, § 2-43; Ord. No. 04-3, § 2-43, 4-19-2004) 
Sec. 2-182. - Membership; appointment; qualifications; terms of office; vacancies. 
    The commission on aging shall consist of nine members to be appointed by the town council to serve for terms of three years. In addition, there shall be two alternates appointed. Annually, thereafter, the town council shall appoint members to succeed the members whose terms expire. In addition to the nine regular members and two alternates of the commission, there will be two council liaisons and the town manager, or his representative, shall be ex-officio members of the commission. Members of the commission shall serve until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1967, § 2-44; Ord. No. 04-3, § 2-44, 4-19-2004) 
Sec. 2-183. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of the commission on aging shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses if approved by a majority vote of the commission and by the town council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-45; Ord. No. 04-3, § 2-45, 4-19-2004) 
Sec. 2-184. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission on aging shall have all the powers and duties not inconsistent with the Charter, which are prescribed in the Connecticut General Statutes. The responsibilities of the commission on aging shall be as follows: 
(1)  To foster understanding, respect and involvement of older adults in the life of the community. 
(2)  To encourage participation of older residents in all aspects of community life. 
(3)  To assure older citizens equal access to town resources, facilities, programs and development through consultation and participation in planning. 
(4)  To continuously study and analyze the needs of the older population in order to maintain innovative approaches to their changing needs. 
(5)  To apply for state and federal or other grants which would support areas of need that are important to older adults. 
(6)  To coordinate local agency programs, both public and private, which provide services for the aged. 
(Code 1967, § 2-46; Ord. No. 04-3, § 2-46, 4-19-2004) 
Secs. 2-185-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-2 , adopted June 5, 2017, repealed Div. 7, §§ 2-201-2-203, which pertained to housing partnership and derived from Code 1967, §§ 2-91-2-93. 

Secs. 2-201-2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-231. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to encourage compliance with the town's zoning regulations and to establish a means by which the town may more effectively enforce its zoning regulations by implementing fines for violations. 
( Ord. No. 14-1, § 2-101 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-232. - Statutory authority. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 8-12a and 7-152c, as may be amended. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-12a, the zoning enforcement officer is hereby authorized to issue citations for any violations of the zoning regulations of the town to the extent and in the manner provided herein. 
( Ord. No. 14-1, § 2-102 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-233. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Citation hearing officer ("hearing officer") means any individual appointed pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-152c and section 2-237 of this article. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, or other legal entity capable of occupying, owning or possessing real property. 
    Zoning enforcement officer ("ZEO") means the individual or individuals designated by the town through its planning and zoning commission to enforce the zoning regulations and to issue citations for violations thereof pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-12a. 
    Violation means any activity, condition or event that does not conform to the Zoning Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 14-1, § 2-103 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-234. - Issuance of citation. 
(a)  The zoning enforcement officer may issue a citation only when the ZEO has issued a cease and desist order and all applicable appeal periods thereto have elapsed. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the zoning enforcement officer shall issue a citation immediately in those cases where a person has received a notice of violation, cease and desist order or citation within the previous 24-month period for the same property and for the same violation. 
(c)  The citation shall include a description of the violation, and the fine(s) for each violation as set forth herein. 
(d)  Any citation issued hereunder shall be sent to any person who commits a violation and to the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested and simultaneously by regular United States Postal Service mail. 
( Ord. No. 14-1, § 2-104 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-235. - Amount of fine; continuing violations. 
(a)  The fine for each violation shall be $150.00. However, in no event shall the fine be greater than allowed by C.G.S. § 8-12a. 
(b)  Each day after the date of the issuance of the citation that the violation(s) exist(s) shall constitute a separate violation(s) and shall be subject to an additional fine as set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The person to whom a citation has been issued shall be responsible for reporting, in writing, subsequent compliance to the Zoning Enforcement Officer who shall verify such compliance. 
( Ord. No. 14-1, § 2-105 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-236. - Payment of fine. 
    Payment of fines is due, and the specified time period for uncontested payment of fines is, the third business day after receipt of the citation and upon each additional day thereafter, as set forth in section 2-105. In accordance with C.G.S. § 8-12a, as amended, all amounts shall be made payable to the Town of Enfield. 
( Ord. No. 14-1, § 2-106 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-237. - Citation appeal. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-152c, as amended, any person issued a citation shall be sent a notice of appeal. 
(b)  Any person issued a citation and notice of appeal shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the citation by delivering in person or by mail within ten days of the date of the notice of appeal a written demand for a hearing to the Town Manager. If any person so cited chooses not to timely request a hearing, he shall be deemed to have admitted liability. If he does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him and that such judgment may issue without further notice. 
(c)  The town manager shall appoint citation hearing officers. Citation hearing officers shall serve for a term of two years. No citation hearing officer shall be a police officer, town employee or any person who has the authority to issue citations. 
( Ord. No. 14-1, § 2-107 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-238. - Other remedies. 
    No action taken pursuant to this chapter shall preclude the town from pursuing any other enforcement remedy which may be imposed by the zoning enforcement officer for a violation as authorized by any state statute, ordinance or zoning regulation. 
( Ord. No. 14-1, § 2-108 , 3-17-2014) 
Secs. 2-239-2-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Department of finance, ch. V, § 8; finance and taxation generally, ch. VI. 

Secs. 2-261-2-300. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-1. - Sale on Sunday by hotels, clubs, etc. 
    The town hereby allows and authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquor on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 noon and 1:00 a.m. on Monday in hotels, restaurants, cafes and clubs, as authorized by G.S. § 30-91. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Topless waitresses, barmaids, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or operating any bar or lounge to permit a waitress, barmaid or entertainer to appear with uncovered breasts, or for any female person to appear in any bar or lounge with uncovered breasts or to appear in any entertainment at such bar or lounge with uncovered breasts. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $100.00 or shall be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(Code 1967, § 7-11) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Removal of dog waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, walking, in possession, custody or control of any dog to allow or permit such dog to defecate upon any public or private property unless such person shall remove all feces deposited by such dog before leaving such property. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dog accompanying any blind person or mobility impaired person. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00. 
(Code 1967, § 7-13.1) 
Secs. 10-32-10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 10-51. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to promote the public safety and general welfare of the citizens of the town by addressing the public nuisance caused by vicious and dangerous dogs. 
(Ord. No. 02-3, § A, 9-12-2002) 
Sec. 10-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affidavit of complaint means a written statement signed under oath before an individual authorized by law to administer such an oath, setting forth the nature and date or dates of the act or acts of the dog, the place where such act or acts took place, a description of the dog, the name and address of the owner (if known) and any other pertinent facts alleging vicious actions. 
    Animal control officer means an employee or agent of the town who administers and enforces the licensing, inspection, and enforcement requirements contained within this division and state statutes. 
    Animal shelter means any facility operated by the town, or any private facility authorized by the animal control officer, to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal. 
    Impoundment means the taking into custody of any animal by the animal control officer or authorized representative thereof. 
    Muzzle means a device, constructed of strong, bite-resistant material, which fastens over the mouth of a dog to prevent it from biting any person or other animal. 
    Owner means any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over or keeping any dog covered by this division. 
    Physical restraint means a muzzle and a leash not to exceed six feet. The leash must be controlled by an adult physically capable of controlling such dog. The muzzle must not cause injury to the dog. 
    Secure enclosure means a fenced-in area that shall be a minimum of five feet wide, ten feet long, and five feet in height above the grade, and with a horizontal top covering said area, all to be at least nine gauge chainlink fencing with necessary steel supporting the posts. The floor shall be at least three inches of poured concrete with the bottom edge of the fencing embedded in the concrete or extending at least one foot below grade. The gate must be of the same materials as the fencing, fit closely and be securely locked or otherwise deemed secured by the animal control officer. The owner shall post the secure enclosure with a clearly visible warning sign, including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The enclosure must contain and provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
    Vicious dog means: 
(1)  Any dog that approaches any person in an aggressive, menacing or terrorizing manner or in an apparent attitude of attack if the person is upon any public ways, including streets and sidewalks, or any public or private property; 
(2)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, to inflict injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
(3)  Any dog that, on more than one occasion, has bitten, inflicted injuries to or otherwise endangered the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
(4)  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
(Ord. No. 02-3, § B, 9-12-2002) 
Sec. 10-53. - Procedure for determining that a dog is vicious. 
(a)  Upon his own complaint, or upon the receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more residents, the animal control officer shall hold a hearing within five days of serving notice to the owner of the dog. 
(b)  To consider declaring a dog vicious, the animal control officer shall hold a hearing to consider any evidence collected. The dog owner shall be notified by a certified letter of the hearing and may attend and have an opportunity to be heard. Criteria to be considered by the animal control officer shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Provocation. 
(2)  Severity of attack or injury. 
(3)  Previous aggressive history of the dog. 
(4)  Observable behavior of the dog. 
(5)  Site and circumstances of the incident. 
(6)  Age of the victim. 
(7)  Statements from witnesses and other interested parties. 
(8)  Reasonable enclosures already in place. 
(9)  Height and weight of the dog. 
(c)  Within five days of the hearing, the animal control officer shall determine whether to declare the dog vicious and shall within five days after such determination notify the owner by certified mail of the dog's designation as a vicious dog and the specific restrictions and conditions for keeping the dog. If the dog is declared vicious, its owner shall confine the dog within a secure enclosure and whenever the dog is removed from the secure enclosure it shall be physically restrained, as defined above. The owner of the vicious dog shall notify the residents of all abutting properties, including those across the street, of such findings. This notice to abutters shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be at the owner's sole expense. The animal control officer may (i) vary the minimum requirements of a secure enclosure if the owner's residence cannot accommodate a secure enclosure as defined in this division or (ii) permit an alternate method of enclosure provided that, in the sole discretion of the animal control officer, such alternate method fulfills the objectives as a secure enclosure. 
(d)  No dog shall be declared vicious if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who: (i) was committing a crime or willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, (ii) was teasing, tormenting, abusing, assaulting or provoking the dog or (iii) was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No dog shall be declared vicious if the dog was protecting or defending a human being or itself from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(Ord. No. 02-3, § C, 9-12-2002) 
Sec. 10-54. - Appeal procedure. 
    Within 14 days of the date of the notice of the animal control officer's decision, the owner of a dog found to be vicious may appeal the decision of the animal control officer with a three member panel appointed by the town council. The owner shall send a notice of his intent to appeal, by certified mail, to the animal control officer, with copies to the chief of police and the town clerk. If such an appeal is filed, it shall be commenced within three weeks of its filing. Within five days of the close of the appeal hearing the three member panel shall determine whether to uphold or reverse the decision of the animal control officer. The determination of the three member panel shall be final and binding. The dog shall be kept either in a secure enclosure or shall be impounded at an animal shelter during the appeal process. Any and all costs for the impounding of the dog involved shall be borne by the owner unless determined otherwise by the three member panel. 
(Ord. No. 02-3, § D, 9-12-2002) 
Sec. 10-55. - Confinement of a vicious dog. 
(a)  If the dog is declared vicious, the owner shall have a two-week period in which to have a secure enclosure constructed to house the dog when it is in the owner's yard. During such period the dog shall be impounded at the Enfield Animal Shelter. The dog shall not be released unless and until the secure enclosure is constructed. The effectiveness of the secure enclosure shall be subject to periodic inspections by the animal control officer, as deemed necessary. If the owner is found violating the secure enclosure requirements, the animal control officer shall immediately impound the dog during the time the violation continues to exist. The owner shall bear all costs for such impoundment. The fine for such violation shall be $50.00 per day or part of the day the violation continues. The dog may be destroyed if the owner fails to correct the violations within two weeks of the commencement of the dog's impoundment. 
(b)  If the owner of a vicious dog does not have a secure enclosure constructed during the two-week period, the dog may be destroyed unless during the same two-week period the owner files an appeal pursuant to this division. 
(c)  An owner of a vicious dog may transport the dog for medical or veterinary care provided the dog is physically restrained, as defined above. If the owner of a vicious dog fails to comply with this subsection, the owner shall be fined $50.00 per violation. 
(d)  Any person under whose name a vicious dog is licensed, shall at all times that he or she possesses the dog, maintain in full force and effect a liability insurance policy of at least $100,000.00 for the benefit of the public's safety. The town shall be named as an additional insured for notification of cancellation or termination purposes only. If the owner of a vicious dog fails to comply with this subsection, the animal control officer may impound the dog at the animal shelter at the owner's expense. The dog may be destroyed if the owner fails to obtain the required insurance and provide the animal control officer with written proof thereof within two weeks of the commencement of the dog's impoundment. 
(e)  The owner of a vicious dog shall display a sign on the premises warning that there is a vicious dog on the premises. The sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the street, road or highway that abuts the premises. If the owner of a vicious dog fails to comply with this subsection, the animal control officer may impound the dog at the animal shelter at the owner's expense. The dog may be destroyed if the owner fails to display the required sign within two weeks of the commencement of the dog's impoundment. 
(f)  The owner of a vicious dog shall immediately notify the animal control officer if the dog escapes from its enclosure or physical restraint and is not on the property of the owner. If the owner of a vicious dog fails to notify the animal control officer of the escape, the owner shall be fined $50.00 per violation. 
(g)  Any owner of a vicious dog who sells or otherwise transfers ownership, custody or residence of the dog shall, within ten business days, provide written notification of the transfer to the animal control officer. The notification shall list the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. If the owner of a vicious dog fails to comply with this subsection, the owner shall be fined $50.00 per violation. 
(h)  Provided the new owner resides within the town, the new owner shall be required to construct a secure area for the vicious dog and must comply fully with all of the provisions of this division. Prior to and during the construction of the secure enclosure, the animal control officer may impound the dog at the animal shelter at the owner's expense. The dog may be destroyed if the owner fails to construct the secure enclosure within two weeks of the commencement of the dog's impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 02-3, § E, 9-12-2002) 
Sec. 10-56. - No defense or waiver of General Statutes. 
    Compliance with the requirements of this division shall be no defense to an order of disposal pursuant to G.S. § 22-358. 
(Ord. No. 02-3, § F, 9-12-2002) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public works, ch. V, § 9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Appointment of building inspector. 
    The building inspector shall be appointed by the director of public works as provided by chapter V, section 9, of the Charter. 
(Code 1967, § 4-3) 
Sec. 14-2. - Building permits for construction on land fronting on unaccepted streets. 
    No building permit shall be issued for any building, other than a building to be used for agricultural purposes, upon any lot, plot or parcel of land which does not have the required lot frontage on an accepted street or highway, except under one of the following conditions: 
(1)  A bond or cash security has been posted to assure the repayment to the town of the cost, or any part of the cost, of improving such street or highway; 
(2)  Other financial arrangements, approved by the town manager, have been made, to assure the repayment to the town of the cost, or any part of the cost, of improving such street or highway; or 
(3)  An instrument, to be recorded in the town land records, as a restriction on the lot, plot or parcel of land, in form approved by the town attorney, which is binding upon the heirs, assigns, successors, executors and administrators of the owner of such lot, plot or parcel of land, has been executed by the owner indicating that the permit is requested on the unaccepted street or highway, and that no request will be made for the improvement of such unaccepted street or highway until either subsection (1) or (2) of this section are complied with. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1) 
Secs. 14-3-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 14-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- With the adoption of G.S. § 29-253, the authority to establish a building code by municipalities was discontinued. Inasmuch, § 14-31, pertaining to the adoption of building code by reference, which derived from § 4-1 of the 1967 Code is repealed. 
_____
Sec. 14-32. - Fee schedule. 
    Fees for permits issued by the division of building inspection shall be: 
FEE SCHEDULE (a) New construction, repairs, and alterations per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof $ 16.50 (b) Demolition per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof 16.50 (c) Moving a building per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof 16.50 (d) Mechanical permits per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof 16.50 (e) Minimum fee for any permit 50.00 (f) Residential sewer construction 50.00 (g) Commercial sewer construction 200.00 (h) Any fees paid are non-refundable (i) Permits for work on a structure owned by the Town of Enfield, the Enfield Housing Authority, or any fire district incorporated within the Town of Enfield are exempt from the fees in this schedule. (j) The value of the work being permitted includes all labor and materials at fair market rates. (k) During the time that a residential building owner is receiving a tax reassessment in accordance with PA-16-45 where the foundation of such residential building was made with defective concrete, said owner may provide a copy of such reassessment to the building official and be exempt from the fees in this schedule for the defective foundation repair or replacement.  
(Ord. No. 99-2, 6-7-1999; Ord. No. 08-4, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 10-5, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 10-6, 11-8-2010; Ord. No. 14-3 , 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 16-5 , 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 17-5 , 12-18-2017) 
_____
Sec. 14-33. - Payment of permit fees. 
    Except an otherwise provided in the building code or state law, no permit to begin work for new construction, alteration, removal, demolition, or other building, installation, or construction activity shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this section shall have been paid to the division of building inspection or other authorized municipal agency, nor shall an amendment to a permit necessitating an additional fee because of an increase in the estimated cost of the work involved be approved until the additional fee shall have been paid. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2) 
Sec. 14-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as the penalties for violations of the state building code are established by G.S. § 29-254a, § 14-34, pertaining to penalties and which derived from § 4-2.1 of the 1967 Code is repealed. 
Secs. 14-35-14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-61. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the housing code is to ensure safe, sanitary and decent housing within the town by prescribing minimum standards relative to living conditions in all structures within the town used for purposes of dwelling or human habitation. 
(b)  Scope. In order to attain the objectives of establishing and continually ensuring safe, sanitary, decent housing and living conditions within the town, this housing code shall apply to all structures now or hereafter used for human habitation by providing for the following: 
(1)  Establishment of minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities, space and occupancy requirements, light and ventilation, sanitary facilities, heating, electrical facilities, structural elements, sanitary conditions, and other such conditions, factors and characteristics which may adversely affect or become a menace to the public safety, health, welfare and physical and social well-being and which lead to the continuation, extension or aggravation of urban blight; 
(2)  Fixing the powers, duties and responsibilities of owners, operators, lessees and occupants of structures used for human habitation, as well as the powers and duties of the town with respect to such structures and conditions therein; 
(3)  Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this housing code by the town; 
(4)  Establishing modes of discovering and remedying conditions determined to be substandard, unsafe, unsanitary or unfit for human habitation within the criteria established by this housing code, and prescribing penalties for violations of the provisions of this housing code. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-1) 
Sec. 14-62. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms defined in building code. Where terms are not defined in this section and are defined in the building code, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in the building code. 
(b)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this housing code or under the provisions of the building code, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context herein may imply. 
(c)  Terms defined. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved as applied to a material, device, or method of construction, means acceptable by any authority designated by law having jurisdiction in the matter in question. 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Boardinghouse; lodginghouse; tourist house. See "Dwelling." 
    Building official means the official designated by the municipality to enforce building, zoning or similar laws, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Chimney means a vertical masonry of reinforced concrete enclosing one or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gaseous fuel. 
    Director of health means the legally designated health authority of the town or his duly authorized representative. 
    Dormitory means a building arranged or used for lodging six but not more than 20 individuals and having common toilet and bathroom facilities. 
    Dwelling means any building which is used or intended to be used in whole or in part for living or sleeping by human occupants including, but not limited to, a boardinghouse, roominghouse, lodginghouse, tourist hours or hotel; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling for use by a family or family unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Exterior property areas means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the state department of environmental protection. 
    Family or family unit means one or more persons related by blood, adoption, marriage, legal guardianship or authority by the child protective agency of the state welfare department or any similar or successor agency, living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the same premises as a single housekeeping unit under one head, exclusive of household servants. A number of persons, but not exceeding three, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption or marriage shall be deemed to constitute a family unit. 
    Fire marshal means the legally designated fire marshal of the town, or of any of the fire districts within the town. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Gross floor area means the total area of all habitable space in a building or structure. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or hallways, closets, recreation room (but not excluding "living rooms"), private workshops or hobby rooms and storage spaces. 
    Hotel means a building arranged or used for sheltering, sleeping or feeding, for compensation, of more than 20 individuals, including, but not limited to, a motel. (See also "Dwelling.") 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
    Lead-base paint means any paint containing more than the level established by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as being the safe level of lead in residential paint and paint products. 
    Motel means a hotel, as defined in this section. 
    Multifamily dwelling means a building containing more than two dwelling units. 
    Occupant means any person (including owner or operator) living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    One-family dwelling means a building containing one dwelling unit. 
    Operable area means that part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, including a roominghouse, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall be owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, lessee or other person in control of a building; or their duly authorized agents; or shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Person means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, cooperative or governmental agency. 
    Plumbing or plumbing fixtures means all of the following (supplied) facilities and equipment: Gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, chimney, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clotheswashing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon. 
    Privacy means the existence of conditions which will permit an individual or individuals to carry out an activity without undue interruption or interference. 
    Properly connected means connected in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the town as from time to time enacted provided, however, that the application of this definition shall not require the alteration or replacement of any connection in good working order and not constituting a hazard to life or health. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator. (See also "Dwelling.") 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, plastic and dust or other items as specified by the director of health. 
    State's attorney means an attorney who has been appointed by the criminal justice commission of the division of criminal justice within the state executive department. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, camp trailer or similar structure which is used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
    Toxic substance means any chemical product applied on the surface of or incorporated into any structural or decorative material which constitutes a potential hazard to human health at acute or chronic exposure levels. 
    Two-family dwelling means a building containing two dwelling units. 
    Variance means a difference between that which is required or specified and that which is permitted by the housing code appeals board. 
    Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
Mechanical -Ventilation by power-driven devices. 
Natural -Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks without wind-driven devices. 
(d)  Usage in connection with certain terms. Whenever the words "dwelling," "multifamily dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," "premises," are used in this housing code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Code 1967, § 5A-2) 
Sec. 14-63. - Applicability. 
(a)  Structures encompassed. Every building, including the premises upon which such building is located, or any portion thereof used or intended to be used for residential purposes shall comply with the provisions of this housing code, irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired, except as hereinafter otherwise provided. Hotels serving transient guests only, rest homes, nursing homes and convalescent homes shall be excepted from the provisions of this housing code except for those provisions expressly relating thereto or generally to all buildings or portions thereof used for human habitation. 
(1)  Application of building code. Any alterations to buildings or changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this housing code shall be done in accordance with applicable sections of the building code of the municipality. 
(2)  Application of zoning regulations. Nothing in this housing code shall permit the establishment or conversion of a multifamily dwelling in any zone except where permitted by the zoning regulations in appendix B; nor the continuation of such nonconforming use in any zone except as provided therein. 
(b)  Effect of conflicting provisions. In any case where a provision of this housing code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the town existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(c)  Existing remedies. Nothing in this housing code shall be deemed to abolish, impair or preclude recourse to existing remedies or enforcement devices of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary or relating to the correction of conditions found to be substandard under the provisions of this housing code. Such other existing remedies or enforcement devices shall continue to exist as alternatives in addition to those provided under this housing code. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-3(a), (b), (d)) 
Sec. 14-64. - Code enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement officer. The building official of the town shall have the duty and responsibility of enforcing the provisions of the housing code as herein provided. Such officer is authorized to inspect and order inspections of dwelling structures and to order any repairs or additional facilities necessary to meet code standards. He is authorized to condemn dwellings that are unfit for human habitation, and, in that situation, the owner of the condemned building must comply with the minimum standards or cease using said building for dwelling purposes. An appeal from a decision of the building official may be taken to the housing code appeals board. 
(b)  Coordination of enforcement. Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this housing code shall be the responsibility of the building official. Wherever, in the opinion of the building official, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any other department or official, he shall arrange for this to be done, but in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous officials nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order for correction of any violation under this housing code shall be issued without the approval of the building official and it shall be the responsibility of that official before issuing any such order to determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or official of the town concerned with any matter involved on the case in question. It shall be the duty of any other department, division, agency head or officer of the town to report to the building official any condition which has come to his attention during the course of his unit's activities which may constitute a violation or which may call for remedial action under this housing code. It shall then be the duty of the building official to make or order to be made an inspection of the matter in question. 
(c)  Inspections. The building official shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, multifamily dwellings, dwelling units, roominghouses, rooming units, and premises in order to safeguard the safety and welfare of the public under the provisions of this housing code. The building official is authorized to enter any dwelling, dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling, roominghouse, or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his duties under this housing code. For the purposes of making such inspections or investigations, he is authorized to employ the assistance of employees or officials from other town departments or agencies when he deems it appropriate or necessary to effectively carry out the investigation. The owner, operator, or occupant of every dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the building official free access thereto and to all parts thereof and to the premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections, examination and survey. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance or impede an official or officer authorized under this housing code in the performance of his duties and every such inspector or officer shall have the right to enter, examine, and survey all premises, grounds, structures, dwellings, and multifamily dwellings and every part thereof at all reasonable times upon display of proper identification. 
(d)  Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit, shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling unit, rooming unit, or its premises, at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspections, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this housing code. 
(e)  Refusal of entrance. Upon refusal of entrance by either an owner or occupant to any person authorized to enter the premises under the provisions of this section, the building official shall notify the town attorney or state's attorney, who shall institute the appropriate action to compel compliance, or shall proceed with the enforcement of the penalty provisions of this housing code. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-4) 
Sec. 14-65. - Condemnation. 
(a)  The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following requirements. Any dwelling or dwelling units which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the building official: 
(1)  One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public; 
(2)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public as prescribed by the provisions of this housing code; 
(3)  One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(b)  Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and so designated and placarded by the building official, shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the building official. 
(c)  No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by the building official. The building official shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based has been eliminated. 
(d)  No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by any notice or order relating to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request in writing and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the housing code appeals board under the procedure provided by section 14-66. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-5) 
Sec. 14-66. - Violations; appeals; penalties. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the building official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time, as determined by the building official for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require; provided, that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he is served with such notice by any, other method authorized or required under the laws of this state; 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(6)  Contain an outline of the appeal procedure, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this housing code may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the housing code appeals board, provided such person shall file in the office of the town manager a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a statement of the grounds for such appeal within five business days after the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the town manager shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner at least five business days written notice thereof; provided, that: Whenever the building official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without requirement of hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of the section, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the town manager shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon the finding as to whether the provisions of this housing code have been complied with, the building official shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it. 
(c)  Noncompliance with orders; remedies. In case any order is not promptly complied with, the building official shall proceed in accordance with either of the following procedures unless the order has been appealed. 
(1)  The building official may request the town attorney or state's attorney to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity against the person or persons responsible for the violation, ordering him to: 
a.  Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work; 
b.  Restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such building; 
c.  Require the removal of work in violation; 
d.  Prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure, or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with the provisions of this housing code, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was issued. 
(2)  The building official may, in appropriate cases where the severity of the situation requires more immediate and definitive remedial action, request that the town do the required work, or employ the necessary services and/or materials to do such work, as may be called for to correct the violation. All expenses (including overhead) incurred by the town in making such corrections shall be charged against the person or persons responsible for the violation. If such person shall fail to pay such expenses and overhead, within 30 days after being billed by the town, all such sums shall constitute a lien upon the property involved. Such lien may be satisfied out of said property as may be authorized by state law. 
(3)  The building official may proceed with the enforcement of the penalty provisions of this housing code. 
(d)  Penalty for violations. Every person who shall violate any provision of this housing code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense. The imposition of the penalty herein prescribed shall not preclude recourse to the preceding provisions of this section prescribing procedures for the abatement or correction of violations of this housing code. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-6) 
Sec. 14-67. - Housing code appeals board. 
(a)  Organization. There is hereby created a housing code appeals board to consist of five regular members and two alternates. Such members and alternates are to be appointed by the town manager with the approval of the town council. The regular members shall serve for five year overlapping terms. Each member shall serve until his successor is appointed and has qualified, and any vacancy shall be filled in like manner for the unexpired term. Such board shall be chosen from among the following persons: 
(1)  A fire chief or fire marshal from one of the town's fire districts; 
(2)  A licensed architect or a licensed civil engineer; 
(3)  A building, plumbing or electrical contractor; 
(4)  A licensed physician or a registered nurse; 
(5)  A professional psychologist, psychiatrist or social worker. 
The two alternates may be chosen from any of the above categories of persons and shall serve for five years. 
(b)  Hearings before appeals board. 
(1)  At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified, extended or withdrawn or a variance granted. 
(2)  The hearing shall be commenced not later than 15 business days after the day on which the petition was filed, except for hearings involving proceeding under section 14-66(b). 
(3)  The hearing shall be had before at least a majority membership (three members) of the housing code appeals board. Such board, by at least three votes, shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, or grant an extension or variance in unique cases where unnecessary hardship would result from an application of the strict letter of the provisions of this housing code and such extension or variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this housing code. The housing code appeals board shall adopt rules of procedure governing the granting of extensions or variances, and the conduct of the hearings before the board. 
(4)  The housing code appeals board shall render its decision not later than ten business days after the close of the hearing. 
(c)  Decisions of board; orders. 
(1)  If the notice is sustained, modified or extended, it shall become an order as so sustained, modified or extended; provided; that any notice served pursuant to section 14-66(a) shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed with the town manager within five business days, as provided in section 14-66(b) after the notice is served. 
(2)  The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decisions of the housing code appeals board, shall be reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the town clerk and open to public inspection at all reasonable times. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the housing code appeals board may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, within 15 days from the date of the sending of notice of the decision of the housing code appeal board, in accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes of the state as they relate to the taking of appeals from municipal administrative bodies. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-7) 
State Law reference- Administrative appeals, G.S. § 51-197b. 
Secs. 14-68-14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-91. - Maintenance of structural elements. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse, rooming unit, or portion thereof for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Accessory structure. All accessory structures including detached garages shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(2)  Foundations, walls, floors and ceilings. Every foundation, floor, ceiling, wall, chimney and all exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to be reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; and shall be capable of affording privacy. 
(3)  Foundation support. The foundation elements shall be maintained so as to adequately support the building at all points. 
(4)  Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects which might admit rain; and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(5)  Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight and rodentproof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(6)  Stairs and porches. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(7)  Door and window hardware. Every exterior door and every window shall be supplied with an interior lock and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(8)  Exit doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being opened from the inside, easily and without use of key. 
(9)  Screening. Guards and screens shall be supplied for protection against rodents and insects in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Guards for basement windows. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents or other pests, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
b.  Insect screens. From June first to October fifteenth of each year, every door opening directly from any dwelling to the outside, and every window or other outside opening used or intended to be used for ventilation, and any other opening which might provide an entry for insects or other pests, shall be supplied with a screen or such other devices as will effectively prevent their entrance. All screen doors shall have a self-closing device maintained in good working condition. 
(10)  Bathroom floors. Every toilet, kitchen and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(11)  Pipes and plumbing facilities. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-8) 
Sec. 14-92. - Sanitary facilities. 
    The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be supplied and maintained in sanitary, safe working condition. 
(1)  Bathroom. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a separate room which affords privacy to any person within said room and which is equipped with the following required facilities: 
a.  Flush water closet. Such room shall be equipped with a flush water closet in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
b.  Lavatory basin. Such room shall be equipped with a lavatory in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
(2)  Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room which affords privacy to any person in such room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower which is in good working condition and which is properly connected to an approved water and sewer system as herein provided. Such bathtub or shower may be provided within the bathroom required in the immediately preceding subsection. 
(3)  Kitchen. Every dwelling unit shall contain a separate room or area for the storage, preparation, cooking and eating of food. Such room or space shall be provided within the following minimum facilities: 
a.  Kitchen sink. Such room or space shall contain a kitchen sink, in addition to the lavatory required by this section, which is in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
b.  Stove space. Such room or area shall contain adequate space for the installation of a stove or other authorized cooking facilities in such a manner that the stove or facilities may be easily accessible yet not located so as to endanger persons utilizing the other kitchen facilities. 
c.  Food storage space. Such room or area shall contain adequate space for dry food storage and, in addition, adequate space for refrigerated food storage facilities. 
(4)  Eating space. Every dwelling unit shall include adequate space for a dining table of ample size to accommodate as many persons as are authorized to occupy the dwelling unit. 
(5)  Hot water. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, shower or bathtub required under the provisions of this section and any laundry facility installed in any dwelling unit, shall be provided with both hot and cold running water under pressure. The required flush water closet, however, need only be provided with cold water under pressure. 
(6)  Water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained, and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with hot water under this section. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit at any time needed. 
(7)  Rubbish and garbage facilities. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with facilities for the safe and sanitary storage of rubbish and garbage and with facilities and services for the regular removal or disposal of such refuse. 
(8)  Insect and rodent harborage. Buildings used for human habitation shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found they shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(9)  Safe storage for drugs and household poisons. Each dwelling unit shall have facilities for the safe storage of drugs and household poisons. 
(10)  Heating and electrical facilities. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be provided with heat and electricity in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Heating facilities. Every dwelling and multifamily dwelling shall be supplied with heating facilities that shall be properly installed, safely maintained and in good working condition, and that are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms located herein, to a temperature of at least 65 degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Electrical facilities. Every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with an approved electric service, outlets and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the town: 
1.  Every habitable room of a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote outlets, one of which may be a ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. 
2.  In kitchens, three separate and remote wall-type electric convenience outlets or two such convenience outlets and one ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture shall be provided. 
3.  Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room, shall contain at least one electric light fixture. 
4.  In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one electric outlet. 
(11)  Installation and maintenance. All supplied equipment and facilities shall be constructed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Plumbing systems and fixtures. In buildings and structures used for human habitation, water lines, plumbing fixtures, chimneys, flues, stacks, waste and sewer lines, vents and drains shall be properly installed, connected, and maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable of performing the function for which they are designed. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the building code. 
b.  Heating equipment. Every heating, cooking, and water heating device located in a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be properly installed, connected, and maintained, and shall be capable of performing the function for which it was designed in accordance with the provisions of the building code. 
c.  Correction of defective system. Where it is found, in the opinion of the building official, that the electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, he shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
d.  Other facilities and equipment. All other equipment and all building space and parts in every dwelling and multifamily dwelling shall be constructed and maintained so as to properly and safely perform their intended function in accordance with the provisions of the building code. 
(12)  Removal or discontinuance. No owner, operator or occupant shall, for any reason, including nonpayment of rent or breach of any condition or covenant of a lease, cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this housing code to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let by him except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the building official, or except when so authorized under the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-9) 
Sec. 14-93. - Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Natural light in habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens when artificial light may be provided in accordance with the provisions of the building code. Whenever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
(b)  Light in public halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in every dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least ten footcandles in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs and passageways. 
(c)  Adequate ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can be easily opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size required, except where mechanical ventilation is provided in accordance with the provisions of the building code. 
(d)  Ventilation and light in bathroom and water closet. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as required by subsections (a) and (c) of this section; except that no window shall be required in bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved ventilation system. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-10) 
Sec. 14-94. - Use, space, occupancy and location requirements. 
(a)  Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable rooms in existing buildings, shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 1/3 feet; except, that in attics or top half-stories, the ceiling height shall not be less than seven feet in not less than one-third of the area when used for sleeping, study or similar activity. The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than the required height under this section shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
(b)  Required space in dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less than 150 square feet for the first occupant, and 100 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total floor area of all habitable rooms. 
(c)  Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum gross floor area of at least 70 square feet per occupant. 
(d)  Access limitation of dwelling unit to commercial uses. No bathroom or water closet compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall open directly into or shall be used in conjunction with a food store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment room, or similar room used for public purposes. 
(e)  Exits. Every dwelling unit shall have as many safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level as are required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and town. 
(f)  Basement or cellar space. No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls be impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness; 
(2)  The total of window area in each room be equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as required in section 14-93(a), and the electrical facilities as required by section 14-92(j)(2)a are provided; 
(3)  The total of openable window area in each room be equal to at least the minimum as required under section 14-93(c), except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the building official. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-11) 
Sec. 14-95. - Minimum requirements for safety from fire and toxic substances. 
(a)  Generally. No flammable liquid with a flash point of 110 degrees Fahrenheit or lower shall be stored in or in close proximity of any dwelling or dwelling unit including flammables stored within motorcycles, lawnmowers and other similar type machinery. 
(b)  Storage of flammable liquids prohibited. No dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall be located within a building containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of 110 degrees Fahrenheit or lower. 
(c)  Cooking and heating equipment. The use of portable heating and cooking equipment employing a flame is prohibited within any dwelling or dwelling unit, except as permitted in accordance with the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and the town. 
(d)  Health hazards. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be free from hazards to health due to the presence of toxic substances, e.g., lead-based paint. 
(e)  Accumulations of rubbish, boxes, lumber, etc. No person shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a harborage for rodents or insects in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-12) 
Sec. 14-96. - Roominghouses. 
    No person shall operate a roominghouse, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any roominghouse, except in compliance with the following provisions and every other provision of this housing code: 
(1)  Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a roominghouse. All such facilities shall afford privacy and be located within the residence building served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar. 
(2)  Minimum floor space for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space per occupant. 
(3)  Bed linen and towels when supplied by operator. The operator of every roominghouse shall change supplies, bed linen and towels therein at least once a week and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(4)  Shades, drapes, etc. Every window of every rooming unit shall be supplied with shades, drawn drapes, or other devices and, the material shall meet fire safety standards which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupant of the rooming unit. 
(5)  Egress. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and the town. 
(6)  Sanitary conditions. The operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the roominghouse; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(7)  Hotels. Every provision of this chapter which applies to roominghouses shall also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-13) 
Secs. 14-97-14-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS 

Sec. 14-121. - Owner's responsibilities. 
    The responsibilities of owners and occupants contained in this division are in addition to those specified elsewhere throughout this housing code. 
(1)  An owner shall: 
a.  Comply with the requirements of G.S. chs. 368o, 830 and 833a and all applicable building and housing codes materially affecting health and safety of both the state and town; 
b.  Make all repairs and do whatever is necessary to put and keep the premises in a fit and habitable condition, except where the premises are intentionally rendered unfit or uninhabitable by the occupant, a member of his family or other person on the premises with his consent, in which case such duty shall be the responsibility of the occupant; 
c.  Keep all common areas of the premises in a clean and safe condition; 
d.  Maintain in good and safe working order and condition all electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating and other facilities and appliances and elevators, supplied or required to be supplied by him; 
e.  Provide and maintain appropriate receptacles and covers for the removal of ashes, garbage, rubbish and other waste incidental to the occupancy of the dwelling unit and arrange for their removal. 
(2)  The owner and occupant of a dwelling unit may agree that the occupant is to perform specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or remodeling if: 
a.  The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith; 
b.  The agreement is in writing; 
c.  The work is not necessary to cure noncompliance with subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section; and 
d.  The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the owner to other occupants in the premises. 
(3)  Compliance by nonconforming rooms, etc. Each habitable room or dwelling unit that does not conform to this housing code and becomes vacated for any reason for a period of 15 days shall conform to this housing code before it is deemed habitable again. The owner of each habitable room or dwelling unit shall be held responsible for compliance to this housing code in any instance where such an habitable or dwelling unit is considered noncomplying. Such work as is necessary to bring each habitable room or dwelling unit that is ruled noncomplying up to the standards as noted in this housing code shall be completed within six months of adoption of this housing code. 
(4)  Shared or common areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. The owner and occupant may agree only under terms of a lease executed in writing that the tenant assume responsibility for keeping the common areas of the premises in a clean and safe condition. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-14) 
Sec. 14-122. - Occupant's responsibilities. 
(a)  Occupant's duties and responsibilities generally. An occupant shall: 
(1)  Comply with all obligations primarily imposed upon occupants by applicable provisions of any building or fire code materially affecting health and safety; 
(2)  Keep such part of the premises that he occupies and uses as clean and safe as the condition of the premises permit; 
(3)  Remove from his dwelling unit all ashes, garbage, rubbish and other waste in a clean and safe manner to the place provided by the owner pursuant to section 14-121(1)e; 
(4)  Keep all plumbing fixtures and appliances in the dwelling unit or used by the occupant as clean as the condition of such fixture or appliance permits; 
(5)  Use all electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other facilities and appliances, including elevators, in the premises in a reasonable manner; 
(6)  Not willfully or negligently destroy, deface, damage, impair, or remove any part of the premises or permit any other person to do so. 
(b)  Responsibility for extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only dwelling unit within that dwelling that is infested. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-15) 
Secs. 14-123-14-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RULES AND REGULATIONS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 14-141. - Adoption. 
    The building official is hereby authorized to establish such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this housing code; provided, that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this housing code. The building official shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt with the town clerk. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this housing code, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this housing code, as herein provided. 
(Code 1967, § 5A-16) 
Secs. 14-142-14-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-1, adopted March 19, 2012, amended Art IV in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Art. IV, §;s 14-171-14-184, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-1, adopted June 1, 2009. 

Sec. 14-171. - Purpose and declaration of policy. 
(a)  This article is enacted pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(7), 7-148aa, and 7-152c as amended and is considered a blight ordinance. 
(b)  This article prohibits any person in control of real property located in the Town of Enfield from allowing, creating, maintaining or causing to be created or maintained blighted premises. This article also establishes penalties for violations. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-172. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Blight means premises containing any one of the following conditions: 
(1)  It has been determined by the town building official, director of health, fire marshal, town engineer, zoning enforcement officer, or other appropriate official, as designated by the town manager, acting within the scope of their authority, that a condition exists that poses a serious or immediate threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the community. 
(2)  Missing or boarded doors or windows for a period of more than 90 days. Should boarded windows or doors be necessary for any additional period up to 180 days, a valid building permit is required. 
(3)  Collapsing or missing exterior walls, roofs, floors or foundations. 
(4)  Collapsing, substantially damaged or dilapidated exterior features which may include, but are not necessarily limited to, stairs, ramps, porches, handrails, railings, fences, hatchways, chimneys, metal smoke stacks, attic vents or floors. 
(5)  Exterior walls which contain holes, fractures, breaks, loose or rotting materials. 
(6)  Severely damaged, cracked, broken or missing siding, stucco, brick, stone or clapboards. 
(7)  Fifty percent of any one exterior wall containing mold. 
(8)  Fifty percent of any one exterior elevation or exterior wall with flaking, peeling, chipped or blistered paint on any one exterior elevation which is visible to the public; or having exterior paint which is chipped, blistered, flaking or peeling on more than one wall. 
(9)  Unrepaired fire, wind, or water damage. 
(10)  Rodent harborage and or infestation. 
(11)  Persistent garbage, refuse or trash. 
(12)  Parking lots in a state of disrepair or abandonment, evidenced by cracks, potholes, fractured asphalt and cement, overgrowth of vegetation within the surfaces, pavement or macadam, or medians and buffers. 
(13)  Shrubs, hedges, grass, and plants that have been left in an unkempt manner by covering or blocking 50 percent or more of the structure, its windows, doors or means of access; 
(14)  Dead, decayed, or damaged trees. 
(15)  Grass, weeds or similar growths reaching a height greater than 12 inches. Nor shall the owner of any undeveloped premises allow any grass, weeds, or similar growths thereon greater than 12 inches in height to remain within 25 feet of a street line or any adjoining property line of any premises with a building or dwelling location thereon whether said building or dwelling is occupied or not. Maintained gardens, including flowers and vegetables are excluded from this subsection. 
(16)  Graffiti or vandalism. 
(17)  The storage of an inoperable or unsightly motor vehicle. 
(18)  The storage of junk occupying a total cumulative area of 100 square feet. 
(19)  A tarp on a roof in excess of 90 days; any deteriorated or unsecured tarp. 
(20)  Unsanitary swimming pools which harbor insects, reptiles, amphibians, or other conditions posing a nuisance to neighboring properties. 
    Building means any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of person, animals or materials. Any other structure eight feet or more in height shall be considered a building, including a solid fence or wall, but excluding a public utility pole or flag pole. 
    Citation Hearing Officer means any individual appointed pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-152c to hear contested cases. 
    Housing Blight means residential premises containing any of the conditions enumerated in section 14-172(a) and in violation of section 14-173 herein. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is incapable of performing the function for which it was designed by virtue of missing parts, or broken or severely damaged components. 
    Junk means a worn out, cast off, or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use and or material including but not limited to household appliances, parts of motor vehicles, furniture, equipment, building materials and refuse. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle as defined by C.G.S. § 14-1, as may be amended from time to time, including, but not limited to an automobile, truck, van, motor vehicle trailer, camper trailer, boat trailer, house trailer, mobile home, motorcycle, and/or any other motorized wheeled vehicle designated or used for highway purpose. 
    Open area means any area that is visible from any public way or adjacent properties. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, or other legal entity capable of occupying, owning or possessing real property. 
    Premises means a platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon, or any part thereof. The term "premises," where the context requires, shall be deemed to include any building, dwellings, parcels or land or structures. 
    Property maintenance inspector means any individual appointed by the town manager for purposes of enforcing this article. 
    Public nuisance means any premises containing any of the conditions enumerated in section 14-172(a). 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground, including signs and billboards, but not including fences or walls used as fences, provided such fence or wall is less than eight feet in height. 
    Town means Town of Enfield. 
    Unsightly motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which is substantially damaged, vandalized, dismantled, and/or partially dismantled. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-173. - Blighted premises prohibited. 
(a)  No person owning real property shall cause or allow blighted premises to be created, nor shall any such person allow the continued existence of blighted premises. Blighted premises are prohibited. Such creation or maintenance of blighted premises shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be prohibited and shall subject such person to enforcement and penalties pursuant to this ordinance. 
(b)  Any building, structure, premises or any part of a structure that is a separate unit, in which exist any one or any combination of the conditions defined as blight in section 14-172 shall be deemed to be blighted. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-174. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following properties shall be exempt from the application of section 14-172(a)(14) and (15): 
(1)  Agricultural lands pursuant to C.G.S. § 22-3(b). 
(2)  Land dedicated as public open space. 
(3)  Land preserved in its natural state through conservation easements or conservation restrictions. 
(4)  Areas designated as buffers by land use agencies. 
(5)  Upland review areas, wetlands and watercourses. 
(6)  Those lots with slopes in excess of 15 degrees or escarpments left to grow wild provided they are keeping with the established setting and natural character of the neighborhood. 
(b)  One inoperable or unsightly motor vehicle shall be allowed in an open area of real property, provided: 
(1)  The motor vehicle shall be rendered safe. The motor vehicle's exterior shall be fully intact and shall be locked or otherwise secured. The motor vehicle shall be free of jagged, sharp, or protruding metal or glass parts. The motor vehicle shall be covered and secured by a motor vehicle cover designed for such use. Tarps or other plastic covers are not acceptable. 
(2)  The motor vehicle shall be located behind the front line(s) of the dwelling, which is the portion of the house that is closest to the street. 
(c)  Farms are exempt from the application of section 14-172(17). 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-175. - Designated enforcement officer. 
    The property maintenance inspector is charged with the enforcement of this article and is hereby authorized to take such enforcement actions as specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-176. - Violation complaints. 
    Complaints of alleged violations shall be submitted in writing, including electronic mail or citizen request procedure available at www.enfield-ct.gov, and shall be signed by the individual making the complaint, including electronic signature. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-177. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  The town, through its property maintenance inspector, shall serve written notice to the person responsible for the blighted premises. The notice may be hand-delivered or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the owner, or such notice may be served by any other method authorized or required in Connecticut. A copy of the notice shall also be sent to the lien holder of the property per C.G.S. § 7-148gg. 
(b)  Such notice shall state the violation and demand its abatement within 30 calendar days. If the owner fails to correct the violation, the property maintenance inspector may issue an enforcement citation as specified herein. 
(c)  If the person responsible for the blighted premises cannot be ascertained or does not accept delivery of the written notice, the notice shall be published once in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the town. The notice shall include the name of the last known owner of the real property upon which violation has been found and the address of the real property. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 14-4 , 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-178. - Enforcement citation. 
(a)  If any violation remains unabated after 30 days, the property maintenance inspector is hereby authorized to issue a citation to the violator in accordance with this article. The citation will require immediate payment. 
(b)  Failure to remedy the violation shall subject the violator to criminal penalties as permitted by statute, including referral to the state's attorney's office for criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 14-4 , 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-179. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Violations of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $75.00 each day the violation continues after the date of the citation. Each day of each violation shall constitute a separate offense subject to the established $75.00 fine. 
(b)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to section 14-180 herein and the citation hearing officer finds liability, fines assessed shall accrue from the date of the issuance of the citation. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-180. - Citation procedure. 
    Any person issued a citation pursuant to this article shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the citation pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-152c. The request for a hearing shall be made to the Town Manager. If any person so cited chooses not to timely request a hearing, he shall be deemed to have admitted liability. The town manager shall appoint a citation hearing officer. the citation hearing officer shall not be a police officer, any other town employee or any person who has the authority to issue citations. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-181. - Notice of penalty assessment with clerk of superior court. 
    If enforcement citation fines levied in accordance with this chapter are not paid within 30 days, despite proper notice to the person found liable, the citation hearing officer shall file a certified copy of the unpaid fines with the clerk of the superior court. Notice with the clerk of the superior court shall be filed within 12 months. The clerk shall enter judgment in favor of the town. The judgment shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and a levy of execution of such judgment may issue without further notice to such person. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-182. - Appeal of penalty assessment to superior court; blight review committee. 
(a)  A person against whom a judgment has been entered is entitled to judicial review in accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-152c; or 
(b)  After the appeal period pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-152c has passed, any person having been issued a citation may seek relief of enforcement citation fines from the blight review committee by contacting the town manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-3 , adopted Dec. 17, 2018, repealed the former § 14-182 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 14-182 pertained to appeal of penalty assessment to superior court and derived from Ord. No. 12-1, adopted March 19, 2012. 
Sec. 14-183. - Recording of lien. 
(a)  Any unpaid imposed fine for housing blight violations shall constitute a lien upon the real estate in accordance with C.G.S. § 7-148aa. Each lien shall be continued, recorded and released as provided for in C.G.S. § 7-148aa. 
(b)  Any unpaid imposed fine for a blight or public nuisance violation, other than housing, shall be enforced in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, including the filing of a judgment lien when appropriate. 
(c)  Any unpaid costs associated with bringing the premises into compliance per section 14-184 herein shall constitute a lien upon the real estate in accordance with C.G.S. § 49-73b. Each lien shall be continued, recorded and released as provided for in C.G.S. § 49-73b. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-184. - Municipal performance. 
(a)  The town may take such steps as are necessary to abate blight on any premises in violation of this article. 
(b)  In addition to any civil or criminal penalties as permitted by statute, the property maintenance inspector is authorized to institute any and all legal proceedings before the superior court to compel compliance with this article. 
(c)  In the event that the property maintenance inspector prevails in any legal proceedings provided for herein, the violator shall be liable for all costs of bringing the property into compliance and shall further be liable for all legal costs incurred by the town in bringing the property into compliance, including its reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-185. - Pending special permit, site plan or property sale exception. 
(a)  Any blighted premises for which a building permit, special use permit, or site plan application is required in order to remediate the blighted premises shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance for a period of 30 days in order for the property owner or his designee to apply for any required building permit, special use permit or site plan approval, and shall be further exempt therefrom during the pendency of the review of such application by the municipal agency having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any blighted premises which has been sold to a bona fide purchaser shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance for a period of 30 days from the date of sale for any remediation work not requiring a building permit, special use permit, or site plan approval. 
(c)  Any blighted premises which has been sold to a bona fide purchaser and which requires a building permit, special use permit or site plan approval for required remediation work, shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (a), above, commencing on the date of sale. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-186. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  The provisions in this article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations which prescribe standards other than are provided for in this article. 
(b)  In any cases where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance, regulation or other code of the town or state, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety, and property values of the residents shall prevail. 
(c)  This article shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or regulation existing prior to the effective date of this code, and any such violations may be governed and continue to be punishable under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 14-187. - Responsibility for compliance. 
    All persons subject to this article shall be jointly and severally obligated to comply with the provisions of this article. Whenever the person, as herein defined, is a corporation or other legal entity, the officers thereof shall be jointly and severally responsible with that corporation or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 18-3 , 12-17-2018) 
Secs. 14-188-14-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISPLAY OF STREET NUMBERS 

Sec. 14-211. - Policy statement. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish an efficient system for the identification of specific locations in the town by emergency personnel. 
(Code 1967, § 4-42) 
Sec. 14-212. - Display of street numbers required. 
(a)  The owner of each residential, commercial or industrial building shall affix to such building the street number for such building as assigned by the engineering division, department of public works, in the manner herein specified: 
(1)  Such numbers shall be at least four inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch and contrast in color with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. 
(2)  The number shall be visible from the street to which it relates. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. 
(3)  Street numbers shall be affixed either at the top or to the side of the most main entrance of the building facing that street. If the building is more than 100 feet from the road, an additional like number shall be displayed on a mailbox, post or fence, along the street line, clearly identifying the property. If affixed on a mailbox such number shall be placed on both sides of said box. 
(4)  For apartments, condominiums and industrial and commercial buildings, each principal building shall bear the number assigned the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance of such principal building shall bear a separate number or letter (A, B, C, etc.). 
(Code 1967, § 4-43; Ord. No. 18-2 , 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 14-213. - Enforcement. 
    The building inspector or his designee shall enforce this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-44(b)) 
Sec. 14-214. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 for each violation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-44(a)) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate and prohibit businesses, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Bazaars and raffles. 
    The town hereby authorizes the promotion, conducting and operation of bazaars and raffles in the town as provided in G.S. §§ 7-170-7-186. 
(Code 1967, § 7-1) 
Secs. 18-2-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Policy statement. 
    It is hereby declared that the business of operating massage therapy establishments as defined herein is a business affecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-2) 
Sec. 18-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means any and all persons, other than the massage therapists, who render any service to the permittee and who have no physical contact with customers and clients. 
    Massage therapist means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage therapy as herein defined. 
    Massage therapy means the systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment of the soft tissues of the body, by use of pressure, friction, stroking, percussion, kneading, vibration by manual or mechanical means, range of motion and nonspecific stretching. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, ice, hot and cold packs, tub, shower, steam, dry heat, or cabinet baths, for the purpose of, but not limited to, maintaining good health and establishing and maintaining good physical and mental condition. Massage therapy does not encompass diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, nor any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, naturopathy, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. 
    Massage therapy establishment means any establishment having a fixed business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in the definition of "massage therapy" above. 
    Private parts means the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast. 
    Recognized school means any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage therapy; which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 70 hours, to be given in not more than three calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning, following the successful completion of such course of study or learning in a school which has been recognized and approved by the state. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 20-206a. 
Sec. 18-33. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of the massage therapy establishment, including appliances, apparatus and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  All employees shall be clean and wear clean outer garments whose use is restricted to the massage therapy establishment. Provisions for a separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(c)  All employees, massage therapists must be modestly attired. Diaphanous, flimsy, transparent, formfitting or tight clothing is prohibited. Clothing must cover the employee's or massage therapist's chest at all times. Hemlines of skirts, dresses or other attire may be no higher than the top of the knee. 
(d)  Private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloth or undergarments when in the presence of any employee or massage therapist. Any contact with a patron's genitals is strictly prohibited. 
(e)  All massage therapy establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in an approved, sanitary manner. 
(f)  Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(g)  No massage therapy establishment granted a permit under provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any services are available other than those services as described in section 18-32, or that employees or massage therapists are dressed in any manner other than described in subsection (c) of this section. Nor, shall any massage therapy establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any services are available other than those services described in section 18-32. 
(h)  Health services enumerated in section 18-32, under the definition of "massage therapy," must be carried on in one cubical, room, booth or area within the massage therapy establishment. No service enumerated in section 18-32, under the definition of "massage therapy," may be carried on in any other cubical, room, booth or area except where such cubical, room, booth or area has transparent doors or walls so that all activity within a cubical, room, booth or area is visible from outside the same. 
(i)  A massage therapy establishment shall not carry on, engage in or conduct business on Sunday, and on any other days shall not carry on, engage in or conduct business before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(j)  No alcoholic beverage or other intoxicant shall be displayed, served, ingested or sold on the premises of a massage therapy establishment. 
(k)  A full schedule of service rates shall be posted in a prominent place within the massage therapy establishment in such a manner as to come to the attention of all patrons. No charges other than the specified rates for specified services are to be allowed, with the patron being notified of the full cost prior to the rendering of any service. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-17) 
Sec. 18-34. - Inspections; right of entry. 
    The division of police and the department of public health shall from time to time, at least twice a year, make an inspection of each massage therapy establishment in the town for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this article are complied with. Such inspections shall be made at a reasonable time, in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-19) 
Sec. 18-35. - Exceptions to provisions. 
    This article does not apply to any person, service, procedure, activity or establishment exempted from the requirements of G.S. §§ 20-206a-20-206e. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-21) 
Sec. 18-36. - Establishment of rules and regulations. 
    The town manager or his designee or the director of health may, after a public hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with, but to carry out, the intent of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-22) 
Sec. 18-37. - Violations. 
    Every person, except persons who are specifically exempt by this article, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives massage therapies or conducts a massage therapy establishment without first obtaining a permit and paying a license fee to the town, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Penalty for conviction of such person shall be as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-23) 
Secs. 18-38-18-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 18-61. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the town, the operation of a massage therapy establishment as herein defined without first having obtained a permit from the town manager or his designee after approval by the director of health. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-4) 
Sec. 18-62. - Filing and fee. 
    Each applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage therapy establishment shall file an application with the town manager or his designee and pay a filing fee of $125.00 which shall not be refundable. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-5) 
Sec. 18-63. - Application generally. 
(a)  The application for a permit to operate a massage therapy establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage therapy to be administered, the proposed place of business and facilities therein and the name and address of each applicant. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Fingerprints and two portrait photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches in size, made not more than six months before the filing date of the application; 
(3)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(4)  Massage therapy or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, has previously operated in this or another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(5)  Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime except minor traffic violations; if any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, statement must be made giving the place and court in which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-6) 
Sec. 18-64. - Hearing; notice of hearing. 
    When the application is filed for a massage therapy establishment permit under this article, the town manager or his designee shall fix the time and place for a public hearing where the applicant may present evidence upon the question of his application. Not less than ten days before the date of such hearing, the town manager or his designee shall cause to be posted a notice of such hearing in a conspicuous place on the property in which or on which the proposed massage therapy establishment is to be operated. The applicant shall maintain such notices posted for the required number of days. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-7) 
Sec. 18-65. - Issuance. 
(a)  The town manager or his designee may issue a permit within 14 days following a hearing if all requirements for a massage therapy establishment described in this article are met, and may issue a permit to all persons who apply to perform, massage therapy services, unless he finds: 
(1)  The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not have complied with all the applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the building, health, city planning, housing, zoning and fire codes of the town; or 
(2)  That the applicant and any other person who will be directly engaged in the management and operation of a massage therapy establishment has been convicted of: 
a.  A felony; 
b.  An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; or 
c.  Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering. 
(b)  The town manager or his designee in his discretion may issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes in subsection (a)(2) of this section, if he finds that any such conviction occurred at least three years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has no subsequent convictions, if, after considering: 
(1)  The nature of the crime and its relationship to the permit for which the person has applied; 
(2)  Information pertaining to the degree of rehabilitation of the convicted person; and 
(3)  The time elapsed since the conviction or release; the town manager or his designee determines that the applicant is suitable to hold such permit. 
(c)  Each such establishment shall conform to all rules and regulations contained herein and the public health code of the state as well as to such terms and conditions as the state commissioner of public health and/or the local director of health finds necessary and proper. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-8) 
Sec. 18-66. - Prerequisites to issuance. 
(a)  No permit to conduct the massage therapy establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the director of health or his authorized representative reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be waterproofed with approved waterproof materials. 
(2)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per section shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
(3)  Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water should be installed in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
(b)  The director of health shall certify that the proposed massage therapy establishment complies with all the requirements of this section and shall give or send such certification to the town manager or his designee. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-9) 
Sec. 18-67. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  Any permit issued for a massage therapy establishment may be revoked or suspended by the town manager or his designee after a public hearing before the town manager or his designee; or after it is found that the provisions of this article are violated; or where the permittee or any employee of the permittee, including a massage therapist, has been convicted of any offense found in section 18-93 and the permittee knows, or knows of the probability, of the violation or conviction; or in any case where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police officer or health inspector of the town to inspect the premises or the operation therein as provided in section 18-34. 
(b)  The town manager or his designee, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least ten days written notice of the charges against him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the town manager or his designee, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases the charges shall be specific and in writing. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-10) 
Sec. 18-68. - Transferability. 
    No permit shall be transferable except with the written consent of the town manager or his designee and the approval of the department of public health; provided, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee, the massage therapy establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of permit. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-11) 
Secs. 18-69-18-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMITS 

Sec. 18-91. - Required; fee. 
    Any person, including an applicant for a massage therapy establishment permit, who engages in the practice of massage therapies shall file an application for a massage therapist permit with the town manager or his designee upon a form provided by the town manager and shall pay a filing fee of $25.00 which shall not be refundable. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-12) 
Sec. 18-92. - Application. 
    The application for a massage therapist permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and resident's address; 
(2)  Social security number; 
(3)  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and fingerprints; 
(4)  Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  Business occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding date of application; 
(6)  Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime except minor traffic violations; if any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, statement must be made giving the place and court in which the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction; 
(7)  A copy of the valid current license of the applicant as a Connecticut licensed massage therapist; 
(8)  Any massage therapist so employed is required to present a certificate from a physician licensed to practice in the state stating that the applicant has been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease and showing that the examination was conducted within 30 days prior to the submission of the application. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-13) 
Sec. 18-93. - Issuance. 
(a)  The town manager or his designee may issue a massage therapist permit within 21 days following application, unless he finds that the applicant for the massage therapist permit has been convicted of: 
(1)  A felony; 
(2)  An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; 
(3)  Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering. 
(b)  The town manager or his designee in his discretion may issue a permit to any person convicted of such crimes if he finds that such conviction occurred at least three years prior to the date of application and the applicant has no subsequent convictions, if, after considering: 
(1)  The nature of the crime and its relationship to the permit for which the person has applied; 
(2)  Information pertaining to the degree of rehabilitation of the convicted person; and 
(3)  The time elapsed since the conviction or release; the town manager or his designee determines that the applicant is suitable to hold such permit. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-14) 
Sec. 18-94. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  A massage therapist permit issued by the town manager or his designee shall be revoked or suspended after a public hearing before the town manager or his designee where it appears that the massage therapist has been convicted of any offense enumerated in section 18-93. 
(b)  The town manager or his designee before revoking or suspending any massage therapist permit shall give the massage therapist at least ten days written notice of the examination into his conviction record and the opportunity for a public hearing before the town manager or his designee, at which hearing the town manager or his designee shall determine the relevant facts regarding the occurrence of the conviction. 
(Code 1967, § 5C-15) 
Secs. 18-95-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-121. - Policy statement. 
    The town council finds: 
(1)  There are a number of "adult-oriented establishments" located in the town which require special supervision from the town's public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health, safety and welfare of the town's citizens. 
(2)  Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the United States indicate that: 
a.  Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such "adult-oriented establishments," especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles, studies and rooms for the private viewing of so-called "adult" motion pictures and/or video tapes and/or live entertainment; and 
b.  Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by patrons, clients or customers of such "adult-oriented establishments" for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts; and 
c.  Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles and rooms; and 
d.  Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes and/or with other members of the same sex, thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons who may come into contact with such deposits; and 
e.  The reasonable regulation and supervision of such "adult-oriented establishments" tends to discourage such sexual acts and prostitution, and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments. 
(3)  The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments including, without limitation, those specifically cited at subsection (1) of this section, is and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the town. 
(4)  The Constitution and laws of the state grant to the town powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise "adult-oriented establishments" as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(5)  It is not the intent of the council, in enacting this article, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States and/or state constitutions, nor is it the intent of the council to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented films, video-tapes, books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this article, the council does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any sexually-oriented materials protected by the United States and/or state constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually-oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such materials. 
(Code 1967, § 5D-2) 
Sec. 18-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult amusement machine means any amusement machine that is regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes, or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined below, and in conjunction therewith has facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, as defined below, and including adult-oriented films, movies or live entertainment, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated performance of "specified sexual activities" or exhibition and viewing of "specified anatomical areas," removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other personal services offered customers. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult-oriented establishment shall include, without limitation, "adult bookstores," "adult motion picture theaters," "adult mini-motion picture theaters" and further means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. An "adult-oriented establishment" further includes, without limitation, any "adult entertainment studio" or any premises that are physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or any other term of like import. 
    Amusement machine means any machine which upon the payment of a charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronically operated, and shall include but not be limited to such devices as pinball machines, skillball, mechanical grab machines, electronic baseball, football, hockey or basketball machines, any and all air propelled machines or games, pool tables, shooting games, any and all video games and all other games, operations similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated, including video monitoring machines. This definition shall not apply to those items generally described as juke-boxes or billiard tables or pool tables in billiard or pool parlors solely designated as such and permitted under the zoning regulations. 
    Employee means any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult-oriented establishment. 
    Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an employee or an independent contractor. 
    Inspector means an employee of the North Central District Health Department authorized and designated by the director of health, or the zoning enforcement officer, or an employee of the town building department or a member of the town division of police, or the fire marshal of any fire districts, or an agent of any or all of such persons who is designated to inspect premises regulated under this article, and to take the required actions authorized by this article in case of violations being found on such premises, and to require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on said premises. 
    Minor shall be deemed to refer to a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Operator means any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment. 
    Sexual activities, as used in this article, is not intended to include any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publication or films, nor does it include any art or photography publications which devote at least 25 percent of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography. Nor does this definition apply to any news periodical which reports or describes current events and which, from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or semi-nude persons in connection with the dissemination of the news. Nor does this definition apply to publications or films which describe and report different cultures and which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or semi-nude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or semi-nudity is indigenous to the population. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region; 
b.  Buttocks; 
c.  Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. 
(Code 1967, § 5D-3) 
Sec. 18-123. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow or permit any minor to loiter in any part of such establishment, including parking lots immediately adjacent to such establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment. 
(b)  Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the town on and after November 5, 1991, shall be well lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult-oriented establishments for whatever purpose, but especially for the purpose of providing for the secluded viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures, or other types of adult-oriented entertainment. 
(c)  On and after November 5, 1991, the operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of live adult entertainment shall be well lighted and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(d)  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(e)  An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(f)  All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by the division of police, inspectors employed by the town, or such other persons as the council may designate. 
(g)  No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less than 500 feet from an area zoned residential. 
(h)  No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less than 1,000 feet from an existing adult-oriented establishment. 
(Code 1967, § 5D-4) 
Sec. 18-124. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this article shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $100.00 for each such violation. 
(b)  Each violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing more than one hour shall be considered a separate offense for each hour of violation. 
(Code 1967, § 5D-5) 
Sec. 18-125. - Savings clause. 
    Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or provision of this article to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect only such section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional, and shall not affect any other section, clause or provision of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 5D-6) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIC AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CULTURE AND ARTS COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-2 , adopted March 21, 2016, changed the title of Art. II from "Cultural Arts Commission" to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 22-31. - Establishment of commission. 
    The town council has established the Enfield Culture and Arts Commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-71; Ord. No. 16-2 , 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the Enfield Culture and Arts Commission. 
( Ord. No. 16-2 , 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 22-33. - Purpose of commission. 
    The purpose of the commission shall be to plan, produce, coordinate, or otherwise provide assistance to sponsors of events or activities and to encourage participation therein, which promote or develop the artistic, historic, cultural and heritage resources of and within the community of Enfield. 
(Code 1967, § 2-72; Ord. No. 14-5 , 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 22-34. - Members; qualifications, appointment, terms of office. 
(a)  Members of the commission shall be appointed by the town council and shall be selected from a broad cross section of the residential and business community so as to create a diverse body of members who are interested in the aims and purposes of this commission as set forth in this article. 
(b)  The commission shall consist of seven resident electors, who shall serve for two-year overlapping terms, which shall commence on June 1 of the year of their appointment; two town council member liaisons; and, one town staff member liaison. 
(c)  Annually, during the month of June, the members of the commission shall meet, organize and from among their members elect a chair, a vice-chair and a secretary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-73; Ord. No. 14-5 , 10-20-2014; Ord. No. 18-1 , 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 22-35. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in the term of any member of the commission shall be filled by appointment by the town council for the unexpired term in accordance with section 22-34(a). 
(Code 1967, § 2-74) 
Sec. 22-36. - Expenses and assistance. 
    The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. The commission may receive federal, state, municipal or private monies for the purposes of fostering, assisting and encouraging the arts and to encourage the participation in, and promotion, development and appreciation of Enfield history, culture and heritage. 
(Code 1967, § 2-75; Ord. No. 14-5 , 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 22-37. - Meetings. 
    The commission shall fix the time and place of its regular monthly meetings and may hold such special meetings as may from time to time be required. The commission shall keep a record of its proceedings, deliberations and actions and shall annually report to the town council in writing its activities and goals. The commission may, within the limit of funds available, employ clerical help or solicit any technical assistance or consultants that may be required. 
(Code 1967, § 2-76; Ord. No. 14-5 , 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 22-38. - Auxiliary services. 
    The facilities and services of the various agencies and departments of the town shall be available to the commission as it may reasonably require. 
(Code 1967, § 2-77) 
Chapter 26 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the economic development commission. 
Sec. 26-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the economic development commission shall be for the promotion and development of the economic resources of the town. 
(Code 1967, § 2-121) 
Sec. 26-33. - Establishment. 
    The town council hereby accepts the provisions of G.S. § 7-136 and establishes an economic development commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-122) 
Sec. 26-34. - Powers and duties. 
    The economic development commission shall serve as an advisory board to the town council and the town manager. The commission shall conduct research into the economic conditions and trends in the town; shall make recommendations to appropriate officials and agencies of the town regarding action to improve its economic condition and development; shall seek to coordinate the activities of and cooperate with unofficial bodies organized to promote such economic development and may advertise and may prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets which in its judgment will further its official purposes; may conduct activities to market the town's assets for beneficial economic development; and may provide stewardship and oversight of public industrial park assets. 
(Code 1967, § 2-123) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-136. 
Sec. 26-35. - Appointment of members. 
    The economic development commission shall consist of 15 members, who shall reside or conduct business in the town. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the town manager. In addition, the town council, the planning and zoning commission, conservation commission and the agricultural commission shall each appoint one liaison from their respective bodies to serve as ex officio members. 
(Code 1967, § 2-124; Ord. No. 99-3, 6-7-1999; Ord. No. 17-3 , 6-5-2017) 
Sec. 26-36. - Terms of office; filling of vacancies. 
    The members of the commission shall serve for overlapping terms of five years. Any vacancy in the membership of the commission shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the town manager. 
(Code 1967, § 2-125) 
Sec. 26-37. - Removal of members. 
    The town manager may remove any member of the commission for cause and, on request of such member, after public hearing. 
(Code 1967, § 2-126) 
Sec. 26-38. - Compensation; expenses. 
    The members of the commission and the ex officio liaisons shall receive no compensation for their services as such, but the members shall, and the liaisons may, be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
(Code 1967, § 2-127) 
Sec. 26-39. - Officers; meetings. 
    The commission shall elect annually a chair and a vice-chair from among its members. All meetings of the commission shall be at the call of the chair. Meetings will be held at least on a quarterly basis. The commission will hold an annual joint meeting with the town council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-128) 
Secs. 26-40-26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 26-71. - Created; composition; qualifications. 
    Under the authority contained in G.S. §§ 8-124-8-169w, there is hereby created the Enfield Redevelopment Agency of five members who shall be electors resident in the town. 
(Code 1967, § 2-19) 
Sec. 26-72. - Appointment; terms of office; vacancies. 
    The members of the redevelopment agency shall be appointed by the town manager with the approval of the town council. Members of the redevelopment agency shall be appointed annually to serve for five-year overlapping terms. Each member of the redevelopment agency shall serve until his successor is appointed and has qualified, and any vacancy shall be filled in like manner for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1967, § 2-20) 
Sec. 26-73. - Officers and employees. 
    The redevelopment agency shall elect from among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, and may employ, subject to provisions of the Charter, a secretary and such other officers, agents, technical consultants, legal counsel and employees as it requires. The members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1967, § 2-21) 
Sec. 26-74. - Majority vote required. 
    Action by the redevelopment agency shall be taken only on the majority vote of all the members. 
(Code 1967, § 2-22) 
Sec. 26-75. - Powers and duties. 
    The redevelopment agency shall have all the powers and duties as authorized under G.S. §§ 8-124-8-169w. 
(Code 1967, § 2-23) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Officers and elections, ch. II. 

Sec. 30-1. - Board for admission of electors. 
    The board for admission of electors in the town shall consist of the town clerk and the registrars of voters. 
(Code 1967, § 4A-1) 
State Law reference- Composition of board for admission of electors, G.S. § 9-15a. 
Sec. 30-2. - Voting districts. 
    The boundaries of the voting districts are as follows: 
DISTRICT 1A-58 
Commences at a point where the centerline of Route 91 intersects with the centerline of Oliver Road 
Then runs east along the centerline of Oliver Road to the centerline of Post Office Road 
Then runs south east along the centerline of Post Office Road to the centerline of Steele Road 
Then goes south along the centerline of Steele Road to the southern border of the Enfield town line 
Then runs west along southern border of the Enfield town line to the centerline of King Street(Route 5) 
Then runs north along the centerline of King Street(Route 5) to the intersection and centerline of Route 91. 
Then runs north along the centerline of I91 to the centerline of Oliver Road 
DISTRICT 1A-59 
Commences at a point where Route 91 intersects with the centerline of Oliver Road 
Then runs north along the centerline of Route 91 to the centerline of South Road 
Then runs east along the centerline of South Road to the intersection centerline of Indian Run 
Then runs south along the centerline of Indian Run to the intersection centerline of Dune Road 
Then runs east along the centerline of Dune Road to the intersection centerline line of Indian Run 
Then runs west along the centerline of Indian Run to the intersection centerline of Chief Street 
Then runs south along the centerline of Chief Street to the property line between 7 and 9 Chief Street. (Assessor map 66, lots 321 and 322) 
Then runs east from above said position to the center point of the Scantic River 
Then runs south along the center point of the Scantic River to the centerline of Town Farm Road 
Then runs east along the centerline of Town Farm Road to the centerline of Pierce Brook 
Then runs south along the centerline of Pierce Brook until the intersection centerline of Buckhorn Brook 
Then runs southeast along the centerline of Buckhorn Brook to the centerline of Broadbrook Road 
Then runs south along the centerline of Broadbrook Road to the southern border of the Enfield town line 
Then runs west along the centerline of the southern border with East Windsor where it intersects with the centerline of Steele Road 
Then runs north along the centerline of Steele Road to the centerline of Post Office Road 
Then runs west along the centerline of Post Office Road to the centerline of Oliver Road 
Then runs west along the centerline of Oliver Road to the centerline of Route 91 
DISTRICT 2A-58 
Commences at the point along the centerline of the southern border with East Windsor where it intersects with the centerline of King Street (Route 5) 
Then runs north along the centerline of King Street (Route 5) to the intersection centerline of Route 91 
Then runs north along the centerline of Route 91 to the centerline of South Road 
Then runs east along the centerline of South Road to the centerline of Freshwater Boulevard 
Then runs north along the centerline of Freshwater Blvd to the centerline of Hazard Avenue (Route 190) 
Then continues north along the centerline of Freshwater Blvd to the centerline of Elm Street(Route 220) 
Then runs west along the centerline of Elm Street (Route 220) to the intersection centerline of Charles Street 
Then runs north along the center line of Charles Street to where an extension of the centerline intersects with an extension of the centerline from Park Avenue 
Then runs west along the centerline of Park Avenue to the intersection centerline of Summer Street 
Then runs north along the centerline of Summer Street to the intersection centerline of Belmont Avenue 
Then runs west along Belmont Avenue to the intersection centerline of Enfield Street (Route 5) 
Then runs north along Enfield Street (Route 5) to the intersection centerline of Grape Brook 
Then runs west and then north along Grape Brook to a point even with the west end of Sunset Drive 
Then runs west to the intersection centerline of the Connecticut River 
Then runs south to the southern border of the Enfield town line 
Then runs east along the southern border to the intersection centerline of King Street (Route 5) 
DISTRICT 3A-58 
Commences at the point where the centerline of Elm Street intersects with the centerline of Palomba Drive 
Then runs south along the centerline of Palomba Drive to the intersection centerline of Hazard Avenue (Route 190) 
Then runs east along the centerline of Hazard Avenue (Route 190) to the intersection centerline of Oldefield Farms Road 
Then runs north along the centerline of Oldefield Farms Road to a point that would intersect with the extended centerline of Avon Street Extension 
Then runs east along the centerline of Avon Street Extension to the intersection centerline line Avon Street 
Then runs south along the centerline of Avon Street to the intersection centerline of Edward Street Extension 
Then runs east along the centerline of Edward Street Extension to the intersection of Edward Street 
Then runs south Edward Street to the intersection centerline of Hazard Avenue (Route 190) 
Then runs east along the centerline of Hazard Avenue (Route 190) to the centerline of Elm St. 
Then runs north along the centerline of Elm Street to the intersection of North Street 
Then runs east along the centerline of North Street to the centerline of North Maple Street 
Then runs north along the centerline of North Maple Street to the intersection centerline of Jawbuck Brook 
Then runs southwest along the center point of Jawbuck Brook, to the intersection centerline of Oakwood Street 
Then runs west along Oakwood Street to the centerline of George Washington Road 
Then runs south along the centerline of George Washington Road to the centerline of Shaker Road 
Then runs west along the centerline of Shaker Road to the intersection centerline of Elm Street 
Then runs west along the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of Palomba Drive. 
DISTRICT 3A-59 
Commences at the point where the centerline of the railroad tracks in the northeast corner intersects with the Massachusetts border 
Then runs east along the Massachusetts border to the Somers town line 
Then runs south along the Enfield town line to the southern border of the Enfield town line 
Then runs west along the southern border of the Enfield town line to the centerline of Broadbrook Road 
Then runs north along the centerline of Broadbrook Road to the center point of Buckhorn Brook 
Then runs northwest along the center point of the Buckhorn Brook to the intersection center point of Pierce Brook 
Then runs north along the center point of Pierce Brook to the intersection centerline of Town Farm Road 
Then continues west along the centerline of Town Farm Road to the intersection center point of the Scantic River 
Then runs northeast along the Scantic River centerline to a point set in a straight line continued from the property line between 7 and 9 Chief Street (Assessor map 66, lots 321 and 322) 
Then runs east from the said point to the intersection centerline of Chief Street 
Then runs north along the centerline of Chief Street to its intersection with the centerline of Indian Run 
Then runs east along the centerline of Indian Run to its intersection centerline with Dune Road 
Then runs west along the centerline of Dune Road to the intersection centerline of Tie Street 
Then runs north along the centerline of Tie Street to the intersection centerline of Indian Run 
Then run north along the centerline of Indian Run to the intersection centerline of South Road 
Then runs west along the centerline of South Road to the centerline of Beech Road 
Then runs north along the centerline of Beech Road to the center line of Middle Road 
Then runs northwest along the centerline of middle Road to the intersection centerline with Hazard Avenue (Route 190) 
Then runs east along the centerline of Hazard Avenue (Route 190) to the intersection centerline of Oldefield Farms Road 
Then runs north along the centerline of Oldefield Farms Road to a point that would intersect with the extended centerline of Avon Street Extension 
Then runs east along the centerline of Avon Street Extension to the intersection centerline Avon Street 
Then runs south along the centerline of Avon Street to the intersection centerline of Edward Street Extension 
Then runs east along the centerline of Edward Street Extension to the intersection of Edward Street 
Then runs south Edward Street to the intersection centerline of Hazard Avenue (Route 190) 
Then runs east along the centerline of Hazard Avenue (Route 190) to the centerline of Elm Street 
Then runs north along the centerline of Elm Street to the intersection of North Street 
Then runs east along the centerline of North Street to the centerline of North Maple Street 
Then runs north along the centerline of North Maple Street to the intersection center point of the Jawbuck Brook 
Then runs northeast along the center point of Jawbuck Brook to the intersection centerline of Bacon Road 
Then continues southeast along the centerline of Bacon Road to the centerline of Shaker Road 
Then runs east along the centerline of Shaker Road to the railroad tracks 
Then runs north along the centerline of the railroad tracks to the northern border of the Enfield town line 
DISTRICT 4A-58 
Commences at the point where the centerline of the Connecticut River intersects with the centerline of the Massachusetts border 
Then runs east along the centerline of the Massachusetts border to the intersection centerline of North Maple Street 
Then runs southeast along the centerline of North Maple Street to the intersection centerline of Jawbuck Brook 
Then runs southwest along the centerline of Jawbuck Brook to the intersection centerline of Oakwood Street 
Then runs west along the centerline of Oakwood Street to the centerline of George Washington Road 
Then runs south along the centerline of George Washington Road to the centerline of Shaker Road 
Then runs west along the centerline of Shaker Road to the intersection centerline of Elm Street 
Then runs west along the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of Palomba Drive 
Then runs south along the centerline of Palomba Drive to the intersection centerline of Middle Road 
Then runs south along the centerline of Middle Road to the intersection centerline of Beech Road 
Then runs south along the centerline of Beach Road to the intersection centerline of South Road 
Then runs west along the centerline of South Road to the intersection centerline of Freshwater Boulevard 
Then runs north along the centerline of Freshwater Boulevard to the intersection centerline of Elm Street (Route 220) 
Then runs west along the centerline of Elm Street (Route 220) to the intersection centerline of Charles Street 
Then runs north along the center line of Charles Street to where an extension of the centerline intersects with an extension of the centerline from Park Avenue 
Then runs west along the centerline of Park Avenue to the intersection centerline of Summer Street 
Then runs north along the centerline of Summer Street to the intersection centerline of Belmont Avenue 
Then runs west along Belmont Avenue to the intersection centerline of Enfield Street (Route 5) 
Then runs north along Enfield Street (Route 5) to the intersection centerline of Grape Brook 
Then runs west and then north along Grape Brook to a point even with the west end of Sunset Drive 
Then runs west to the intersection centerline of the Connecticut River 
Then runs north along the centerline of the Connecticut River to the intersection of the Massachusetts border 
DISTRICT 4A-59 
Commences at the point on the Massachusetts border where it intersects on the centerline of the railroad tracks in the northeast corner 
Then runs south along the centerline of the railroad tracks to the centerline of Shaker Road 
Then runs west along the centerline of Shaker Road to the centerline of Bacon Road 
Then runs northwest along the centerline of Bacon Road to the intersection center point with the Jawbuck Brook 
Then runs southwest along the center point of Jawbuck Brook to the intersection centerpoint of North Maple Street 
Then runs north along the centerline of North Maple Street to the intersection of the Massachusetts border 
Then runs east along the Massachusetts border to the intersection centerline of the railroad tracks. 
(Code 1967, § 4A-3; Ord. No. 03-1, 2-18-2003; Ord. No. 09-2, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 13-1, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 30-3. - Preparation and printing of concise summaries of arguments in favor of and opposed to local proposals and questions. 
(a)  Concise summaries of arguments in favor of, and arguments opposed to, local proposals or questions approved for submission to the electors of the town at a referendum for which explanatory texts are prepared pursuant to G.S. § 9-369b shall be prepared and printed for posting and distribution. 
(b)  Such summaries shall be prepared by an ad hoc committee of six members, three of whom are in favor of the proposal or question, and three of whom are opposed to it. They shall be chosen by the town manager or his designee. The committee shall provide an opportunity for public comment on such summaries to the extent practicable. 
(c)  Members of the committee so appointed shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Once summaries are drafted for a particular proposal, the ensuing procedure must be followed: 
(1)  The summaries must be reviewed and approved by a vote of the town council. 
(2)  The summaries shall be printed in accordance with the procedures set forth for the printing of explanatory texts under G.S. § 9-369b. The summaries shall be printed in sufficient supply for public distribution and shall also be printed on posters of a size to be determined by the town clerk. At least three such posters shall be posted at each polling place where electors will be voting on such proposals or questions. The town clerk may post additional posters at locations that are frequented by the public. 
(3)  The summaries shall be printed and made available for distribution and posting at least 30 days prior to submission to the electors of the town. 
(4)  The summaries shall be furnished to each absentee ballot applicant as required by G.S. § 9-140(d). 
(5)  The summaries shall contain language clearly stating that the printing of the summary does not constitute an endorsement by nor does it represent the official position of the town. 
(e)  Subject to the approval of the town attorney, materials may be prepared and printed concerning any such proposal or question in addition to the explanatory text if such materials do not advocate the approval or disapproval of the proposal or question. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6.3) 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Automatic telephone alarms, G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xiv), 7-282b; damaging, tampering with or removing property owned for alarm purposes, G.S. § 53a-117a. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-1, adopted June 20, 2011, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 34-31-34-37, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-1, adopted March 1, 2010. 
State Law reference- Transmittal of false alarms, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(14). 

Sec. 34-31. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to reduce needless alarms to which the division of police or other emergency service responds as a result of the activation of burglar, holdup, panic and fire alarms that automatically summon the division of police or other emergency service either via a central station, the division of police or automatic dialers. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 6-20-2011) 
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the division of police or other emergency service is expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm system" shall include, but not be limited to, the terms "automatic holdup alarm systems," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems," "manual holdup alarm systems," "audible alarm systems" and "fire alarm systems." "Alarm systems" which monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or any attempted robbery or a fire or smoke condition at a premises are specifically excluded from the provision of this article, as are alternative "alarm systems" designed to notify of medical emergencies. 
    False alarm means the activation of any alarm system to which the division of police or other emergency service responds which is not caused by: 
(1)  Fire, a criminal act or other emergency. 
(2)  An act of nature, such as an earthquake, tornado or hurricane. 
(3)  Circumstances occurring off the protected property and within the control of either the subscriber, his alarm business or his answering service. 
(4)  A person motivated solely by criminal, malicious or mischievous intent. 
    Protected property means any property which is monitored by, protected by or maintains an alarm system as defined above. 
    Residential property means a residential dwelling consisting of not more than six units. 
    Nonresidential property means any property which is not a residential property as defined herein. 
    Subscriber means a person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm system and thereafter installs it or has it installed. The term "subscriber" shall also mean a person who has control of premises in which an operable alarm system exists, with the ultimate responsibility for the alarm system being with the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 6-20-2011) 
Sec. 34-33. - Registration; notifications; imposition of penalties. 
(a)  Existing alarm systems must, within 90 days of adoption of article, March 16, 2010, be registered with the Town of Enfield. Alarm registration forms will be provided by the town. 
(b)  For new alarms installed after March 16, 2010, the protected property must, in addition to obtaining any building, electrical or other permits, register with the Enfield Police Department. 
(c)  Upon a police or other emergency service response to a false alarm at a protected property, a notice of such response shall be left at the property or mailed to the property owner as shown on the assessor's records of the Town of Enfield, noting the date and time of the response and that a false alarm was noted. Said notice shall also include a notification of the penalties that may be imposed as set forth below. 
(d)  The town will charge the subscriber of an alarm system for a nonresidential property a penalty of $15.00 for the first emergency services or police response to a false alarm, and a penalty of $90.00 for each subsequent false alarm for a registered protected nonresidential property, and a penalty of $90.00 for the first and any subsequent false alarm for any unregistered nonresidential protected property. 
(e)  The town will charge the subscriber of an alarm system for a residential property a penalty of $90.00 for the third emergency services or police response to a false alarm in each calendar year commencing January 1 of each year, and a penalty of $90.00 for each subsequent false alarm for a registered protected residential property in each calendar year. 
(f)  Notwithstanding subsection (e) above, if a registered residential property has had more than five false alarms in the preceding calendar year, the town will charge the subscriber of an alarm system for a residential property a fine of $90.00 for every emergency services or police response to a false alarm in the subsequent calendar year. 
(g)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarms owned or used by the Town of Enfield or its agencies, including the Board of Education, the State of Connecticut or the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 6-20-2011) 
Sec. 34-34. - Right to appeal. 
    Any person issued a citation pursuant to this section shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the citation pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 7-152c. The town manager shall appoint a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall not be a police officer or any other town employee. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 6-20-2011) 
Sec. 34-35. - Payment of fines. 
(a)  All fines payable under this article will be made to the Town of Enfield and, unless appealed pursuant to section 34-34, will be due and payable immediately upon the issuance of the citation, subject to the abatement and waiver provisions as set forth in section 34-33. If a registrant or property owners fails to pay any fine within 30 days of when it is due, the levied fine shall be increased by $100.00. 
(b)  Continued failure to pay the fine may result in an infraction (state/court ticket) being issued to the registrant or property owner for failure to comply with a town ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 6-20-2011) 
Sec. 34-36. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The chief of police will enforce and administer this article and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 16-3 , 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 34-37. - Violation of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be an infraction pursuant to G.S. § 51-164p. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 6-20-2011) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to prevent disturbing noises, G.S. §§ 7-148(e)(7)(H)(viii), 22a-73. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Aquifer protection agency. 
(a)  Designation and membership. 
(1)  In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 22a-354o et seq., the planning and zoning commission is hereby designated as the aquifer protection agency (hereinafter the "agency") of the town. 
(2)  Agency members' terms shall be concurrent with their terms on the planning and zoning commission. The membership requirements of the agency shall be the same as those of the planning and zoning commission including, but not limited to the number of members, terms, method of selections and removal of members, and filling of vacancies. 
(3)  At least one member of the agency or staff of the agency shall complete the course in technical training formulated by the commissioner of environmental protection of the state, pursuant to G.S. § 22a-354v. 
(b)  Regulations to be adopted. 
(1)  The agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with G.S. § 22a-354p and R.C.S.A. § 22a-354i-3. 
(2)  Said regulations shall provide for: 
a.  The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be established and amended or changed. 
b.  Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area. 
c.  The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area. 
d.  Notice and publication requirements. 
e.  Criteria and procedures for the review of applications. 
f.  Administration and enforcement. 
(c)  Inventory of land use. 
(1)  In order to carry out the purposes of the aquifer protection program, the agency will conduct an inventory of land use within the area to assess potential contamination sources. 
(2)  Pursuant to G.S. § 22a-354e, not later than three months after approval by the commissioner of the state department of environmental protection of Level B Mapping of aquifers, the agency will inventory land uses overlying the mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers in accordance with guidelines established by the commissioner pursuant to G.S. § 22a-354f. Such inventory shall be completed not more than one year after authorization of the agency. 
(Ord. No. 04-4, 6-21-2004) 
Secs. 38-2-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 38-31. - Commission established. 
    Pursuant to G.S. § 7-131a, the town hereby establishes a conservation commission for the development, conservation, supervision and regulation of natural resources, including water resources, within the territorial limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 01-4, 4-16-2001) 
Sec. 38-32. - Membership. 
    The conservation commission shall consist of seven members and three alternate members to be appointed by the chief executive officer of the municipality. The chief executive officer may remove any member or alternate member for cause and may fill any vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term. All members of the conservation commission shall be appointed in accordance with the requirements of G.S. § 9-167a. 
(Ord. No. 01-4, 4-16-2001) 
Sec. 38-33. - Terms; compensation. 
    Appointments to the conservation commission shall be for overlapping terms. Any reappointment or new appointment to the conservation commission shall be for a term of four years. All members of the conservation commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 01-4, 4-16-2001) 
Sec. 38-34. - Powers and duties. 
    The conservation commission shall have all the powers and duties, not inconsistent with the Charter, which are enumerated in G.S. § 7-131a. 
(Ord. No. 01-4, 4-16-2001) 
Secs. 38-35-38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD AND EROSION CONTROL BOARD 

Sec. 38-61. - Statute adopted. 
    The provisions of G.S. §§ 25-84-25-94 are hereby adopted. 
Sec. 38-62. - Establishment of board. 
    There is hereby established the flood and erosion control board of the town pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 25-84. 
(Code 1967, § 2-101) 
Sec. 38-63. - Membership; liaisons. 
    The flood and erosion control board shall consist of the members of the town council. The town council shall appoint one liaison from each of the following departments: Town manager; public works; planning and community development. 
(Code 1967, § 2-102) 
Sec. 38-64. - Appointment of regular members; terms; vacancies. 
    Regular members of the flood and erosion control board shall serve the same term as provided for the town council pursuant to the Charter. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by the Charter for the town council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-103) 
Sec. 38-65. - Organization. 
    Within 30 days following any municipal election of members of the town council, the flood and erosion control board shall meet, organize, and elect a chair, a vice-chair and a secretary. 
(Code 1967, § 2-104) 
Sec. 38-66. - Meetings; assistants; consultants; quorum. 
    The flood and erosion control board shall fix the time and the place of its regular meetings, and may hold such special meetings as may from time to time be required. The board may prepare an annual budget and may request an annual appropriation as provided by law. The board may within the limits of appropriations made for the purpose of the town, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants. The presence of six members of the flood and erosion control board shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1967, § 2-105) 
Sec. 38-67. - Powers. 
    The flood and erosion control board shall have all the powers and duties provided by G.S. §§ 25-84-25-98, together with such other powers as may now or hereafter be conferred on municipal flood and erosion control boards by local, state, or federal law. 
(Code 1967, § 2-106) 
Sec. 38-68. - Regulations. 
    In order to carry out its duties, the flood and erosion control board is empowered to adopt regulations which shall be consistent with all federal and state law, town Code, and Charter provisions. 
(Code 1967, § 2-107) 
Secs. 38-69-38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE 

Sec. 38-101. - Declaration of policy 
    Excessive noise must be controlled by the town to protect, preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare. The town council recognizes the fact that people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-1, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-102. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings hereinafter set forth: 
    Background noise means noise which exists at a point as a result of the combination of many distant sources, individually indistinguishable. In statistical terms, it is the level which is exceeded 90 percent of the time (L 90 ) in which the measurement is taken. 
    Business zone means those areas so designated under the zoning regulations of the town. 
    Chief of police means the duly appointed chief of police of the town or his designee. 
    Construction means the assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition, or site-preparation for or of public or private rights-of-way, buildings or other structures, utilities or property. 
    Day-time hours means the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
    Decibel means a unit of measurement of the sound level, the symbol for which is dB. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Excessive noise means any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards set forth in section 38-106. 
    Impulse noise means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
    Industrial zone means those areas so designated under the zoning regulations of the town in appendix B. 
    Intrusion alarm means a device with an audible signal which, when activated, indicates intrusion by an unauthorized person. 
    L 90 means the A-weighted sound pressure level exceeded 90 percent of the time period during which measurement was made. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle as defined in G.S. § 14-1(47). 
    Nighttime hours means the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday evening through Saturday morning, and between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Saturday evening through Sunday morning. 
    Noise level means a frequency weighted sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dBA. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency, or political or administrative subdivision of the state, or other legal entity of any kind. 
    Premises means any building, structure, land, or portion thereof, including all appurtenances, owned or controlled by a person. 
    Property maintenance equipment means all engine or motor-powered tools and equipment used occasionally in the repair and upkeep of exterior property and including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, riding tractors, wood chippers, power saws, leaf blowers. 
    Public emergency sound signal means a device either stationary or mobile, producing audible signal associated with a set of circumstances involving actual or imminent danger to persons or damage to property which demands immediate action. 
    Public facility maintenance means all activity related to the clearing, cleaning, repair and upkeep of public roads, sidewalks, sewers, water mains, utilities, and publicly owned property. 
    Recreational vehicle means any internal combustion engine powered vehicle which is being used for recreational purposes. 
    Residential zone means those areas so designated under the zoning regulations of the town. 
    Sound means a transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure or position of the particles in the medium and which, in air, evoke physiological sensations, including, but not limited to, an auditory response when impinging on the ear. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels. A sound level meter shall conform, as a minimum, to the American National Standards Institute's operational specifications for sound level meters ANSI S1.4-1983 (R 1997) (Type 1). 
    Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals, expressed in decibels (dB) units. 
    Town manager means the duly appointed town manager of the town or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-2, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-103. - Exclusions. 
    This article shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to: 
(1)  Natural phenomena. 
(2)  The unamplified sound made by any wild animal. 
(3)  A bell or chime from any building clock, school or church. 
(4)  A public emergency sound signal. 
(5)  Warning devices required by OSHA or other state or federal safety regulations. 
(6)  Farming equipment or farming activity. 
(7)  An emergency. 
(8)  Snow removal. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-3, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-104. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from this article subject to the special conditions noted: 
(1)  Noise created by the operation of properly maintained and properly functioning property maintenance equipment during day-time hours. 
(2)  Noise generated by any construction equipment operated during day-time hours. 
(3)  Noise created by any recreational activities which are sanctioned by the town, including, but not limited to, parades, sporting events, concerts and firework displays. Any equipment related to such recreational activities shall be properly maintained and properly functioning. 
(4)  Noise created by blasting provided that the blasting is conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. local time and provided that a permit for such blasting has been obtained from state or local authorities. 
(5)  Noise created by refuse and solid waste collection, provided that such activity is conducted between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(6)  Noise created by a properly maintained and properly functioning fire or intrusion alarm which, from time of activation of the audible signal, emits noise for a period of time not exceeding ten minutes when such alarm is attached to a vehicle or 30 minutes when attached to any building or structure. 
(7)  Noise created by public facility maintenance during day-time hours. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-4, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-105. - Noise level measurement procedures 
    For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this article, and as set forth in Connecticut Regulations G.S. § 22a-69-4, the following procedures shall be applicable: 
(1)  A person conducting sound measurements shall have been trained in the techniques and principles of sound measuring equipment and instrumentation. 
(2)  Instruments used to determine sound level measurements shall be sound level meters as defined in this article. 
(3)  The following steps shall be taken when preparing to take sound level measurements: 
a.  The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed. 
b.  Measurements to determine compliance with section 38-106, in those cases where a receptor is an abutter to the emitter, shall be taken at a point that is located more or less one foot beyond the boundary of the emitter's premises and at a point within the receptor's premise. In those cases where the receptor is not an abutter to the emitter, measurements to determine compliance with section 38-106 shall be taken at a point that is located more or less one foot within the boundary of the receptor's premises. 
c.  The person conducting the testing shall prepare a written report to include, but not necessarily be limited to, such information as date, time, location, observation of conditions of the environment such as identification of noise source, weather, traffic and other pertinent data. 
(4)  The zoning enforcement officer is charged with assisting in training efforts and with assisting emitters in their efforts to comply with the standards set forth herein. 
(5)  The director of planning and community development and the zoning enforcement officer are charged with the review of development proposals during the administrative review process to determine the potential for violation of this article and to assist potential emitters in their efforts to comply with the standards set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-5, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-106. - Noise levels. 
(a)  Noise levels. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any noise beyond the boundaries of his premises in excess of the noise levels established in this article. 
_____
(b)  Noise level standards. No person shall emit noise exceeding the levels stated herein. 
Zone in Which Receptor is Located> Zone in Which 
Emitter is Located Industrial 
(dBA) Business 
(dBA) Residential 
Day-time Hours 
(dBA) Residential 
Night-time Hours 
(dBA) Industrial 70 66 61 51 Business 62 62 55 45 Residential 62 55 55 45  
_____
(c)  Background noise and impulse noise. 
(1)  In those individual cases where the background noise levels caused by sources not subject to this article exceed the standards contained herein, a source shall be considered to cause excessive noise if the noise emitted by such source exceeds the background noise levels by five dBA, provided that no source subject to this article shall emit noise in excess of 80 dBA at any time, and provided that this subsection shall not be interpreted as decreasing the noise level standards of this article. 
(2)  No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of 80 dB peak sound pressure level during night-time hours. 
(3)  No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of 100 dB peak sound pressure level at any time. 
(d)  Short term noise. In measuring compliance with the noise level standards, the following short term noise level excursions over the noise level standards established by this article shall be allowed, and measurements within these ranges of established standards shall constitute compliance therewith: 
Allowable Levels Above Standards 
(dBA) Time Period of Such Levels 
(Minutes/Hour) 3 15 6 7 8 5  
(e)  Existing noise sources. Existing noise sources constructed between January 1, 1960, and June 15, 1978, shall be provided a permanent five dBA maximum noise level allowance over levels otherwise herein required regardless of subsequent changes in ownership or facility utilization processes at the location of the existing noise source. Existing noise sources constructed prior to 1960 shall be provided a permanent ten dBA maximum noise level allowance over levels otherwise herein required regardless of subsequent changes in ownership or facility utilization processes at the location of the existing noise source. 
(f)  Motor vehicle noise. 
(1)  All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the town shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels as set forth in the regulations of the State of Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles, Section 14-80a-4a entitled "Maximum Permissible Noise Levels For Vehicles." 
(2)  No sound amplifying devices on or within motor vehicles shall emit noise in excess of the noise levels as specified in this article. 
(g)  Recreational vehicle noise. No person shall create or cause to be created any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise due to the operation of a recreational vehicle. A noise shall be deemed to be unreasonably loud and a violation of this article when the noise so generated exceeds the noise level standards in this article. 
(h)  Existing state law. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the powers of the police to enforce applicable state laws, including, but not limited to, breach of the peace, motor vehicle noise, or recreational vehicle noise. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-6, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-107. - Enforcement. 
    Violations of this article shall be enforced by the chief of police. The chief of police may develop procedures consistent with this article, including, but not limited to: Metering, training, and issuance of violation notices. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-7, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-108. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be in violation of any sections of this article for the first time, who is willing to correct the violation, shall be given a two-week grace period in which to correct the violation. The chief of police shall refer the person found to be in violation to the director of planning and community development and the zoning enforcement officer to receive direction for corrective action. Provided all necessary applications related to the corrective action are filed with the relevant land use agency within the two-week grace period, the town manager may extend the grace period pending the review of the applications. 
(b)  Any person found to be in violation of any sections of this article: After the grace period referred to in subsection (a); or, who is unwilling to correct the violation; or, for the second or successive times, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $50.00 per day that such violation continues. The chief of police shall continue to meter the violation. 
(c)  In the event that the violation is not corrected and/or the fine is not paid, the chief of police may request that the town attorney determine appropriate legal or equitable action or proceeding before the superior court against the person or persons responsible for the violation. The remedies sought may include, but are not limited to, judicial enforcement of the fines and/or injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-8, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-109. - Variance. 
(a)  Any person residing or doing business in the town may apply to the town manager for a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article which are more stringent than the state department of environmental protection's regulations for the control of noise, provided that the applicant supplies all of the following information to the town manager at least 20 days prior to the start of said activity: 
(1)  The location and nature of activity. 
(2)  The time period and hours of operation of said activity. 
(3)  The nature and intensity of the noise that will be generated. 
(4)  Any other information required by the town manager. 
(b)  No variance from these regulations shall be issued unless it has been demonstrated that: 
(1)  The proposed activity will not violate any provisions of the state department of environmental protection regulations. 
(2)  The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will not constitute a danger to the public health. 
(3)  Compliance with this article constitutes an unreasonable hardship on the applicant. 
(c)  The application for variance shall be reviewed and either approved or rejected at least five days prior to the proposed start of said activity. The approval or rejection shall be in writing and shall state the condition of approval, if any, or the reasons for rejection. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-9, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-110. - Zoning regulations. 
    All provisions of the zoning regulations (in appendix B) which are more stringent than those set forth herein, shall remain in force. 
(Ord. No. 01-5, § 6A-10, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 38-111-38-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-3 , adopted Dec. 17, 2018, repealed Art. V, §§ 38-141-38-149, which pertained to abandoned, inoperable, unregistered motor vehicles and unsightly materials and derived from Ord. No. 02-5, §§ 5B-11-5B-19, adopted Dec. 2, 2002. 

Secs. 38-141-38-149. - Reserved. 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-31. - Statutory authorization. 
    The general assembly of the state has in G.S. §§ 7-148 and 7-194 authorized municipalities to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Code 1967, § 4-15; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Code 1967, § 4-16; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-33. - Purpose. 
(a)  Generally. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(b)  Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purpose, this article includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Code 1967, § 4-17; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-34. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the town planning and zoning commission's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year (100-year flood area). 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year storm). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground) on all sides. 
    Building means structure. 
    Cost means, as related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing components, structural components, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials; building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications; survey costs; permit fees; outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment and materials, located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    Federal Insurance Administration means the Federal Insurance Administration or its successor for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, which is the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland water; and/or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of the special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community, as well as base flood elevations at selected locations. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that includes flood profiles, flood insurance rate maps, the water surface elevation of the base flood, and other flood data. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Functionally dependent use or facility means a use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior if the State of Connecticut does not have such an approved state program. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
    Market value means the value of the structure shall be determined by an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
    Mean sea level (MSL) means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    New construction means structures or substantial improvements for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this article, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures or substantial improvements. 
    Person aggrieved means a person aggrieved by a decision of a board or commission and includes any officer, department, board or bureau of the town charged with enforcement of any order, requirement or decision of the board or commission. "Aggrieved person" includes any person owning land that abuts or is within a radius of 100 feet of any portion of the land involved in the decision of the board or commission. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the Area of Special Flood Hazard. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A and AE on a FIRM. 
    Start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure without a basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or any other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured (mobile) home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, exclusive of land value, either (i) before the improvement or repair is started; or (ii) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by a town code enforcement officer, which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this article. 
    Violation means a failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
(Code 1967, § 4-18; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-35. - Land to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Code 1967, § 4-19; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-36. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Hartford County, Connecticut", dated September 26, 2008 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated September 26, 2008 and any other supporting data, and any subsequent revision thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this article. Mapping, legally incorporated by reference herein, shall be deemed conclusive until and unless amended or revised by FEMA. The flood insurance study is on file at the office of the town clerk, Town of Enfield, Town Hall, 820 Enfield Street, Enfield, Connecticut. 
(Code 1967, § 4-20; Ord. No. 03-3, 5-5-2003; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-37. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 4-21; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-38. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance provision, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1967, § 4-22; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-39. - Interpretation and severability. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes; and 
(4)  If upon interpretation and/or application, any section, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the article shall not be affected. 
(Code 1967, § 4-23; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-40. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the town, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1967, § 4-24; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-41. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in section 42-36. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the town planning and zoning commission and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 42-82(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Code 1967, § 4-25; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-42. - Violations; penalties. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $250.00 per day if proven done willfully and $100.00 per day if not, or imprisoned for not more than ten days for each day of violation, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and reasonable legal fees involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1967, § 4-32; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Secs. 42-43-42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-61. - Planning and zoning commission-Designated to implement article. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall administer and implement this article by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Code 1967, § 4-26; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-62. - Same-Duties and responsibilities. 
    Duties of the planning and zoning commission shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Permit review. 
a.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
b.  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
c.  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For purposes of this article, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
(2)  Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 42-36, basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the planning and zoning commission shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer subsection 42-82(1), specific standards, residential construction, and subsection 42-82(2), specific standards, nonresidential construction. 
(3)  Information to be obtained and maintained. 
a.  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures; 
b.  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
1.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and 
2.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection 42-41(c). 
c.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Alteration of watercourses. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the department of environmental protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
b.  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section 42-63. 
(Code 1967, § 4-27; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-63. - Variance and appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning commission, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the superior court, as provided in Chapter 124, Section 8-8, of the General Statutes of Connecticut (G.S. § 8-8). 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(c)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge will result. 
(d)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage. Such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
(Code 1967, § 4-28; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Secs. 42-64-42-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-81. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  Subdivision proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(5)  Manufactured homes. Manufactured (i.e., mobile) homes are prohibited for any use both temporary and permanent within all areas of special flood hazard due to the public safety threats associated with placing such structures in these areas. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. (A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.); or 
c.  Meet all the general standards of this section and the requirements of section 42-82. 
(7)  Aboveground storage tanks. Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of floodwater. 
(8)  Portion of structure in flood zone. If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. 
(9)  Structures in two flood zones. If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., A zone is more restrictive than X zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.) 
(10)  No structures entirely or partially over water. New construction cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility. 
(Code 1967, § 4-29; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-82. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 42-36, basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard or subsection 42-62(2), use of other base flood data, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below one foot above the base flood level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection 42-62(3)b. 
(3)  Water-holding capacity. The water-holding capacity of the floodplain shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by structures, improvements, filling, regarding, and any other form of development of land shall be compensated by depending and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on site unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be a volume not previously used for flood storage and shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of floodwater at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. 
(4)  Encroachments. Within the floodplain as designated on the maps, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and any other development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any (0.00) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the bordering land subject to flooding, including work to provide the above specified compensatory storage shall not restrict flows so as to cause an increase in flood stage or velocity. 
(Code 1967, § 4-30; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Sec. 42-83. - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-36 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and any other development unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that encroachments shall not result in any (0.00) increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the planning and zoning commission shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood by more than one foot at any point. 
(3)  In A1-30, AE, or AH zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. 
(4)  If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Code 1967, § 4-31; Ord. No. 08-6, 9-15-2008) 
Chapter 46 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DISTRICT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the historic district commission. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure including the kind and texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. 
(Code 1967, §§ 4B-3, 4B-8) 
Sec. 46-32. - Established; purpose. 
    In order to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive characteristics of buildings and places associated with the history of or indicative of a period or style of architecture of the town, of the state or of the nation, and through the development of appropriate settings for such buildings and places, a historic district within the town as more particularly described in section 46-33, is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §§ 7-147a-7-147k, inclusive. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-147a. 
Sec. 46-33. - Boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the proposed historic district on Enfield Street are as follows: Bounded on the north by Route 190 and extending south on Enfield Street on a little more than two miles to the approximate intersections of Oliver Road on the east and Old King Street on the west; but including house number 1489, owned by Thomas R. Smyth on the east; and house number 1503, owned by Herbert M. Carson on the west; these houses being of historic and architectural significance. 
(b)  All homes, buildings and real property within the north to south boundary of such district aforementioned and bordering upon Enfield Street shall be included within the boundaries of such district. The boundary shall extend east from the state highway markers on the east side of Enfield Street to the rear property line of such homes, buildings or real property bordering upon Enfield Street but in no event more than 250 feet east from such state highway markers. The boundary shall extend west from the state highway markers on the west side of Enfield Street to the rear property line of such homes, buildings or real property bordering upon Enfield Street, but in no event more than 250 feet west from such state highway markers. 
(c)  The following exceptions are made: The residence of Thomas Smyth at 1489 Enfield Street, 300 feet depth; the Orrin Thompson house only, in the Felician Sisters complex, 525 feet depth. 
(d)  "Rear property line" shall mean the line delineated on the deed or map describing such home or real property and designating the furthest eastern or western point from Enfield Street. 
(e)  Reference is hereby made to a map entitled "Enfield Historical District" which map is not included herein but may be found on file in the office of the town clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-2) 
Sec. 46-34. - Action by commission to prevent illegal acts; penalty for violations. 
(a)  If any action or ruling taken by the commission pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §§ 7-147a-7-147k, inclusive, or of this article has been violated, the commission may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action in the superior court for the judicial district wherein such violation exists, which court shall have jurisdiction to restrain such violation and to issue orders directing that the violation be corrected or removed. Such order may direct the removal of any building, structure or exterior architectural feature erected in violation of said sections or this article or the substantial restoration of any building, structure, or exterior architectural feature altered or demolished in violation of said sections or any regulation or ordinance adopted under said sections. Regulations and orders of the commission issued pursuant to said sections, or to any regulation or ordinance adopted under said sections, shall be enforced by the building inspector or by such other person as may be designated by ordinance, who may be authorized to inspect and examine any building, structure, place or premises and to require in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereon in violation of any provision of the regulations or orders made under the authority of said sections or of this article. 
(b)  The owner or agent of any building, structure or place where a violation of any provision of such statutes or of this article has been committed or exists, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building, entire structure or place where such violation has been committed or exists, or the owner, agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building, structure or place in which such violation has been committed or exists, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building, structure or place in which any such violation exists, shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 for each day that such violation continues; but, if the offense is wilful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each day that such violation continues. The superior court for the judicial district wherein such violation continues or exists shall have jurisdiction of all such offenses, subject to appeal as in other cases. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with actions under this section may, in the discretion of the court, be assessed as damages against the violator, which, together with reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the historic district commission which brought such action. Any funds collected as fines pursuant to this section shall be used by the commission to restore the affected buildings, structures, or places to their condition prior to the violation wherever possible and any excess shall be paid to the municipality in which the district is situated. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-147h. 
Sec. 46-35. - Appeals. 
    Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the historic district commission or of any officer thereof may, within 15 days from the date when such decision was rendered, take an appeal to the superior court for the judicial district in which such municipality is located, which appeal shall be made returnable to such court in the same manner as that prescribed for other civil actions brought to such court. Notice of such appeal shall be given by leaving a true and attested copy thereof in the hands of or at the usual place of abode of the chairman or clerk of the commission within 12 days before the return day to which such appeal has been taken. Procedure upon such appeal shall be the same as that defined in G.S. § 8-8. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-147i. 
Sec. 46-36. - Exempted acts. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in the historic district which does not involve a change in the appearance or design thereof; nor to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature which the building inspector or a similar agent certifies is required by the public safety because of a condition which is unsafe or dangerous due to deterioration; nor to prevent the erection or alteration of any such feature under a permit issued by a building inspector or similar agent prior to the effective date of establishment of such district. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-147j. 
Secs. 46-37-46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION 

Sec. 46-61. - Established; composition; qualifications and compensation of members. 
    The historic district commission is hereby established. The commission shall consist of five regular members who shall be appointed as provided in section 46-62 and three alternate members who shall be appointed as provided in section 46-63. Each regular and alternate member of the commission shall be a resident elector of the town holding no salaried municipal office. Three or more regular members of the commission shall reside in the historic district, if three or more persons who reside in such district are willing to serve on the commission. The commission shall possess the powers and perform the duties and functions of an historic district commission as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes and as more particularly set forth in this article. No regular or alternate member of the commission shall receive any compensation for his service. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-3) 
Sec. 46-62. - Appointment of regular members. 
    The regular members of the commission shall serve for five-year overlapping terms, commencing on September 1. The town council shall annually appoint one regular member, who shall serve until his successor is duly appointed. Any vacancy in the term of any member of the commission shall be filled by appointment by the town council for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-4) 
Sec. 46-63. - Appointment of alternate members. 
    The alternate members of the commission shall serve for five-year overlapping terms, commencing on September 1. As the term of each alternate member expires, the town council shall appoint an alternate member, who shall serve until his successor is duly appointed. Any vacancy occurring in the term of any alternate member of the commission shall be filled by appointment by the town council for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-5) 
Sec. 46-64. - Organization; election of officers. 
(a)  Annually during the month of September the commission shall elect from among its regular members a chairman, a vice-chairman and a clerk. 
(b)  When a regular member of the commission is absent, because of illness or otherwise, or has a conflict of interest, he shall notify the chairman, who shall forthwith designate one of the alternate members to serve in the place of such regular member. Such alternate member shall thereupon exercise all the powers and duties of a regular member of the commission until the absence or conflict of interest of the regular member shall have terminated. The chairman shall choose alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-6) 
Sec. 46-65. - Powers and responsibilities generally; meetings; quorum. 
    The commission shall exercise the powers and responsibilities imposed upon a historic district commission by the provision of the General Statutes. It shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and may hold such special meetings as may from time to time be required. The commission shall keep a record of its proceedings, deliberations and actions and shall annually report to the town respecting its work. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the General Statutes and may, within the limit of appropriations made for the purpose by the town, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants. The presence of three regular members or, in the case of proper designation of an alternate or alternates as provided by the terms of this article, the presence of three regular and alternate members shall constitute a quorum. No resolution or vote to adjourn or to fix the time and place of its next meeting shall be adopted by less than three affirmative votes. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-7) 
Secs. 46-66-46-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 46-81. - When required; "exterior architectural features" defined. 
    No building or structure, including stone walls, fences, signs, light fixtures, steps and paving or other appurtenant fixtures, shall be erected, altered, restored, or demolished within the historic district until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features has been submitted to the commission and approved by the commission. The style, material, size and location of outdoor advertising signs, posters and other such notices within the historic district shall also be under the control of the commission. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-8) 
Sec. 46-82. - Application; hearing; action of commission. 
(a)  The historic district commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for a certificate of appropriateness unless the commission determines that such application involves items not subject to approval by the commission. The commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the municipality not more than 15 days nor less than five days before such hearing. 
(b)  Within not more than 65 days after the filing of an application as required by G.S. § 7-147d, the commission shall pass upon such application and shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. When a certificate of appropriateness is denied, the commission shall place upon its records and in the notice to the applicant the reasons for its determination, which shall include the bases for its conclusion that the proposed activity would not be appropriate. In the notice to the applicant the commission may make recommendations relative to design, arrangement, texture, material and similar features. The commission may issue a certificate of appropriateness with stipulations. Evidence of approval, as referred to in G.S. § 7-147d, shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Failure of the commission to act within said 65 days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(c)  In its deliberations the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use and shall take no action except for the purpose of preventing the erection, reconstruction, restoration, alteration or razing of buildings in the historic district obviously incongruous with the historic aspects of the district. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-147c. 
Sec. 46-83. - Considerations in determining appropriateness; solar energy systems. 
(a)  If the commission determines that the proposed erection, alteration or parking will be appropriate, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. In passing on appropriateness as to exterior architectural features, buildings or structures, the commission shall consider, in addition to other pertinent factors, the type and style of exterior windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, above-ground utility structures, mechanical appurtenances and the type and texture of building materials. In passing upon appropriateness as to exterior architectural features the commission shall also consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, scale, general design, arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other buildings and structures in the immediate neighborhood. No application for a certificate of appropriateness for an exterior architectural feature, such as a solar energy system, designed for the utilization of renewable resources shall be denied unless the commission finds that the feature cannot be installed without substantially impairing the historic character and appearance of the district. A certificate of appropriateness for such a feature may include stipulations requiring design modifications and limitations on the location of the feature which do not significantly impair its effectiveness. In passing upon appropriateness as to parking, the commission shall take into consideration the size of such parking area, the visibility of cars parked therein, the closeness of such area to adjacent buildings and other similar factors. 
(b)  In its deliberations, the historic district commission shall act only for the purpose of controlling the erection or alteration of buildings, structures or parking which are incongruous with the historic or architectural aspects of the district. The commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use. However, the commission may recommend adaptive reuse of any buildings or structures within the district compatible with the historic architectural aspects of the district. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-147f. 
Sec. 46-84. - Variations, permissible when. 
    Where, by reason of topographical conditions, district borderline situations or because of other unusual circumstances solely with respect to a certain parcel of land and not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon the owner of any specific property, the commission in passing upon applications shall have power to vary or modify strict adherence to said sections or to interpret the meaning of said sections so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variance, modification or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said sections so that the general character of the district shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variations, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, better fulfill the purposes of said sections. In addition to the filing required by G.S. § 7-147e(b) the commission shall, for each variation granted, place upon its records and in the notice to the applicant the reasons for its determinations. 
(Code 1967, § 4B-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-147g. 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate or prohibit loitering, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(F). 

Sec. 50-1. - Loitering. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loiter means remaining idle in essentially one location, and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
(b)  Certain types of loitering prohibited. No person or persons shall loiter in or about a public place or on private property, upon complaint of the owner of said property or where such private property is posted with a "Loitering Prohibited" sign which is dated and signed by the property owner, in such a manner as to create or cause to be created a danger of breach of peace; create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles. 
(c)  Discretion of police officer. Whenever any police officer, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, shall decide that the presence of any person in any public place, or on private property, upon complaint of the owner of said property or where such private property is posted with a "Loitering Prohibited" sign which is dated and signed by the property owner is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, he may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order that person to leave that place or property. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $25.00 for each offense. Each and every violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 7-12; Ord. No. 99-1, 1-19-1999) 
Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS 

Sec. 54-1. - Supervision. 
    All parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, the Town Green and the Joseph E. O'Connor Gazebo shall be operated and maintained under the supervision of the director of public works as provided by Chapter V, Section 9, of the town Charter. 
(Code 1967, § 7A-1) 
Sec. 54-2. - Permit required for assemblies, festivals, displays and other events. 
(a)  Whenever any person, corporation, association or organization desires to utilize park, playground or recreational area facilities for any event, assembly, festival, entertainment, party, rally or similar activity, a permit shall first be obtained from the director of public works or his designated agent. 
(b)  Applications for said permit, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall be in a form set forth by the director of public works or his agent and must be submitted to the director or his agent not less than ten days before the initial date of the proposed activity. At his discretion, the director of public works may require that the applicant post an indemnity bond to protect the town from any liability of any kind or character and to protect town property from damage. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, whenever any person, corporation, association or organization desires to utilize the Town Green and/or the Joseph E. O'Connor Gazebo for any event, assembly, festival, entertainment, party, rally or similar activity or a display, a permit shall first be obtained from the town manager or his designated agent. 
(d)  Applications for said permit, as required by subsection (c) of this section, shall be in a form set forth by the town manager or his agent and must be submitted to the town manager or his agent not less than ten days before the initial date of the proposed activity. The applicant shall provide the town with a certificate of liability insurance, with the town named as an insured and in a format approved by the town, in the amount of $1,000,000.00; provided, however, that the amount of insurance coverage required may be increased at the discretion of the town manager if in his opinion the activity, event and/or display has a potential liability risk in excess of $1,000,000.00. 
(e)  Any proposed use of town facilities for an event or display that is religious in nature shall be decided on a case by case basis and shall be reviewed by the office of the town attorney to ensure compliance with constitutional standards and governing case law. An application for a permit for the use of town facilities shall be in a form set forth by the town manager or his agent and, notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (d) of this section, must be submitted to the town manager or his agent not less than 60 days before the initial date of the proposed event or display. 
(f)  The director of public works or his agent or the town manager or his agent shall grant and issue such permit if: 
(1)  The proposed activity or use of the town property will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the property; 
(2)  The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
(3)  The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application; 
(4)  The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic; 
(5)  The conduct of such activity will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the town to properly police such activity and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police protection of the town; 
(6)  The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(7)  Such activity is not to be held for the purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held for private profit; 
(8)  The activity, event, and/or display is not in violation of any law. 
(g)  In any activity, event or display in which personal property of the applicant will be placed on town property, the applicant shall provide proof of insurance coverage for loss or damage to the said personal property. 
(h)  In the event that a display on town property is not properly maintained and kept in good repair, the town manager or the director of public works may, at his sole discretion, order that the display be immediately removed by town employees. 
(i)  Any event, activity, or display on the Town Green and/or the Joseph E. O'Connor Gazebo shall be for a period not to exceed two consecutive weeks. 
(j)  The town manager may promulgate additional regulations governing the use of the Town Green and the Joseph E. O'Connor Gazebo, and the director of public works may promulgate additional regulations governing the use of parks, playgrounds, and other recreational areas. 
(Code 1967, § 7A-2) 
Sec. 54-3. - Hours of operation; exceptions. 
(a)  The parks, playgrounds and recreational areas of the town shall be open daily to the public during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to be present in such parks, playgrounds, and recreational areas during any hours in which such parks, playgrounds and recreational areas are not open to the public. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  When the hours governing the use of any facility or area are posted otherwise to those set forth above; 
(2)  When employees or agents of the town are engaged in the conduct of official business; 
(3)  When any person or persons are engaged either as a participant or spectator in any town sponsored event or activity when such event or activity extends beyond 9:00 p.m.; 
(4)  When any person, corporation, association, or organization has been issued a valid permit, pursuant to section 54-2, to conduct an event or activity which extends beyond 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1967, § 7A-3) 
Sec. 54-4. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person using the Town Green, Joseph E. O'Connor Gazebo, any park, playground or recreational area to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or town property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
(2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any town property or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters; 
(3)  Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any town property or left anywhere on the grounds of town property, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the town property by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
(4)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language; 
(5)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act; 
(6)  Commit any assault, battery, or engage in fighting; 
(7)  Prevent any person from using any town property, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this article and the rules applicable to such use; 
(8)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any town property except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted; 
(9)  Drive or park any motor vehicle except on a street, driveway, parking lot, or other designated parking area in or on the Town Green, any park, playground, or recreational area, or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established and designated for public parking; 
(10)  Bring any dangerous animal onto any town property, and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be on any town property unless such dog is validly licensed and on a leash not more than six feet long; 
(11)  Vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article unless specifically authorized to do so by the permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(12)  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands, streets, or roads adjacent to the Town Green, any park, playground or recreational area unless specifically authorized to do so by the permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(13)  Conduct any amusement for gain or for which a charge is made unless specifically authorized to do so by the permit issued pursuant to this article, and any such amusement so conducted, shall be in accordance with applicable law; 
(14)  Possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on the Town Green, in the Gazebo or any park, playground, or recreation area operated or maintained by the town; 
Exceptions: 
a.  Brainard Park (picnic area only); 
b.  Powder Hollow Recreational Facility (picnic area only); 
c.  Where such possession or consumption is specifically authorized by a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter; 
d.  Kindle, use, or maintain any open fire in or upon any town property except at locations and in receptacles specifically designated for such purpose; 
(15)  Injure, destroy, molest, capture, or interfere with birds, game or wildlife; 
(16)  Hunt, or carry or discharge any firearms. 
(Code 1967, § 7A-4) 
Sec. 54-5. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined an amount not to exceed $100.00. 
(Code 1967, § 7A-5) 
Chapter 58 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority or towns to license and regulate the business of hawkers, peddlers, auctioneers, etc., G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iv), 21-36 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND AUCTIONEERS 

Sec. 58-31. - License required. 
    No person except those exempted by the state law shall vend upon the public streets of the town any groceries, provisions, fruits, goods, wares or other merchandise at any public sale or auction or shall peddle or solicit sales of such articles of merchandise from house to house within the town unless such person shall first obtain a license from the town council. 
(Code 1967, § 5-1) 
Sec. 58-32. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to sales by farmers or gardeners of the products of their farms and gardens, and to fish vendors. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2) 
Sec. 58-33. - Fee; duration; expiration. 
    The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be $25.00, which license shall be good for one year, to expire April 1 in each year. 
(Code 1967, § 5-3) 
Sec. 58-34. - Badge. 
    Each peddler, vendor or auctioneer licensed under this article shall procure a badge with a number plainly engraved or fastened thereon from the town clerk, which he shall wear in a conspicuous place. 
(Code 1967, § 5-4) 
Sec. 58-35. - Mobile food vendors. 
(a)  A "mobile food vendor" is one who sells food and/or drink to walk-up customers from a legally operable, insured and registered vehicle or trailer, excluding tractor-trailers, as defined in Connecticut General Statute § 14-1, which is equipped for the safe and sanitary storage, preparation, and sale of food or beverage. 
(b)  A mobile food vendor shall be permitted to vend in accordance with those rules and regulations as established by the Town of Enfield. Said rules and regulations shall be established by resolution of the town council. 
(c)  Previous section notwithstanding, those rules and regulations as may be promulgated in subsection (b) herein, no mobile food vendor shall: 
(1)  Vend without an approved permit to do so from the town. 
2)  Vend from any location other than the location for which they are permitted. 
(3)  Park or stand his vehicle or trailer upon any sidewalk or sidewalk area, or upon any street, alley, highway or public thoroughfare so as to cause or increase congestion, obstruct travel or inconvenience the public. The judgment of any town agent vested the authority to enforce the provisions of this section, exercised in good faith shall be conclusive as to whether the area is congested, or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(4)  Connect to any utility or service, such as, but not limited to water, sewer or electrical for the purpose or duration of activity. 
(d)  In addition to other penalties as ascribed by law, any vendor found to be in violation of this section shall be prohibited from vending within the town for 365 consecutive days from the date upon which said violation occurred. 
(e)  Any vendor who has had their permit revoked by the town may appeal that decision to a designated hearing officer pursuant to Connecticut General Statute § 7-152c. 
( Ord. No. 16-4, 8-1-2016 ) 
Secs. 58-36-58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITION OF PANHANDLING, SOLICITATION AND OTHER ACTIVITIES FROM UNSAFE LOCATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-4 , adopted Sep. 18, 2017, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 58-61-58-66, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to prohibition of aggressive and unsafe panhandling or solicitation and derived from Ord. No. 15-1, adopted Oct. 5, 2015. 

Sec. 58-61. - Purpose. 
    Generally, the purpose of this section is to preserve the public order, to protect the citizens of Enfield and to ensure the safe and uninterrupted passage of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic, without unconstitutionally impinging upon protected speech, expression or conduct. 
(Ord. No. 17-4 , 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 58-62. - Definitions. 
    For purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
1.  Ask, beg , or solicit alms includes the spoken, written, or printed word or such other act conducted for the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation or money or thing of value. 
2.  Panhandle includes asking, begging, or soliciting alms. 
3.  Unsafe location means any roadway or roadway medians, including areas immediately adjacent to the roadway or roadway median, that have been designated by Town's traffic safety officer as a place where the presence of pedestrians is hazardous to the safe travel of persons or traffic. 
(Ord. No. 17-4 , 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 58-63. - Prohibited location. 
    No person may panhandle or conduct any other activity from an unsafe location, as defined herein. The traffic safety officer shall submit the list of the unsafe locations, which list may be revised from time to time as circumstances warrant, to the town clerk and the chief of police, which list shall be posted in the town hall and on the town website. 
(Ord. No. 17-4 , 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 58-64. - Interpretation of provisions. 
(a)  No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to prohibit speech, expression or conduct protected by the laws or Constitution of the United States or the laws or Constitution of the State of Connecticut. 
(b)  No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to prohibit the installation, construction, repair and/or maintenance of roadways, roadway medians, or utilities located above, upon or beneath such roadways, roadway medians or areas immediately adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 17-4 , 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 58-65. - Penalties for offenses. 
(a)  Upon a finding that a person is in violation of any provision of this ordinance, a written warning shall be issued. 
(b)  Upon a finding of a second and subsequent violation of any provision of this ordinance, a fine of $99.00 shall be imposed and the violation shall be deemed to be an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 17-4 , 9-18-2017) 
Chapter 62 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Merit system, ch. VII. 
State Law reference- Municipal pension systems, G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(5)(A), 7-450; collective bargaining by municipal employees, G.S. § 7-467 et seq.; Workers' Compensation Act, G.S. § 31-275-31-355a. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Hours of work for police. 
    The town hereby authorizes an average work week of 40 hours for permanent paid police officers as provided in G.S. §§ 7-292-7-294. 
(Code 1967, § 2-3) 
Charter reference- Division of police, ch. V, § 10(a). 
Sec. 62-2. - Pension plans for police. 
    There shall be a pension plan for the town police. The provisions of such pension plan are contained in the union contract between the town and the union which represents the police personnel. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6.2) 
Sec. 62-3. - Social security. 
    The town treasurer is hereby authorized to deduct from the wages of all town employees participating in the Social Security Act, as defined in G.S. § 7-452, any amounts due under the Act. 
(Code 1967, § 2-5) 
Sec. 62-4. - Workers' compensation. 
    The town authorizes the coverage of any salaried officer or paid member of the division of police and all elected and appointed officials and agents of the town by the Workers' Compensation Act (G.S. § 31-275 et seq.) so that they may receive the benefits thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 2-4) 
Secs. 62-5-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTIVE BARGAINING 

Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the representative of the board appointed under G.S. § 31-103. 
    Board means the board of labor relations provided for in G.S. § 31-102. 
    Employment relations means matters concerning wages, grievances, hours of work and terms or conditions of employment. 
    Labor organization means any organization which includes municipal employees which exists and is constituted primarily for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with the municipal employer concerning employment relations. 
    Municipal employee means all persons employed by the town except: 
(1)  Elected officials. 
(2)  Persons holding positions of employment as a result of direct appointment by the town council. 
(3)  Heads of departments holding positions of employment as a result of direct appointment by the town manager. 
(4)  Persons employed as teachers by the board of education. 
(5)  Persons employed on a temporary basis or as special consultants. 
    Municipal employer means the town or any agency, board, commission or department thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 2-31) 
Sec. 62-32. - Rights of employees. 
(a)  Municipal employees shall have, and shall be protected in the exercise of, the right of self-organization, to form, join or assist any employee organization, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing on questions of wages, hours and other conditions of employment and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, free from actual interference, restraint or coercion. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall constitute a grant of the right to strike to municipal employees, and such strikes are prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 2-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-468. 
Sec. 62-33. - Election of municipal employee representative. 
(a)  Representatives designated or selected for the purposes of collective bargaining by the majority of the municipal employees in a unit appropriate for such purposes or by the majority of the municipal employees voting in an election conducted pursuant to this article shall be the exclusive representative of all the employees in such unit for the purposes of collective bargaining in respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment or other conditions of employment; provided, that any municipal employee, directly or through representatives, shall have the right at any time to present any grievance to his municipal employer. In order to secure to employees the full benefit of this article, the board shall decide in each case the appropriate unit. 
(b)  When it is complained by a municipal employee or his representative or the municipal employer or its representative that there is a question or controversy concerning the representation of municipal employees, the board shall hear the matter. If after hearing, the board finds that there is a controversy concerning the representation of municipal employees, it may conduct an election or use any suitable method to ascertain such representatives. 
(c)  The board shall have the power to determine who may participate in the election and to establish the rules governing such election; provided, that no election need be directed by the board solely because of the request of the municipal employer or of the municipal employees prompted thereto by the municipal employer nor shall such election be conducted with the municipal employer's participation, assistance or supervision. 
(d)  If, at an election conducted pursuant to this section, three or more nominees for exclusive collective bargaining representatives appear on the ballot and no one of them receives a majority of the votes cast at the election, the two nominees who receive the highest number of votes shall appear on the ballot of a second election to be conducted hereunder, and the one receiving a majority of the votes cast at the second election shall be the exclusive representative of all the municipal employees in such unit for the purpose of collective bargaining in respect to rate of pay, wages, hours of employment or other conditions of employment. 
(e)  A labor organization nominated as the representative of municipal employees shall be listed by name on the ballots authorized by subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(f)  All elections ordered by the board shall be by secret ballot. 
(Code 1967, § 2-33) 
Sec. 62-34. - Town bargaining agent. 
    The town manager shall be the bargaining agent for the municipal employer for the purpose of carrying on collective bargaining with the exclusive bargaining agent or agents selected pursuant to section 62-33. 
(Code 1967, § 2-34) 
Sec. 62-35. - Collective bargaining procedure. 
(a)  Collective bargaining between the town's bargaining agent and the exclusive bargaining agent or agents selected pursuant to section 62-33 shall commence on or about January 1 of each year and shall be completed on or about March 1 of each year. 
(b)  Items agreed upon as a result of the annual negotiations provided for hereinabove shall be incorporated in the town manager's annual budget submitted to the town council where such items require financial implementation. 
(c)  When an impasse develops between the town's bargaining agent and the exclusive bargaining agent, or when a question arises out of an interpretation of a clause in the working agreement provided for in subsection (d) of this section, the town bargaining agent shall join with the exclusive bargaining agent in petitioning the state board of mediation and arbitration to assist the parties in the resolution of the issue by mediation in accordance with G.S. §§ 31-91-31-100. Should mediation not resolve the issue, the parties shall jointly petition for arbitration by the state board of mediation and arbitration in accordance with the provisions of G.S. §§ 31-91-31-100. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the use of other arbitration tribunals in the resolution of disputes over the interpretation or application of the terms of written agreements between municipal employers and employee organizations. 
(d)  Upon final disposition of all issues, a written agreement encompassing all the agreed upon provisions shall be executed by the town's bargaining agent for the town, and the exclusive bargaining agent for the municipal employees; provided, that any agreement where financial implementation of the same requires the approval of the town council under the Charter of the town, shall not be executed until such time as the town council has approved the financial implementation. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the signing of a contract for a period in excess of one year. 
(Code 1967, § 2-35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-472. 
Secs. 62-36-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PENSION SYSTEM FOR CLASSIFIED SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Retirement of municipal employees, ch. VII, § 3. 

Sec. 62-61. - Fund established; composition. 
    There shall be in the town a fund to be known as the "pension fund for town employees of the classified service," to consist of: 
(1)  Such sums of money as shall be appropriated to such fund from the treasury of the town by the town council; and 
(2)  Such sums of money as contributed to the fund by town employees of the classified service as a condition of their participation in the pension system. 
(Code 1967, § 2-15) 
Sec. 62-62. - Participation; division of police excluded. 
    Participation in the pension system shall be voluntary and limited to regular full-time paid employees of the town classified service excluding members of the division of police. Participants may withdraw from such system at any time. 
(Code 1967, § 2-16) 
Sec. 62-63. - Administration. 
    The town manager shall administer the pension fund, and the town treasurer shall be the treasurer of such fund. 
(Code 1967, § 2-17) 
Sec. 62-64. - Rate of contributions. 
    The town manager shall determine the necessary rate of contributions by a participating employee and all other provisions of the pension system. 
(Code 1967, § 2-18) 
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS TRUST[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-3, adopted May 17, 2010, enacted provisions intended for use as article III. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as article IV, §§ 62-65-62-67. 

Sec. 62-65. - Authority; establishment of retiree benefit trust. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to the town council in Chapter III, Section 5 of the Charter and G.S. § 7-450(b), there shall be created and established for such town an other post-employment benefits ("OPEB") trust to fund certain post-employment benefits, other than pension benefits, pursuant to the terms of previously established plans for the benefit of certain town and board of education employees, retirees, their spouses and dependents. The provision of such OPEB trust shall be as set forth in the OPEB declaration of trust, including revisions thereto, as are hereafter approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 62-66. - Establishment of OPEB board. 
    Immediately upon the enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives, the town manager shall appoint three employees to serve as the board of trustees for the OPEB trust, hereinafter referred to as the "OPEB board." The members of said OPEB board shall receive no compensation for serving on the OPEB board, and may be removed at any time in the sole discretion of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 62-67. - Duties of the OPEB board. 
    The OPEB board shall perform the duties set forth in the OPEB declaration of trust, as amended from time to time, relating to the management of the assets held in the OPEB trust. The town manager and/or his or her designee shall have the care and custody of all funds in the OPEB trust and shall have the power, with the approval of the OPEB board, to invest such funds in securities legal for investment for such trust funds. 
(Ord. No. 10-3, 5-17-2010) 
Chapter 66 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and zoning commission, ch. V, § 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 66-31. - Alternate members; appointment; qualifications; terms of office. 
(a)  Pursuant to G.S. § 8-1b, the town council shall appoint three alternate members to the planning and zoning commission which alternate members will sit on such commission in the absence of any regular member. Such alternate members, when sitting, shall have all the powers and duties as prescribed by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  No alternate member shall be a member or alternate member of the zoning board of appeals or the conservation commission. The alternate members shall be resident electors of the town, holding no salaried municipal office and shall not receive any compensation for their service. No more than two of the alternate members shall be of the same political party. 
(c)  Two alternate members shall be appointed for a term of four years and one alternate member shall be appointed for a term of two years. 
(Code 1967, § 2-81) 
Secs. 66-32-66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY 

Sec. 66-61. - Joining. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 8-31a, the town hereby adopts G.S. §§ 8-31a-8-37a, and joins the regional planning agency for the capitol region, as defined or redefined by the secretary of the state office of policy and management, or his designee, under the provisions of G.S. § 16a-4a. 
(Code 1967, § 2-24) 
Sec. 66-62. - Local representation-Number, appointments, term of office, vacancy. 
(a)  The town having a population of 45,212 according to the 2000 census, is entitled to three regional representatives on the capital regional planning agency, as provided in G.S. § 8-31a. 
(b)  In addition, the town council, the town manager and the planning and zoning commission shall each appoint one regional representative for a term of three years. 
(c)  An appointee shall continue to serve after expiration of his term until his successor has been appointed and takes office. Appointees may be reappointed for successive terms. Any vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1967, § 2-25) 
Sec. 66-63. - Same-Absence from meetings. 
    Any regional representative who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the capital regional planning agency and any intervening duly called special meetings thereof shall be considered to have resigned from such agency. The provisions of this section may be waived by the appointing authority where illness or other extenuating circumstances make it impossible for a representative to meet these attendance requirements. 
(Code 1967, § 2-26) 
Sec. 66-64. - Notification to agency. 
    The town clerk shall transmit a copy of this article, and of any amendments thereto, to the capital regional planning agency. The appointing authority shall notify capital regional planning agency of the appointments, reappointments and resignations of representatives to the agency. 
(Code 1967, § 2-27) 
Secs. 66-65-66-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LAND USE APPLICATION FEES 

Sec. 66-91. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article: 
(1)  To establish a schedule of fees pursuant to G.S. § 8-1c which permits towns to require applicants to pay a fair share of the actual municipal expenses for the review, evaluation, and processing of applications to the planning and zoning commission, which expenses are directly attributable to each individual application. 
(2)  To ensure that the schedule of fees does not fund municipal expenses for negotiating with applicants for agreements, conveyances, conditions, modifications, or any other concessions desired by the municipality in the review process that are not specified in the zoning or subdivision regulations. 
(3)  To improve services provided to applicants by recouping municipal expenses for reviewing and processing applications by the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  To encourage applicants to become familiar with and to review municipal development regulations, to submit applications that comply with municipal regulations, and to submit plans and proposals with fewer errors and omissions. 
(Ord. No. 03-5, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 66-92. - Reduction of fees. 
    The planning and zoning commission may grant a reduction in fees for any zoning or subdivision application, but not for any zoning permit fees, only after finding that: 
(1)  Such application is substantially similar to one previously filed and withdrawn; 
(2)  If such application is a subdivision application, it is a reapplication for an approved subdivision where the time frame for filing with the town clerk has expired and there is no change in the plans or layout of the subdivision, provided, however, such reapplication occurs within 60 days such expiration of time; 
(3)  The previous application had paid all fees in full; and 
(4)  Minimal additional staff time will be needed for review and processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 03-5, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 66-93. - Appeal. 
    An applicant may challenge any aspect of a fee payable under this article by submitting a written appeal on a form available in the planning department at the Town Hall. The appeal shall be submitted to the director of planning within 30 days of either the date of the action of the planning and zoning commission, or the date of the withdrawal of an application by the applicant. The planning and zoning commission shall hear any such appeal within 65 days of receipt of the appeal and make a ruling within 65 days of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 03-5, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 66-94. - Zoning applications fee schedule. 
(a)  Fees for applications are charged to offset the cost of the following: 
(1)  Staff time spent in the review, evaluation and processing of applications prior to their submission. 
(2)  Staff time spent in the review, evaluation and processing of applications from the time of submission until final commission action on the application. 
(3)  Expenses for, but not limited to, legal advertisements regarding hearings, decisions of the commission and other matters requiring publication in a newspaper; recording and transcribing public hearings and minutes of commission meetings relative to the application; staff salaries and overhead expenses for the director of planning and other staff and officials that may need to be consulted in direct connection with the technical and regulatory review of the application; staff salaries and expenses for town attorney legal advice and review of documents directly related to the application. 
(b)  An applicant for planning and zoning commission action under the zoning regulations shall pay, at the time of application, an application fee according to the following schedule: 
Petitions for zoning text amendments $300.00 Petitions for zone changes 10 acres $300.00 <10 acres  250.00 Special use permit (new or revised) Commercial/Industrial New construction or addition $200.00 plus 0.01 per square foot of new building footprint plus .005 per square foot of additional disturbed area. Change of use for existing floor space only $200.00 Special use permit 
Residential Planned residential developments/senior residential developments $200.00 plus $50.00 per unit plus $1,0080.00for every 100 feet, or any part thereof, of new roadway proposed to be constructed and intended to be deeded to the town as public right-of-way Revisions to above $200.00 plus $50.00 per unit difference from original approval plus $100.00 for every 100 feet, or any part thereof, of additional roadway proposed to be constructed, and intended to be deeded to the town as public right-of-way. Existing residential conversions (apartments) 
All other applications in residential zones $200.00 or $50.00 per unit whichever is greater. 
$200.00 plus 0.01 per square foot of new building footprint plus .005 per square foot of additional disturbed area (if applicable). Site plan review New construction or addition $100.00 plus 0.01 per square foot of new building footprint plus .005 per square foot of additional disturbed area. Change of use for existing floor space only requiring commission action $100.00 Administrative review/minor revisions not requiring commission action $85.00 Home occupations and professional offices Requiring site plan approval by the commission (no hearing) $100.00 Requiring special use permit by the commission (hearing) $200.00  
Note: All application fees shall include an additional nonrefundable surcharge required by the State of Connecticut in an amount pursuant to G.S. § 22a-27j as may be amended from time to time (currently $10.00). 
Filing fees may also be increased to include additional costs incurred by the town, including but not limited to, the expense of retaining experts to analyze, review and report on areas requiring a detailed, technical review in order to assist the planning and zoning commission in its deliberations. Said costs will be estimated by the commission, based on preliminary estimates from such experts, and said estimate of costs times 150 percent will be paid over to the commission prior to proceeding on the application. Upon completion of the technical review and a determination of the costs incurred, any excess will be refunded to the applicant. The applicant shall not be responsible for costs incurred in excess of 150 percent of the commission's estimate. 
(Ord. No. 03-5, 9-15-2003) 
_____
Sec. 66-95. - Subdivision application fee schedule. 
(a)  Subdivision applicants shall pay approximate actual municipal expenses for review, evaluation, and processing subdivision application. 
(b)  Fees for subdivision applications are charged to offset the cost of the following: 
(1)  Staff time spent in the review, evaluation and processing of subdivision applications prior to the submission of a subdivision application. 
(2)  Staff time spent in the review, evaluation and processing of subdivision applications from the time of submission until final commission action on the application. 
(3)  Expenses for, but not limited to, legal advertisements regarding hearings, decisions of the commission and other matters requiring publication in a newspaper; recording and transcribing public hearings and minutes of commission meetings relative to the application; staff salaries and overhead expenses for the director of planning and other staff and officials that may need to be consulted in direct connection with the technical and regulatory review of the application; staff salaries and expenses for town attorney legal advice and review of documents directly related to the subdivision. 
A subdivision applicant shall pay, at the time of subdivision application, an application fee which is the sum total of each of the following applicable charges: 
A. $250.00 or $25.00 per lot, whichever is greater 1 For mailing, notices and general administrative expenses B. $80.00 for every 100 feet, or any part thereof, of new roadway proposed to be constructed as part of the subdivision and intended to be deeded to the town as public right-of-way. For engineering review C. $50.00 for every 100 feet, or any part therefore, of existing or previously approved public rights-of-way for town or state roadways abutted by the boundaries of the land contained in the proposed subdivision. For engineering review D. $100.00 for each of the first 20 lots. 
$75.00 for each of the 21st through 50th lots. 
$50.00 for each new lot over 50 lots to be created by the application filed with the planning and community development department. 2 For staff review time E. $50.00 per lot For sediment and erosion control review F. $10.00 (or greater) 3 For State of CT Fee pursuant to G.S. § 22a-27j as may be amended from time to time  
1 This portion of the fee may not be reduced or waived. 
2 The calculation of the number of lots is per application pending, not per cumulative number of lots. 
3 This fee is required by the state and is subject to change by the legislature. 
(Ord. No. 03-5, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 66-96. - Applicability. 
    For purposes of this article, a subdivision application shall also mean a resubdivision application or an application for amendment or revision to a subdivision or resubdivision application. 
(Ord. No. 03-5, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 66-97. - Zoning permit fee schedule. 
    In order to help offset the costs of zoning review and inspections by the zoning enforcement official or other duly authorized planning staff the following schedule of fees for a zoning permit to be paid at the time of application to the planning and community development office is hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of G.C. § 8-1c: (These fees are in addition to any other fees that may be required for Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission actions.) 
Residential Permits  New single-family houses $0.00  New two-family houses 100.00  New multifamily dwellings 150.00  Conversions 100.00  Additions 50.00  Accessory structures = 100 sq. ft. 20.00  Accessory structures > 100 sq. ft. 40.00  Home occupation registration 5.00 Commercial Permits  New building, plus $0.0025 per sq. ft. 100.00  Building addition, plus $0.0025 per sq. ft. 75.00  Accessory structures, plus $0.0025 per sq. ft. 70.00  Signs, plus $1.00 per sq. ft. 20.00  Temporary signs 35.00  Site Work without a building permit 50.00  Excavation and fill, per 1,000 cubic yards 10.00  Open lot sales - short-term 50.00  Open lot sales - long-term 100.00  Sidewalk sales events 35.00 Enforcement fee: All fees above are doubled if work begins prior to the issuance of a permit. Note: All application fees shall include an additional nonrefundable surcharge required by the state in an amount pursuant to G.S. § 22a-27j as may be amended from time to time.  
(Ord. No. 03-5, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 08-5, 6-2-2008) 
Secs. 66-98-66-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 66-131. - Electronic submittals. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for submitters whenever geographic data is required by the town in a digital format. 
(b)  Scope. It is the intention of the Town of Enfield to receive GIS data in the format requested. The format of the data refers to the coordinate systems, file format and geographic alignment with the town's current data. 
(c)  Policy. The developer/owner of projects receiving land use approval within the Town of Enfield are required to submit plans in an electronic format to the planning department. Final as-builts are also required in electronic format for incorporation into the town's GIS system. 
(d)  Formatting and fee requirements for electronic submittals: 
(1)  The developer/owner shall submit a deposit of $50.00 per each 24 inches × 36 inches plan and $25.00 for each 18 inches × 24 inches or smaller plan. If the file has not been properly geographically referenced, then the deposit will be used by the town for such a conversion. If the file is successfully submitted, then the fee will be refunded to the developer/owner. 
(2)  The submittal should be formatted accordingly: 
a.  The DXF files submitted to the town shall contain separate and distinct layers designated as DXF-LAYERS in the DXF file format for each of the feature groups or layers designated by the town. This file shall include all layers and graphic elements included in the submitted paper document (geography, text, legend, scale, labels, etc.). 
b.  The coordinate information contained in the digital drawings or record plans shall be delivered in the Connecticut State Plane coordinate system using the NAD83 horizontal datum and NAVD88 vertical datum using US Survey feet as units. These data shall be produced in real coordinate space with an insertion point of (0,0). 
c.  The completed drawing file shall contain text in standard fonts that can be read without third-party software. 
d.  All drawings should also be submitted in PDF format. 
(e)  Fee for digital conversion of data. In the event that the developer/owner is unable to provide a digital submission to the town at the time of final permit approval, a charge of $50.00 per each 24 inches × 36 inches plan and $25.00 for each 18 inches × 24 inches or smaller plan will be applied to the submitter's permit fees for conversion costs. 
(f)  As-built electronic submittals. Upon completion of the project, the developer shall also submit the as-built/record drawings in electronic form to the planning and public works departments as appropriate. These plans shall be in conformance with the Town of Enfield Public Improvement Standards. A refundable fee will be required with the as-builts. 
(Ord. No. 08-2, 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 66-132. - Data cost schedule. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Protect the Town of Enfield, Connecticut ("town") against the misuse or misinterpretation of Geographic Information System data (GIS Data) compiled and electronically stored by the town; 
(2)  Limit third party distribution of GIS data; and 
(3)  Establish a procedure by which the public may request GIS data. 
(b)  Scope. This article applies to all requests for GIS data made to any municipal department or division that is permitted to release GIS data. 
(c)  Procedure. All requests (except internal requests) for GIS data shall be made in writing on the town's GIS data request form. The party requesting the GIS data shall be required to sign the town's data distribution agreement. The GIS data is provided in ESRI personal geodatabases only. The party requesting the GIS data shall pay a fee as set forth on the town's fee schedule, which fee shall be prior to the distribution of the requested GIS Data. 
(d)  Town-wide. 
(1)  Planimetrics ..... $2,000.00 
Includes buildings, roads, major water bodies, water bodies, streams, railroads, fire hydrants, trails, walls, fences, sidewalks, parking, driveways, hedges, guide rails, road centerlines, town boundary, road names compiled from data in 1991 and 2006. 
(2)  Parcels ..... $500.00 
Includes parcels, parcel identifier, parcel dimensions, map/lot, parcel frontage, parcel easement text, parcel road names. 
(3)  Contours ..... $2,000.00 
Includes 2-foot and 10-foot contours with spot elevations and text as of 1991. 
(4)  Orthophotography (.6" pixel resolution - .sid) ..... $2,000.00 
Color taken on April 20, 2006. 
(e)  Tiles. See tiles section of data request policy. 
(1)  Orthophotography (.6" pixel resolution - .tiff or .sid) ..... $50.00 
(2)  The costs above are exempt for: 
a.  Town of Enfield Fire Districts, 
b.  Other state, regional and local government bodies, 
c.  Agencies under contract with the Town of Enfield that require the data to complete their obligation, 
d.  Agencies in which the town has a written agreement to acquire new data. 
Any recipient that is exempted from the cost schedule will still be required to sign the Town of Enfield Geographic Information System Distribution Policy. 
(Ord. No. 08-3, 4-7-2008) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Declaration of policy. 
    The collection, removal, recycling and disposal of solid waste generated in the town must be regulated by the town for the protection of the public health, the safety and the welfare of the residents of the town. The town is committed to preserving air and water quality as well as limited landfill space by separating recyclable material from the waste stream and providing for its delivery to persons who can prepare it for reuse whenever possible. It is therefore found and declared that: 
(1)  The town is authorized by G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(4)(H), 22a-220 and 22a-220a to regulate the disposition of solid waste generated within its boundaries, to collect a fee for that service, and to license refuse collectors; 
(2)  The town is authorized by G.S. § 22a-220a to designate an area where solid waste generated within its boundaries shall be disposed; 
(3)  The town has executed the municipal service agreement requiring it to cause all solid waste generated within its boundaries and which meets the contractual standards, to be directed to the directed solid waste facility ("DSWF"); 
(4)  The public health, safety and welfare of the town will be best served by requiring solid waste to be delivered to the directed solid waste facility; 
(5)  The enactment of this chapter is in conformity with the town's regional solid waste management plan; and 
(6)  This chapter is also adopted pursuant to G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), and is considered a blight ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-1, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authority means the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority (CRRA) established pursuant to G.S. ch. 446e or any board, body, commission department, officer, agency or other successor thereto. 
    Bulky waste includes, but is not limited to, wood waste from construction and demolition activity. 
    Commercial solid waste means any solid waste arising from any source other than residential. 
    Contractual standards for solid waste delivered to the designated solid waste facility are as follows: 
(1)  The waste must emanate from within the boundaries of the town; 
(2)  The waste must not be of such a quantity, quality or other nature as to materially impair the operation or capacity of the DSWF or any portion thereof, normal and reasonable wear and usage excepted; 
(3)  The waste must not be of such a quantity, quality or other nature as to materially impair the strength or the durability of the structures, equipment or works of the DSWF; 
(4)  The waste must not be of such a quantity, quality or other nature as to create flammable or explosive conditions in the DSWF; 
(5)  The waste must not contain chemical or other properties which are deleterious, as determined by the CRRA, or capable of damaging the DSWF or personnel; and 
(6)  Such waste must not contain hazardous waste as defined below. 
    Curbside placement means a location on the roadway pavement, against the curb, on the edge of road with the grass, and/or up against a snow bank during the winter months, with no obstruction. 
    Directed solid waste facility or DSWF means the location or facility designated by the town for disposal of solid waste, bulky waste and/or recyclables generated within the town, including any other site as may be temporarily substituted. 
    Director means the director of public works of the town or his designated agent. 
    Disposal charge means the amount to be charged for each ton of solid waste delivered to the DSWF as established by the procedures authorized in the municipal service agreement. 
    Fixed site container means an enclosed container for refuse generated by commercial establishments or residential complexes with greater than six units, with a capacity of either four, six, or eight cubic yards, with an attached lid that allows for a 270-degree swing to the rear of the container, of a design for automated transfer of the refuse from the container into the refuse collection vehicle. 
    Generator means any person who creates solid waste. 
    Hazardous waste means any waste material which may pose a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly disposed of, treated, stored, transported, or otherwise managed, including: 
(1)  Hazardous waste identified in accordance with Section 3001 of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.); 
(2)  Hazardous waste identified by regulation by the department of environmental protection; and 
(3)  Polychlorinated biphenyls in concentrations greater than 50 parts per million, but does not mean byproduct material, source material or special nuclear material, as defined in G.S. § 22a-151, or scrap tires. 
    Municipal service agreement means the contract between the town and the CRRA. 
    Plastic bag means a bag used for the disposal of household refuse, of not greater than 35-gallon capacity, manufactured of pliable plastic material of a two-mil. thickness, of sufficient strength to contain 40 pounds of material. 
    Recyclables means discarded material which may be reclaimed, such as cardboard, batteries, glass, metal, plastics, newspapers, office paper, crankcase oil, brush and leaves, grass clippings and any other material designated as such by regulation adopted by the state commissioner of environmental protection or by local regulation or ordinance. 
    Refuse collector means a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of collecting and transporting solid waste for profit within the town. 
    Regulations means rules developed by the director to carry out the terms of this chapter, which rules shall have the same binding effect on generators and collectors as this chapter. 
    Residential waste means waste generated by persons living in residences containing not greater than six dwelling units, but excluding hospitals, motels or hotels. 
    Scrap metal means used or discarded items which consist predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel, or alloys thereof, including white goods. 
    Solid waste is defined as provided in G.S. § 22a-207(3), but excluding: 
(1)  "Hazardous waste"; 
(2)  Semi-solid or liquid materials which are collected and treated in a sewerage system. 
    Tipper barrel means a container for refuse of not less than 35 nor more than 120-gallon capacity, with an attached lid that allows for a 270-degree swing to the rear of the container, of a design for automated or semi-automated transfer of the refuse from the container into the refuse collection vehicle. 
    Transfer station means any location or structure, whether located on land or water, where more than ten cubic yards of solid waste, generated elsewhere, may be stored for transfer or transferred from transportation units and placed in other transportation units for movement to another location, whether or not such waste is stored at the location prior to transfer. 
    Waste stream means material that has been placed at curbside or at any designated collection or pick-up site or designated disposal site. 
    Written warning means a warning issued in writing and on a form specified by the director or his designee to first time violators of this article. The written warning shall state the section of the ordinance violated, the date of the violation, and the remedial action required. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-2, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. §§ 22a-115, 22a-207, 22a-260. 
Sec. 70-3. - Refuse containers and containers for recyclables. 
(a)  Containers for single-family dwellings. As specified by the department of public works, the standard container for single-family dwelling residential refuse shall be a tipper barrel, with a capacity of not less than 35 gallons nor more than 96 gallons. Solid waste containers shall be maintained by the resident in good and sound condition, free from holes and fissures. 
(b)  Containers for commercial solid waste. The standard container for commercial solid waste shall be a watertight, vermin-proof, galvanized or plastic receptacle, with a tight lid of not less than 35-gallon nor more than 120-gallon capacity; except that commercial establishments may provide for a large covered container that is designed to be emptied into a refuse truck. 
(c)  Containers for multifamily dwellings. As specified by the department of public works, the standard container for multifamily dwelling residential refuse shall be a tipper barrel, which shall be provided by the real property owner, with a capacity of not less than 35 gallons nor more than 120 gallons. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-3, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-4. - Storage and handling of solid waste and recyclables. 
(a)  Curbside placement of solid waste. Solid waste may not be placed at curbside sooner than two hours prior to sunset on the day preceding a scheduled collection. Containers shall be placed curbside, upon the edge of the roadway, with orientation to facilitate automated collection as noted on the tipper barrel. All solid waste put out for disposal must be contained within a tipper barrel, except on collection days immediately following holidays as defined by the director of public works, when overflow may be placed alongside the tipper barrel for collection in plastic bags. Empty containers shall be removed from the curbside before 8:00 a.m. the day after collection. 
(b)  Public places. No person, firm or corporation shall store or accumulate solid waste in any location in the town, either public or private, unless it is stored in approved tipper barrels, fixed site containers or otherwise properly prepared for collection, except in cases where the director has issued an exemption from these rules. The preceding prohibition shall apply as well to throwing or depositing solid waste in any stream or other body of water. 
(c)  Nuisances; notification; removal. Any accumulation of solid waste that is not stored as set forth above is deemed a nuisance and is prohibited. In such cases the director may notify the owner of such premises, or any other person responsible for the prohibited accumulation. Failure to remove such accumulation within 30 days of notification is a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Littering. Solid waste shall not be cast, placed or deposited in such manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or upon the property of another person. 
(e)  Hazardous waste. It is unlawful to place hazardous waste or similar dangerous substance into any solid waste or recyclables container or to submit such substance to the transfer station or the DSWF. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-4, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-5. - Separation of recyclable materials. 
(a)  Generally. Each occupier of land in the town shall be responsible for the ultimate separation of all designated recyclable materials from other refuse, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as well as any regulations drafted pursuant to this chapter, or any order of the director. 
(b)  Deposit of materials in designated areas. Recyclable material may be deposited by refuse collectors at an area designated by the DSWF, so long as the material is separated according to type and is clean and is placed in the designated area. The director or the CRRA shall determine whether the materials meet the requirements of this section and whether or not a charge shall be levied. 
(c)  Duties of the refuse collector. Refuse collectors are required to collect separated recyclables in the manner specified by this chapter. Refuse collectors are required to notify the director of any customers who do not separate recyclables, and must assist the director by identifying those parties responsible for mixing recyclables with solid waste that has been placed in the waste stream. Refuse collectors shall provide warnings to residential violators upon request of the director. 
(d)  Separation of materials, collection. Recyclable materials shall be separated from solid waste and placed at the curb or other designated location on the day designated by the refuse collector. Refuse collectors shall provide public notice of their schedule for collecting recyclables. 
(e)  Separation at dumpster. Owners of nonresidential property, including multifamily (those properties that do not use curbside service), shall make provisions for recyclables to be ultimately separated. 
(f)  Regulations. Recyclables shall be separated and prepared for pickup or disposal at the DSWF in accordance with the director's regulations. 
(1)  All solid waste entering the waste stream is subject to inspection to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(2)  During transportation from the source to the disposal site, paper stock must be separated from glass, metal and plastic recyclables. Brush, leaves and grass clippings must also be separated from other recyclables during transportation from the source to the disposal site. 
(3)  Refuse collectors must deliver recyclable bottles and cans to the DSWF, as designated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-5, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-6. - Removal of recyclable materials. 
(a)  No person shall remove recyclable materials, including but not limited to scrap metal, newspapers, unbroken glass, bottles, cans, tires and other collectibles from the designated disposal site without authorization from the director. 
(b)  Once recyclable materials are placed at curbside or other designated area, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person or entity, other than those authorized under this chapter, to collect or remove recyclable materials from said area. 
(c)  At the option of the director, violators of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may be required to make restitution to the town for any materials illegally removed. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of anyone to dispose of his own recyclables in any other lawful manner, provided that such materials have not been set out on the curb or placed in any designated collection or disposal site. 
(e)  Any nonprofit organization within the town may request authorization from the director to collect recyclables. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-6, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-7. - Enforcement. 
    Except as otherwise specified in this chapter the director or his designee shall enforce all provisions of the chapter and the regulations as they apply both to solid waste that is transported to the DSWF or any other area designated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-8, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-8. - Security. 
    The CRRA and/or the director shall require any licensee to post a letter of credit, bond or such other security as may reasonably be required to protect the town or the CRRA, as the case may be, from the nonpayment of any money owed to either the town or the CRRA. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-9, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-9. - Damages. 
(a)  By accepting a license issued under this chapter or the regulations, the licensee agrees to hold the town and the CRRA harmless from loss, damage, or injury arising from delivery of unacceptable or hazardous wastes to the DSWF. The director, in conjunction with the CRRA, shall establish such procedures as may be appropriate to protect the DSWF and their operators and employees from injury or damage arising from such deliveries. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, any person entering town waste disposal facilities shall be construed to be on the premises at his own risk and the town shall not be legally liable for any injuries or damages occurring to such person or his property while on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-10, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-10. - Lien. 
    Pursuant to G.S. § 7-148aa, any unpaid fine imposed pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a lien upon the real property against which the fine was imposed from the date of such fine. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-11, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-11. - Rules and regulations; decisions of director. 
(a)  In order to carry out the terms of this chapter, the director may, from time to time, promulgate rules and regulations, which rules shall have the same binding effect as this chapter. 
(b)  The director shall notify the CRRA of any action taken under the provisions of this chapter by the town, independent of the CRRA. 
(c)  The director shall be the municipal agent in accordance with G.S. § 22a-220. 
(d)  The director shall make his decisions that are authorized by this chapter in accordance with a law, ordinance, regulation or uniform town standard. 
(Code 1967, § 8B-24; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-12. - Penalties. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who violates the terms of this chapter or any regulation intended to implement this chapter shall be issued a citation imposing a fine as set forth below for each offense, in addition to any other penalty that may be imposed by law. 
(b)  Nonresidential and multifamily residential property. The initial violation of this article shall be documented by the issuance of a written warning. Each violation of this article subsequent to a written warning shall be documented by the issuance of a citation and punishable by a fine. The first subsequent violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. The next subsequent violation within five years of the first subsequent violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. Each subsequent violation within five years of a previous violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. The fines shall be in addition to any other penalty that may be imposed by law. Each violation constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  Civil penalties for refuse collectors. A refuse collector that knowingly mixes recyclables with solid waste may be issued a citation imposing civil penalties of $1,000.00 to $5,000.00. 
(d)  Single-family residential property. The initial violation of this article shall be documented by a written warning for the first offense. The first subsequent violation within five years of the written warning shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $25.00, the next subsequent violation within five years of the previous violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00, the next subsequent violation within five years of the previous violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00, the next subsequent violation within five years of the previous violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. All subsequent violations shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(e)  Hazardous waste violation. Any person who violates the terms of this chapter or any regulation intended to implement this chapter involving hazardous waste shall be issued a citation imposing a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense, in addition to any other penalty that may be imposed by law. 
(f)  Hearings. Any person issued a citation hereunder shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the citation pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 7-152c, as may be amended. The town manager shall appoint a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall not be a police officer, the director of public works or any other town employee. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 8B-7, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 03-2, 5-5-2003; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-13. - Central Connecticut Solid Waste Authority. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. Pursuant to G.S. § 7-273aa, which provides that any two or more Connecticut municipalities may, by concurrent ordinances of their legislative bodies, create a regional solid waste authority under the provisions of G.S. §§ 7-273aa-7-273oo, inclusive ("chapter 103b"), to jointly manage solid waste and recycling services on behalf of its members, the purpose of this section is to create such a regional authority to be known as the Central Connecticut Solid Waste Authority ("CCSWA"). Upon adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives by two or more municipalities, CCSWA shall be created. 
(b)  Creation of the regional solid waste authority. CCSWA is hereby created as a regional authority under the provisions of G.S. ch. 103b and shall have all the rights, powers, duties and obligations of a regional authority pursuant to G.S. chs. 103b, 446d and 446e. 
(c)  Designation of regional solid waste authority. The town (the "municipality") hereby designates CCSWA as its regional solid waste authority, including its regional resource recovery authority, and adopts the provisions of G.S. ch. 103b in connection with this election to become a member of CCSWA; provided, however, that this designation and membership election shall not constitute a commitment of the municipality's solid waste or recycling streams, and provided further that the Municipality agrees that it shall take no action, now or in the future, contrary to its currently existing legal obligations and commitments, including, without limitation, making any pledge of its municipal solid waste or recycling streams to a disposal or recycling option chosen through CCSWA which has an effective date commencing prior to the expiration date of any currently existing waste stream commitment to another disposal or recycling arrangement. By adopting this section, the municipality shall not be obligated now or in the future to make any such commitment of its solid waste or recycling streams, or to commit any funding toward CCSWA, without further express authorization by its legislative body. 
(d)  Purpose of the authority. The purpose of CCSWA shall be to solicit and jointly manage solid waste and recycling services on behalf of its members. 
(e)  Principal address of the authority. The principal address of CCSWA shall be 241 Main Street, Hartford, Connecticut 06106, c/o the Capitol Region Council of Governments. 
(f)  Members of the authority. The members of CCSWA shall be the municipalities, including this municipality, which adopt the ordinance from which this section derives. Each member municipality shall be assigned to one of four sub-regions of CCSWA: 
(1)  The Northwest Sub-Region; 
(2)  The Naugatuck Valley Sub-Region; 
(3)  The Greater Capitol Sub-Region; or 
(4)  The Shoreline Sub-Region. 
(g)  Voting system for meetings of the authority's full membership. The number of votes to be cast by each municipal member of CCSWA at any meeting of the authority's full membership shall be determined in accordance with the following five-tiered voting system based on the individual population of each municipal member compared to the total population of all CCSWA municipal members (all such population figures to be derived from the most recent annual data published by the Connecticut Department of Public Health): 
(1)  Each municipal member whose individual population is less than one percent of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have one vote; 
(2)  Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or greater than one percent, but less than two percent, of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have two votes; 
(3)  Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or greater than two percent, but less than five percent, of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have three votes; 
(4)  Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or greater than five percent, but less than ten percent, of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have four votes; and 
(5)  Each municipal member whose individual population is equal to or greater than ten percent of the total population of all CCSWA municipal members shall have five votes. 
(h)  Appointment, removal and term of office of a municipal member representative. Each municipal member shall appoint one representative to CCSWA, which shall be the current chief elected official of the municipality or that official's designee, and that representative shall exercise the voting powers established for that municipal member as set forth in this section. As long as the method of appointment and removal and the term of office of each municipal member representative shall be consistent with the first sentence of this section, the details of such appointment, removal and term of office shall be as determined by the appointing municipality; provided however, that not more than half of the terms of all such municipal representatives shall expire within any one fiscal year. 
(i)  Annual meeting and by-laws of the authority. There shall be at least one annual meeting of all municipal members of CCSWA, to elect the members of the executive committee and enact such other business as shall be deemed advisable at such meeting, all as provided in the by-laws of CCSWA to be adopted after its formation. It shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of all CCSWA municipal members to enact the authority by-laws or adopt any amendments thereto, such vote to take place at a duly-called meeting of the full membership of CCSWA, with proxy voting to be permitted at such meeting. 
(j)  Prohibition against member monetary compensation other than host community compensation. The members and member representatives of CCSWA shall receive no monetary compensation solely for their service as members and member representatives of CCSWA; provided, however, that the ability of CCSWA, if it chooses to do so in its sole discretion, to pay host community compensation to municipal members which agree to host facilities owned or used by CCSWA within their municipal borders shall not be affected by this prohibition. 
(k)  Executive committee of the authority. The full membership of CCSWA shall elect an executive committee to manage the operations of CCSWA, provided, however, that the specific division of responsibilities for such management between the executive committee, the full membership of CCSWA and any other body or officer of CCSWA shall be consistent with the by-laws of CCSWA to be adopted after its formation. No member of CCSWA shall have more than one representative on the executive committee, and each member of the executive committee shall have one vote, without regard to the voting system established by subsection (g) for meetings of the authority's full membership. The members of such executive committee shall constitute an odd number, shall include at least one representative of each of the five voting tiers established pursuant to subsection (g) for meetings of the authority's full membership, and shall also be determined by considerations of geographical representation based on the four sub-regions established under subsection (f), all such matters and the terms of office and appointment of such executive committee members and other matters pertaining thereto to be specifically determined in a manner consistent with the by-laws of CCSWA to be adopted after its formation. 
(Ord. No. 10-2, §§ 1-11, 5-17-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-2, §§ 1-11, adopted May 17, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 70-13 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 70-14-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND REGULATION OF REFUSE COLLECTORS 

Sec. 70-31. - Required. 
(a)  All solid waste originating within the limits of the town shall be collected, transported and disposed of either by the town or by refuse collectors licensed jointly by the town and the CRRA in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No other person or business entity shall collect, transport or dispose of solid waste, with the exception that is incidental to the repair and maintenance of residential property. Individual generators of solid waste or owners of property upon which solid waste has accumulated may collect, transport and/or dispose of such waste in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or such regulations as the director may, from time to time, adopt. 
(b)  No solid waste collected from outside the boundaries of the town shall be disposed of under a license of vehicle issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 8B-21; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-32. - Application; registration of vehicles. 
(a)  Application. All refuse collectors/transporters shall apply to the director for a license to collect and transport solid waste in the town. Fixed site storage containers shall be registered by location concurrently with licensure. Such application shall be on a form provided by the director and shall comply with the requirements contained in the regulations. Any of the following shall be deemed sufficient grounds for denial of a license: 
(1)  The applicant has been irresponsible in the conduct of solid waste collection, hauling or separation as evidenced by prior suspension and/or revocation of a license; 
(2)  The applicant does not have suitable equipment; 
(3)  The applicant has not complied with licensing requirements and/or has not paid required fees to either the town or the CRRA; or 
(4)  The collector has demonstrated a lack of cooperation or good faith effort to carry out the terms of this chapter or the regulations. 
(b)  Issuance. Nontransferable licenses shall be issued for the term of one fiscal year, which shall begin on July 1. No refuse collector shall engage in the business of collecting solid waste in the town without a valid license. 
(c)  Registration of vehicles. Each licensee shall obtain a separate registration for each vehicle he uses to transport solid waste and/or recyclables within the town. Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of 18,000 pounds or greater shall be classed as "Commercial II vehicles" for permitting purposes and shall not be allowed to utilize the town transfer station. 
Vehicles are subject to such inspection at reasonable times as the director may require. Registration may not be transferred from one vehicle or container to another without permission of the director. 
(d)  Registration term; fee, renewal. Registrations are issued for a period not to exceed one year, commencing on July 1. Registration fees may be prorated in accordance with the regulations if application is made after that date. Registration fees may be set annually by the town council. 
(Code 1967, § 813-22(a)-(d); Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Charter reference- Fiscal year, ch. III, § 10. 
Sec. 70-33. - Security. 
    The CRRA and/or the director shall require any licensee to post a letter of credit, bond or such other security as may reasonably be required to protect the town or the CRRA, as the case may be, from the nonpayment of any money owed to either the town or the CRRA. 
(Code 1967, § 8B-9; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-34. - Damages. 
    By accepting a license issued under this chapter or the regulations, the licensee agrees to hold the town and the CRRA harmless from loss, damage or injury arising from delivery of unacceptable or hazardous wastes to the DSWF. The director, in conjunction with the CRRA, shall establish such procedures as may be appropriate to protect the system and their operators and employees from injury or damage arising from such deliveries. 
(Code 1967, § 8B-10; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-35. - Reinspection; vehicle registration and identification; transfer of routes; rates. 
(a)  Reinspection. In the event that a registered vehicle or fixed site container is sold or transferred to another licensee during the registration year, it shall be reinspected by the director within seven days of the transfer; however, no additional registration fee will be required. 
(b)  Display registration. Registration numbers shall be conspicuously displayed on the left front of the body of each vehicle or fixed site container or as otherwise required by the director. 
(c)  Vehicle identification. Each licensee shall prominently display his business name, address and telephone number on the door of each registered vehicle or front of each fixed site container in letters at least four inches high. 
(d)  Transfer of route. If a licensee transfers all or part of his route to another licensee, the transferor shall provide written notice to the director at least seven days prior to the date of transfer. 
Such notice shall provide the name of the transferee and date of intended transfer. Failure to provide such notice shall be reason to deny a full return of any bond or insurance. 
(e)  License nontransferable. No licensee shall transfer all or part of his route to any refuse collector that is not licensed jointly by the town and the CRRA. 
(f)  Routes serviced. Before a license will be issued, a refuse collector must supply the director with a customer list and a description of his routes, including the days of collecting solid waste and recyclables. Such lists must be updated during the term of the license in accordance with the regulations. 
(g)  List of rates. Upon request, each refuse collector shall furnish a list of rates, for the services he provides, to the director or any of his present or prospective customers. 
(Code 1967, § 8B-22(e)-(k); Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-36. - Revocation or suspension of license or registration. 
(a)  Generally. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license or registration issued under its provisions. 
(b)  Notice required. Revocation or suspension shall become effective five calendar days after written notice is mailed by the director unless a lesser time is indicated in the notice. 
(c)  Person available to receive notice. Licensees must provide the director with the name and address of a person who will be available at all times, in person or by designee, to receive notice either by mail or in-hand delivery. Lack of availability on the part of such person shall be deemed a waiver of required notice. 
(d)  Request for review. Upon receipt of a notice of suspension or revocation, the licensee may file a written request for review. Such request must be filed with the town clerk within five days of receipt of the notice. Failure to file within such time shall waive the licensee's right to review, making the suspension or revocation final and binding upon the refuse collector. 
(e)  Timely filing. If such request is filed within five days of receipt of notice, such request shall stay the revocation or suspension, pending review by the special appeals board, if appointed as set forth below, excepting such cases where, in the opinion of the director or the CRRA, a stay would present substantial harm to the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(f)  Special appeals board, hearing. The town council may appoint a special appeals board consisting of four electors of the town, one licensed refuse collector and a member of the town council to serve as a nonvoting liaison member, and the board shall then, within 15 days, hear and decide the matter. The decision of the board shall be final and binding upon the refuse collector. 
(g)  Names, addresses of customers to be furnished upon revocation, suspension. Whenever a refuse collector's license or registration is revoked or suspended, he shall furnish the director within 24 hours, the names and addresses of his customers to ensure continuity of service. 
(h)  Loss of permission to use DSWF. The director shall have the right to request that CRRA deny any refuse collector admission to the DSWF when in his opinion such refuse collector has violated this chapter or the regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 8B-23; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-37. - Administration. 
    The director or his designee shall administer the licensing and registration of any refuse collector engaged in collecting and transporting solid waste and recyclables within the town. 
    The director or his designee shall not issue a license until the refuse collector provides proof of adequate liability insurance which shall include an obligation on the part of the carrier to notify the town if coverage is terminated. 
(Code 1967, § 8B-24(a), (b); Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 70-38. - Licensee's responsibilities and obligations. 
(a)  Generally. Each licensee collector shall deliver all solid waste collected within the town, meeting the contractual standards, to the DSWF and pay the disposal charge to the CRRA. All other solid waste shall be delivered to such location as the director may designate and any required charge shall be paid by the licensee. All residential recyclables shall be delivered to such place as the director designates. 
(b)  Failure to pay. Any licensee who fails to pay any disposal charge to the town or the CRRA, within 30 days of the date of the bill, shall pay, in addition to such bill, interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or fraction thereof, beginning on the date of the bill, and all costs of collection, including reasonable attorney's fees. Failure to pay within 90 days shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license. 
(c)  Prohibition on delivery. No licensee shall deliver solid waste meeting the contractual standards to any place other than the site designated by the director. 
(d)  Vehicles; construction, maintenance. All registered vehicles and fixed site containers shall be automatic loading/unloading vehicles of watertight construction and shall be maintained free of noxious odors and accumulations of solid waste. Any vehicle with a capacity greater than ten cubic yards shall be of closed construction. Containers used for nonliquid solid waste need not be watertight, but must be completely enclosed. A vehicle of less than ten cubic yards may have an open top, provided that it is covered when in motion. 
(e)  Delinquent customers. A licensee may refuse collection service to any customer who is more than 75 days delinquent in the payment of the licensee's fee. The refuse collector shall notify the director in writing of such action. However, the licensee shall immediately restore service upon payment of the debt. 
(f)  Responsibility to provide service; refusal to provide. Licensees of the town are hereby made jointly responsible for providing collection service to any resident of the town. Any resident who is denied the services of a refuse collector or who is dissatisfied with his collection service with cause, may make application to the director, who shall have the right to direct such licensee to provide service or to designate another licensee to provide service. The selected licensee shall comply with the director's order. In making such designation, the director shall give primary consideration to those licensees who service customers in the same or a contiguous locality. 
(g)  Designation of licensee to provide service. In the event that solid waste collection is not provided in a geographical area of the town, the director may designate a licensee to provide service to such geographical area. The designee is required to comply with the director's order. 
(h)  Customers' containers. Licensees shall leave their customers' containers off the highway, in a neat and upright position, with lids replaced. 
(i)  Spilled solid waste. Licensees shall clean up any solid waste or recyclables that spill while being collected or hauled. 
(Code 1967, § 8B-25; Ord. No. 08-1, 3-3-2008) 
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of the department of public works in connection with highways, sidewalks and curbs, ch. V, § 9. 
Related law reference- Sidewalks and curbs in Village of Thompsonville, part II, art. 2. 
State Law reference- Municipal highways and sidewalks, G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(6)(C), 52-558; state highways, excavations and obstructions, G.S. § 13a-247; obstructing free passage, G.S. § 53a-182a. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SCENIC ROADS 

Sec. 74-31. - Purpose. 
    Certain roads within the town may be designated scenic roads, as defined in G.S. § 7-149a. In order to preserve the scenic character of such roads the town adopts this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-3, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 74-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owners means those persons having record title ownership to land, which directly abuts any roadway subject to the provisions of this article. 
    Town means the Town of Enfield, a municipal corporation having its territorial limits within the County of Hartford. 
(Ord. No. 00-3, § 1, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 74-33. - Procedure and criteria for the establishment of scenic roads. 
(a)  The town council shall have authority to designate any town highway, or portion thereof, as a scenic road. 
(b)  Prior to the designation of any highway as a scenic road, the town shall receive a written statement of approval of such designation from the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the highway, or portion thereof, to be designated as a scenic road. All such approvals shall be filed in the town clerk's office. 
(c)  Any highway, or portion thereof, to be designated as a scenic road must be free of intensive commercial development and intensive vehicular traffic and must meet at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  It is unpaved; 
(2)  It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls; 
(3)  The traveled portion is no more than 20 feet in width; 
(4)  It offers scenic views; 
(5)  It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain; or 
(6)  It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds. 
(Ord. No. 00-3, § 2, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 74-34. - Rescission of scenic road designation. 
    The town council may rescind a scenic road designation after receiving the written concurrence of the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the highway, or portion thereof, that has been designated as a scenic road. 
(Ord. No. 00-3, § 3, 12-18-2000) 
Secs. 74-35-74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPENINGS, EXCAVATIONS OR OBSTRUCTING STREETS 

Sec. 74-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public highway means any public highway within the limits of the town built, maintained and repaired by the town. 
(Code 1967, § 9-2) 
Sec. 74-62. - Compliance. 
    No person shall open or make any excavation in any part or portion of any public highway, or place any equipment or obstruction within, upon or over any public highway, for any purpose, except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 9-3) 
Sec. 74-63. - Permit-Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to open or make any excavation in any part or portion of any public highway or to place any equipment or obstruction within, upon or over any such public highway, shall first make application for a permit to the director of public works stating the purpose thereof and the place concerned. 
(b)  The director of public works may, if he deems it necessary, supply written applications requiring reasonably necessary information in order to make the determinations hereinafter mentioned. 
(Code 1967, § 9-4) 
Sec. 74-64. - Same-Approval or disapproval. 
(a)  The director of public works shall act upon any applications for a permit under this article received within a reasonable time and shall determine whether or not it shall be approved. 
(b)  In the event the director of public works approves any such application, a written permit shall be issued upon such terms and conditions as the director of public works shall prescribe and as shall be reasonable. 
(Code 1967, § 9-5) 
Sec. 74-65. - Same-Bond. 
(a)  Before any person shall make any application for a permit under this article they shall file with the town treasurer a bond, with surety, in form and amount satisfactory to the director of public works and approved by him. Such bond shall be conditioned to cover the following: 
(1)  To repay and reimburse the town for any expense that the town may incur by reason of having to fill in or close any opening or excavation or removing any obstruction or equipment. 
(2)  To save the town harmless for injury or death to any person or property damage to any person by reason of the negligence of the permittee when carrying on of such work, or by reason of his negligently leaving any obstruction or equipment on such public highway, by the permittee, his servants or agents. 
(3)  To save harmless any person which may be injured in any way by the negligent carrying on of such work by the permittee or by his negligently leaving any obstruction or equipment on such public highway. 
(b)  Such bond may be a continuing bond to cover all of such work conducted by a permittee in the town during the term of such bond. 
(Code 1967, § 9-6) 
Sec. 74-66. - Appeal. 
    Any such person aggrieved by the neglect or unreasonable refusal of the director of public works to grant such permit, or by the terms and conditions therein imposed may appeal to the town manager for a review of such application and proceedings before the director of public works, which town manager may upon giving reasonable notice to the director of public works, of such appeal and of the time of hearing, determine whether such permit ought to be granted or such terms and conditions altered and may further make such any order or orders as to director of public works may seem appropriate. 
(Code 1967, § 9-7) 
Sec. 74-67. - Application of article to public service companies. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply and be effective as to public service companies in every respect except that whenever any of the provisions of G.S. §§ 16-229-16-231 cover the same subject or procedure as contained in this article, then the provisions of G.S. §§ 16-229-16-231 shall prevail over and supersede this article as to such public service corporations. 
(Code 1967, § 9-8) 
Sec. 74-68. - Public safeguards. 
(a)  All excavated material shall be compactly piled and shall not interfere with public travel more than necessary and, unless specifically permitted, shall not completely block any street. 
(b)  The permittee hereunder shall install barricades, warning signs and warning lights as are necessary to adequately warn traffic of work in progress. Warning lights shall remain in continuous operation between sunset and sunrise. 
(c)  The permittee shall install barricades and take any other appropriate steps which the town manager or his designated agent determines are necessary to prevent pedestrian access to the construction area. At the close of work each day the permittee shall secure the construction area in order to prevent access to the site by pedestrians. 
(d)  The use of a traffic director shall be required if the town manager or his designated agent determines that the location and extent of the work has an adverse effect on traffic control and public safety. The town manager or his designated agent shall determine if the traffic director shall be a uniformed police officer or a flag person employed by the permittee. If the traffic director is a police officer, the cost thereof shall be paid by the permittee. The town manager or his designated agent may require that there be more than one traffic director. 
(Code 1967, § 9-8A) 
Sec. 74-69. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall open or make any excavation in any part or portion of any public highway or shall place any equipment or obstruction within, upon or over such public highway, without first obtaining a permit as provided in this article and any person who having made such opening or excavation or placed such equipment or obstruction pursuant to a permit issued and who refuses to comply with the terms and conditions of such permit, and any person who otherwise violates any other provisions of this article, shall be fined not more than $250.00 for each violation and each day will constitute a new offense. 
(Code 1967, § 9-9; Ord. No. 07-1, 1-16-2007) 
Secs. 74-70-74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Highways and sidewalks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C). 

Sec. 74-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Occupant means the tenant, lessee or any other person or entity in possession and control of any privately owned premises. 
    Owner means the person, estate, corporation or any other legal entity that owns the premises. This includes all owners regardless of number or interest. 
    Premises means any tract, parcel, lot or other subdivision of land, within the town with or without buildings thereon, that adjoins or fronts on any sidewalk within the town or borders or adjoins any street, square or public place within the town where there is a sidewalk. 
    Sidewalk means any paved, graded, planked or raised, or in any other way improved, municipally-owned off-road walkway intended for public use. 
(Code 1967, § 9-10; Ord. No. 09-03, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 74-102. - Duty to remove snow and ice; throwing snow and ice into street. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any premises within the town where there is a sidewalk, to remove or cause to be removed from the entire width of such sidewalk any and all snow and ice within the following time limits: 
(1)  In the case of snow 24 hours from the time the snow has ceased as declared by the director of public works or his designee. 
(2)  In the case of ice 24 hours from the time conditions which have caused the sidewalk to have ice upon it or to be covered with ice, have stopped or ceased to exist. 
(b)  In any case or situation where the removal of ice is impossible or extremely difficult the owner or occupant shall cause such sidewalk to be made safe for public travel by covering the same with sand or some other suitable substance. 
(c)  All snow and ice accumulating in the street higher than a point four inches below the bottom of the lowest outlet on any fire hydrant, and within a radius of three feet from the center of such hydrant, shall be removed by the occupant or owner of the premises fronting on that portion of the street within 24 hours after the snow event has ceased as declared by the director of public works or his designee. 
(d)  No owner or occupant shall throw or put, or cause to be thrown or put, any snow or ice into or onto the traveled portion of any public street or highway under the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Code 1967, § 9-11; Ord. No. 09-3, 12-21-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-3, adopted December 21, 2009, changed the title of section 74-102 from "Duty to remove snow and ice; exception" to "Duty to remove snow and ice; throwing snow and ice into street." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 74-103. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Whenever any owner or occupant of premises, as herein defined, whose duty it is to remove snow and ice or to otherwise make sidewalks safe for public travel, as herein provided, shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the same or shall otherwise violate any provision of this article shall be issued a citation and fined $75.00 for each offense. The citation must be paid upon receipt. 
(b)  Each and every day of refusal or neglect to comply with such provisions shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any owner or occupant issued a citation pursuant to this article shall be entitled to a hearing pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 7-152c as revised. 
(d)  The town manager shall appoint a hearing officer(s) pursuant to G.S. § 7-152c as revised. The hearing officer(s) will conduct the hearing as provided for in G.S. § 7-152c as revised. 
(Code 1967, § 9-12; Ord. No. 09-3, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 74-104. - Action by town upon violations. 
(a)  Pursuant to G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v), in the event any owner or occupant of premises as defined herein shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove snow or ice from any sidewalk or to make any sidewalk safe for public travel or otherwise fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article the director of public works or his designee upon such failure, neglect or refusal may remove any snow or ice from such sidewalk or otherwise make it safe for public travel. 
(b)  The expenses of such removal or other necessary action shall be a lien upon the premises concerned provided the town council shall cause a certificate of lien to be recorded in the office of the town clerk within 30 days from such removal or other necessary action. 
(Code 1967, § 9-13; Ord. No. 09-3, 12-21-2009) 
Chapter 78 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Tax collector authorized to retain excess tax payments under $5.00. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 12-129, the tax collector is authorized to retain property tax payments in excess of the amount due provided that the amount of the excess payment is less than $5.00. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.8) 
Sec. 78-2. - Waiver of penalty on income and expense reports 
(a)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statute § 12-63c(d), as may be amended, the Assessor, or the Board of Assessment Appeals, may waive the ten percent penalty imposed for failure to submit information as required by C.G.S. § 12-63c(a), as may be amended. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for such waiver, the owner of the property must submit the assessor's form with correct and complete information to the assessor no later than December 31 of the current grand list year. Any property for which such form is received by the assessor after December 31st of the current grand list year will not be eligible for the waiver of penalty. 
( Ord. No. 17-1, 1-3-2017 ) 
Secs. 78-3-78-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXEMPTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-30. - Interest on real property tax for armed forces members serving in the Middle East. 
(a)  Purpose. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Public Act 05-3, June Special Session. 
(b)  Waiver. 
(1)  The interest on real property tax due, assessed on the 2003 Grand List for those eligible under subsection (c) of this section, shall be waived for one year. 
(2)  The interest on real property tax due July 1, 2004, shall be waived through June 30, 2005. 
(3)  The interest on real property tax due January 1, 2005, shall be waived through December 31, 2005. 
(4)  Real property taxes, assessed on the 2003 Grand List and due on July 1, 2004, and January 1, 2005, shall be due and paid in full no later than July 1, 2005, and January 1, 2006, respectively. 
(5)  If real property taxes are not paid in full in accordance with subsection (b) (4) of this section, 18 percent interest shall be due as required by G.S. § 12-146. 
(c)  Eligibility. 
(1)  The payment of interest due on real property tax shall be waived for the spouse of a service member or reservist who is called to active service, authorized by the President, for military operations in Iraq and who is serving in the Middle East on August 2, 2004, and February 1, 2005, provided the spouse is living with the service member or reservist. 
(2)  "Service member or reservist" means any member of the armed forces as defined in G.S. § 27-103 and includes members of the National Guard. 
(3)  To qualify for the waiver under subsection (b) of this section, verification of eligibility must be provided to the satisfaction of the town tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 05-2, 10-17-2005) 
Sec. 78-31. - Certain veterans exempt from property taxation. 
    The Town of Enfield hereby enacts property tax relief for residence property of certain veterans residing in specially adapted housing pursuant to the authority granted to the town under G.S. § 12-81(21). 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.4) 
Sec. 78-32. - Blind exempt from property taxation. 
    The town hereby enacts property tax relief for property of blind persons pursuant to the authority granted to the town under G.S. § 12-81j, contained within Public Act 87-404. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.5) 
Sec. 78-33. - Permanently and totally disabled persons exempt from residence property taxation. 
    The town hereby enacts property tax relief for residence property of permanently and totally disabled persons pursuant to the authority granted to the town under G.S. § 12-81i. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.6) 
Sec. 78-34. - Exemption for certain nonprofit organizations from property tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of G.S. § 12-81b, the town hereby enacts this section providing for property tax relief for certain institutions. 
(b)  This section shall be applicable to property acquired on or after May 1, 1994. 
(c)  This section shall apply only to a nonprofit organization which has complied with the requirements of G.S. § 12-81(7), 12-81(11), 12-81(12), 12-81(15) or 12-81(16). 
(d)  The property of such an organization shall be exempt from taxation as of the date of its acquisition. 
(e)  Any such organization seeking a refund of taxes from the town shall file an application with the tax collector within one year of the date of the payment of such taxes. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the tax collector. 
(f)  Any refund due pursuant to this section shall be limited to the principal amount of any taxes paid by the organization and the amount of any tax reimbursement to the prior owner of the property. In no event shall the refund exceed the amount of the taxes that were first due without interest or penalty in the municipal fiscal year in which the organization acquired the property. There shall be no refund of: 
(1)  Interest or penalties; 
(2)  Sewer user fees or fire district taxes or interest or penalties thereon. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.7) 
Sec. 78-35. - Certain motor vehicles exempt from filing. 
    In accordance with G.S. § 12-41, no person required by law to file an annual declaration of personal property shall include in such declaration motor vehicles which are registered in the office of the state commissioner of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1) 
Sec. 78-36. - Ambulance type motor vehicle. 
(a)  Purpose. The following requirements are necessary for an ambulance-type motor vehicle to be eligible for exemption from personal property taxation pursuant to G.S. § 12-81c (1) and (3). 
(1)  In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 12-81c, the town council, authorizes and directs the tax assessor to exempt from personal property taxation any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for profit. Such owner of the vehicle must show proof annually to the assessor that the vehicle is being used to transport medically incapacitated individuals. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle owned by a person with disabilities, or owned by the parent or guardian of such person, which vehicle is equipped for purposes of adapting its use to the disability of such person is exempt from taxation provided it meets the criteria set below. 
(b)  Equipment of vehicle. The vehicle must be equipped with assistive devices, including but not limited to, any one of the following permanently installed features: 
(1)  A wheelchair or scooter lift; 
(2)  A four-way driver's transfer seat with hand controls; 
(3)  Hand controls for gas and/or brake; 
(4)  Manual extension controls for gas and/or brake; 
(5)  A lowered floor with wheelchair lift; 
(6)  Automatic door openers; 
(7)  Automatic platform lift; 
(8)  Customized knob on steering wheel, combined with crossover bar on steering column for directional signals and dimmer lights; 
(9)  Left-hand side gas pedal. 
(c)  Application. The cost of vehicle adaptation must be stated on an application available in the assessor's office. The application must be received annually, no later than January 31 following the assessment date and the immediate preceding supplemental grand list. Failure to file such application within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for the assessment year. 
(d)  Authorization. The assessor is authorized to promulgate such procedure and forms as are necessary to implement this exemption. 
(Ord. No. 00-1, 4-3-2000) 
Secs. 78-37-78-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 

Sec. 78-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Active solar energy heating or cooling system means equipment which (i) provides for the collection, transfer, storage and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or cooling which absent such solar energy system would require a conventional energy resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, (ii) employs mechanical means such as fans or pumps to transfer energy, and (iii) meets standards established by regulation, in accordance with the provisions of G.S. ch. 54, by the secretary of the state office of policy and management. 
(Code 1967, § 8A-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 12-81(56)(b). 
Sec. 78-62. - Applicability. 
    Pursuant to G.S. § 12-81(56), any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 2006, which is equipped with an active solar energy heating or cooling system, or any building to which a solar energy heating or cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 2006, to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such solar heating or cooling system exceeds the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with the conventional portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such system related to solar energy, provided this exemption shall only apply to the first 15 assessment years following construction of such building or addition of any such system to a building. 
(Code 1967, § 8A-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 12-81(56)(a). 
Sec. 78-63. - Filing for exemption. 
    Any person claiming the exemption provided in this subdivision for any assessment year shall, on or before November 1 in such assessment year, file with the assessor or board of assessors in the town in which such real property is located written application claiming such exemption. Failure to file such application in the manner and form as provided by such assessor or board within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for such assessment year. Such application shall not be required for any assessment year following that for which the initial application is filed, provided if such solar energy heating or cooling system is altered in a manner which would require a building permit, such alteration shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such exemption until a new application, applicable with respect to such altered system, is filed and the right to such exemption is established as required initially. 
(Code 1967, § 8A-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 12-81(56)(c). 
Sec. 78-64. - Appropriate mechanical permit. 
    In addition to any other requirement provided in this division, persons must apply for the appropriate mechanical permit and provide an estimate of the total cost of construction to the building inspector's office plus a separate listing of the cost of the active solar energy heating or cooling system that is to be installed or proposed for installation in such structure. 
(Code 1967, § 8A-18) 
Secs. 78-65-78-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX RELIEF FOR ELDERLY PERSONS 

Sec. 78-81. - Property tax relief for residence property of the elderly granted. 
    The town hereby enacts property tax relief for residence property of the elderly pursuant to the authority granted to the town under G.S. § 12-129n, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.1) 
Sec. 78-82. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide supplemental property tax relief for residence property of the elderly equal to the tax credit amount provided by the tax relief benefits obtained from the state in accordance with G.S. §§ 12-129b-12-129d, inclusive, 12-129n and 12-170aa, and no such property tax relief, together with any relief received by any such resident under the above provision shall exceed, in the aggregate, the total amount of the tax which would, except for G.S. §§ 12-129b-12-129d, inclusive, 12-129n and 12-170aa, be laid against the taxpayer. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.2) 
Sec. 78-83. - Qualifications and application. 
    To be eligible, the elderly taxpayer shall complete an application and must have qualified for the state tax credit relief for elderly homeowners under the provisions of G.S. §§ 12-129b-12-129d, inclusive, 12-129n and 12-170aa. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.3) 
Secs. 78-84-78-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX ABATEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 78-111-78-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS; VOLUNTEER EMERGENCY MEDICAL PERSONNEL 

Sec. 78-131. - Purpose. 
    The town, in recognition of the benefits provided to the community by the dedicated residents of the town who volunteer their time and service as firefighters, emergency medical technicians, paramedics and ambulance drivers, hereby establishes, pursuant to G.S. § 12-81w, a tax abatement program as an incentive in recruiting and retaining such volunteers. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 78-132. - Scope. 
    All firefighters, emergency medical technicians, paramedics and ambulance drivers who are volunteer members of one of the fire departments within the town, who own real or personal property within the town and who meet the criteria established below are eligible to participate in the tax abatement program. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 78-133. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency incidents means events that the fire department responds to with emergency services and for which all members of the department receive notification. Approved drills are training and/or educational sessions approved by the chief of the department. 
    Emergency medical personnel/person means volunteer emergency medical technicians, volunteer paramedics and volunteer ambulance drivers. 
    Firefighter, emergency medical technician, paramedic or ambulance driver means a regular, active, volunteer member of one of the fire departments within the town who provides at least one of the aforementioned services for the fire department. 
    Firefighter I certification means certification to the Firefighter I level by the state of Connecticut Commission on Fire Prevention and Control or equivalent based on NFPA Standard 1001. Emergency medical technician certification is defined as certification to the emergency medical technician level by the state office of emergency medical services. 
    Property tax means real estate taxes, motor vehicle taxes and personal property taxes for property in the town that is owned by the firefighter or emergency medical person either individually, jointly or as a tenant in common. 
    Year of service means the 12-month period commencing from the date that the firefighter or emergency medical person became a volunteer member of the fire department or the 12-month period from the anniversary date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 78-134. - Eligibility. 
    In order to be eligible for this program, a firefighter or emergency medical person must be a regular, active member of his fire department. A regular, active member shall attend at least 25 percent of the department's emergency incidents and 12 approved drills. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 78-135. - Notice of eligibility. 
    No later than April 1 of each year, except for grand list year 2003 which is extended to April 15, the chief of each fire department in the town shall provide to the town manager a written list of that fire department's members who are eligible for the tax abatement program for July 1 of that year. The list shall contain the home address of each eligible member, the eligible member's years of service as of July 1 of that year and shall specify the maximum abatement, as set forth below, for which each member is eligible. The omission of any of the required information regarding a firefighter or emergency medical person shall disqualify that individual from eligibility for the abatement for that year. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 78-136. - Abatements. 
    Abatements of property taxes due on July 1 shall be granted to eligible members as follows: 
(1)  Firefighters or emergency medical personnel who have satisfied their department's probationary membership requirements, who have met the eligibility requirements set forth above, have less than five years of service and are not certified as a Firefighter I or to the Emergency Medical Technician level, shall be eligible for a property tax abatement of $250.00. 
(2)  Firefighters or emergency medical personnel who have met the eligibility requirements set forth above, have less than five years of service and are certified as a Firefighter I or to the Emergency Medical Technician level, shall be eligible for a property tax abatement of $500.00. 
(3)  Firefighters or emergency medical personnel who have met the eligibility requirements set forth above, have at least five years of service, but less than ten years of service and are not certified as a Firefighter I or to the Emergency Medical Technician level, shall be eligible for a property tax abatement of $500.00. 
(4)  Firefighters or emergency medical personnel who have met the eligibility requirements set forth above, have at least five years of service, but less than ten years of service and are certified as a Firefighter I or to the Emergency Medical Technician level, shall be eligible for a property tax abatement of $750.00. 
(5)  Firefighters or emergency medical personnel who have met the eligibility requirements set forth above, have at least ten years of service and are not certified as a Firefighter I or to the Emergency Medical Technician level, shall be eligible for a property tax abatement of $750.00. 
(6)  Firefighters or emergency medical personnel who have met the eligibility requirements set forth above, have at least ten years of service and are certified as a Firefighter I or to the Emergency Medical Technician level, shall be eligible for a property tax abatement of $1,000.00. 
(7)  In no event shall the amount of any abatement for any year exceed the total of all property tax liability of the firefighter or emergency medical person for that year. Any unused portion of the abatement shall not be carried over into subsequent years. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 78-137. - Adjustment to time served. 
(a)  In the event that a firefighter or emergency medical person ceases to be a regular, active member of his fire department and later returns to regular, active membership with his fire department or another fire department in the town, any previously served time will be included in his years of service for purposes of determining the amount of the abatement. The returning member must satisfy his department's probationary membership requirements prior to becoming eligible for an abatement. 
(b)  Time spent as a firefighter or emergency medical person with one fire department in the town may be combined with time spent as a firefighter or emergency medical person with another fire department in the town. 
(c)  Any firefighter or emergency medical person who is a member of a fire department in the town at the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived and who meets the eligibility requirements herein shall have all accrued time as a firefighter or emergency medical person applied to his years of service. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, 8-18-2003) 
Sec. 78-138. - Disqualification. 
    Any firefighter or emergency medical person who is not a regular, active member of a fire department in the town for more than six months in any one year of service shall not be eligible for an abatement in the next following fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, 8-18-2003) 
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Director of public safety authorized to be traffic authority, ch. V, § 10. 
State Law reference- Power of town to regulate traffic, G.S. § 14-297 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in G.S. §§ 14-1 and 14-297, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Code 1967, § 6-19) 
Sec. 82-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    It is hereby declared to be in the best interest of the public safety, convenience and welfare of the town to regulate and restrict vehicle traffic and the parking of vehicles within the town. 
(Code 1967, § 6-1) 
Sec. 82-3. - State statutes to control. 
    The Connecticut General Statutes, as they may be amended from time to time, shall control. 
(Code 1967, § 6-17) 
Sec. 82-4. - Restrictions generally. 
    Traffic and parking shall be prohibited or restricted within such portion or the whole of any street or highway of the town for such period of time as public necessity, convenience and safety requires or for such period of time as such street and highway condition continues, or for such period of time as such emergency on such street or highway exists, as may be designated by the town manager or his representative. 
(Code 1967, § 6-2) 
Sec. 82-5. - Owner presumed responsible. 
    In any prosecution or proceeding under this chapter, the registered owner of any such vehicle shall prima facie be presumed to have parked or to have authorized the parking of the vehicle in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 6-3) 
Sec. 82-6. - Vehicles prohibited on sidewalks. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon, nor shall any motor vehicle be left parked, standing or stopped on or across, any public sidewalk except to cross such sidewalk to enter or leave adjacent areas or to perform necessary sidewalk construction, maintenance or snow removal. 
(Code 1967, § 6-4(g)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 14-250a. 
Sec. 82-7. - Establishment of vehicle pounds. 
    The chief of police may designate a vehicle pound or pounds to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed by a police officer, or under the direction of a police officer, as provided in section 82-8. Such pound or pounds shall be such storage garage or garages, or such other appropriate places, as may be designated by the chief of police. Before any such garage or place shall be designated as a vehicle pound, the operator thereof shall furnish to the chief of police satisfactory evidence of insurance coverage to make the town whole for any claims for damages paid by the town arising from the towing or storage of any impounded vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 6-13) 
Sec. 82-8. - Impounding and immobilization. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of any municipal traffic ordinance, rule or regulation, it may be removed and conveyed by, or under the direction of, a member of the division of police by means of towing or otherwise to a vehicle pound. It will then be the duty of the police authorizing the removal to duly notify the owner of the reason for the removal and the procedure for the repossession of the vehicle (see subsections (c), (e), and (f)) of this section and rights of appeal as shown in section 82-40. 
(b)  Whenever there is found any motor vehicle parked upon the streets or public grounds of the town which has received five or more parking citations issued for a violation of any provisions of this Code which are delinquent, unpaid, otherwise unsettled and uncontested, such vehicle may, by towing or otherwise, be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a garage or other location, or such vehicle may be immobilized in such manner as to prevent its removal or operations except by such persons as shall be authorized to do so by the traffic authority or division of police. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any police officer removing or immobilizing a motor vehicle, or under whose direction such a vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform, as soon as practicable, within 24 hours, the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices for which, or on account of which, such vehicle was removed or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this section, there shall be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, a notice warning that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage thereto. 
(d)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be allowed at least 24 hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle, following which such vehicle may be removed to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of a police officer. 
(e)  Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle taken into custody or immobilized as above provided, shall be allowed to repossess or to secure the release of said vehicle, he or his agent shall pay the following: 
(1)  The cost of towing; plus 
(2)  The cost of storage for each day, or portion of a day, that such a vehicle is so stored in excess of the first 24 hours; plus 
(3)  All sums legally due for any Town of Enfield parking citations issued and outstanding against such vehicle; or, in lieu of the above 
(4)  A bond with a surety company authorized to do business in this state in amount sufficient to cover the above charges. No such vehicle shall be released until the owner or his agent has established his identity and right to possession and has signed a proper receipt therefor. 
(f)  Any person, who, after having had his vehicle towed or immobilized, shall remove such vehicle without complying with subsection (e), shall, in addition to the charges provided for in said subsection, be liable for any damage done to the immobilization device or mechanism and be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(g)  Prior to scheduling any vehicle on a list for impoundment or immobilization, the division of police shall cause to be mailed to the registered owner a list of all delinquent charges and statement warning that such vehicle shall be impounded if found and giving notice of appeal rights pursuant to section 82-40. Such notice shall be mailed 15 days prior to placement of any vehicle on a list for impoundment or immobilization. 
(Code 1967, § 6-14) 
Secs. 82-9-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-31. - Parking vehicle generally. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be permitted to remain stationary or parked: 
(1)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing unless otherwise signed by the traffic authority (when properly signposted); 
(2)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance of any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly signposted); 
(3)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(4)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure that is part of a public highway; 
(5)  Within ten feet of any fire hydrant, or upon the traveled portion of any highway except upon the right-hand side of such highway in the direction in which such vehicle is headed; and, if such highway is curbed, such vehicle shall be so placed that its right-hand wheels, when stationary, shall, when safety will permit, be within a distance of 12 inches from the curb; 
(6)  Within 25 feet of an intersection or a marked crosswalk thereat, or within 25 feet of a stop sign caused to be erected by the traffic authority in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-301; 
(7)  Upon the traveled portion of any highway at any curve or turn or at the top of any grade where a clear view of such vehicle may not be had from a distance of at least 150 feet in either direction; 
(8)  Upon the traveled portion of any highway within 50 feet of the point where another vehicle, which had previously stopped, continues to remain stationary on the opposite side of the traveled portion of the same highway; 
(9)  Within the limits of a public highway in such a manner as to constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the free movement of traffic thereon, provided a vehicle which has become disabled to such an extent that it is impossible or impracticable to remove it may be permitted to so remain for a reasonable time for the purpose of making repairs thereto or of obtaining sufficient assistance to remove it. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to emergency vehicles and to maintenance vehicles displaying flashing lights or to prohibit a vehicle from stopping, or being held stationary by any officer, in an emergency to avoid accident or to give a right-of-way to any vehicle or pedestrian as provided by law, or from stopping on any highway pursuant to any ordinance. 
(Code 1967, §§ 6-4(a)-(e), (g)-(j), 6-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 14-251. 
Sec. 82-32. - Parking on right. 
    No motor vehicle shall be permitted to remain or to be parked on the traveled portion of any highway except on the righthand side of such street or highway in the direction in which such vehicle is headed unless it is otherwise permitted and posted accordingly. 
(Code 1967, § 6-5) 
Sec. 82-33. - Limited time parking. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall park any vehicle in any place where parking is prohibited or for a longer period than that indicated as lawful by any sign erected and maintained in accordance with G.S. ch. 249. 
(Code 1967, § 6-6) 
Sec. 82-34. - Parking so as to obstruct driveway. 
    No person shall park or leave stationary on a public highway any vehicle in front of or so as to obstruct or interfere with ingress to or egress from any private driveway or alleyway, except with the permission of the owner of such driveway or alleyway. Such parking or stationary position of any vehicle with such permission shall be subject to existing parking regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 6-7) 
Sec. 82-35. - Loading and unloading. 
(a)  Location; signage. The traffic authority shall have power to determine the location of loading and unloading zones and shall erect and maintain signs designating such zones. 
(b)  Restrictions. No operator of any vehicle shall park for a period of time longer than it is necessary for the loading or unloading of materials or merchandise in any place marked as a loading or unloading zone. 
(Code 1967, § 6-8) 
Sec. 82-36. - Parking between curb and sidewalk. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle between the curb and the sidewalk at any time (curb includes the boundary of the traveled portion of any highway whether marked by a curbstone or not so marked). 
(Code 1967, § 6-9) 
Sec. 82-37. - Obstruction of traffic. 
(a)  Generally. No vehicle shall be permitted to remain stationary within the limits of the public street or highway in such a manner as to constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the free movement of traffic thereon. A vehicle which has become disabled to such an extent that it is impossible to remove it may be permitted to remain so for a reasonable time for the purpose of making repairs thereto or of obtaining sufficient assistance to remove it. 
(b)  Double parking. No vehicle shall be permitted to be double parked. 
(Code 1967, § 6-10) 
Sec. 82-38. - Parking spaces for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, except a motor vehicle displaying the special license plate or windshield placard provided for in G.S. § 14-253a or the plate of a disabled veteran provided for in G.S. § 14-254, or as otherwise excepted by law, in any parking space that has been reserved for blind persons and persons with disabilities. Any person who violates this subsection shall be fined not less than $85.00 and not more than $100.00. 
(b)  A person may display and use a plate or placard referred to in this section when authorized by law to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 6-11) 
Sec. 82-39. - Designation of disabled parking spaces. 
(a)  In the case of any public building or private building with a parking lot capacity of 20 or more vehicles, at least one space shall be designated as reserved for vehicles displaying special license plates or placards as provided for in G.S. § 14-253a. 
(b)  Additional spaces for disabled parking, in private parking areas for 200 or more cars, shall be provided pursuant to G.S. § 14-253a in accordance with the following schedule: 
Total Number of Parking Lot Spaces Number of Special Parking Spaces Required 0-200 Exempt 201-1,000 1.0% 1,001-2,000 10 plus 0.8% of spaces over 1,000 2,001-3,000 18 plus 0.6% of spaces over 2,000 3,001-4,000 24 plus 0.4% of spaces over 3,000 4,001 or more 28 plus 0.2% of spaces over 4,000  
(c)  Any person refusing or failing to designate and maintain disabled parking spaces as required in this section shall be fined as provided in the schedule of fines referred to in section 82-41. Each day that the space is not designated or delineated after the effective date of the order of the traffic authority, shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  The disabled parking spaces shall be kept free of snow, ice, and debris by the owner, operator, lessee, or tenant of the site for which the handicapped parking privilege is established. 
(e)  If the signs and markings called for herein are not installed within 15 days of notice by the town and maintained thereafter, the town may proceed to install same and impose the cost thereof against the owner of the site. 
(Code 1967, § 6-12) 
Sec. 82-40. - Appeal of parking violation notices. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. 
(1)  Any operator or owner of a vehicle which has been cited under section 82-8 may request administrative appeal to the traffic authority of the issuance of such citation within a designated appeal period of not less than 15 days from the issuance of the violation notice. 
(2)  The traffic authority shall establish and publish notices indicating the procedures to request administrative appeal under subsection (a)(1) of this section and shall cause notice of appeal rights to be printed on each violation notice issued. 
(3)  Any person who so requests administrative appeal shall be subject only to the basic penalty schedule while the administrative appeal procedure is pending. 
(4)  Any person who has requested administrative appeal shall be notified in writing of the findings relative to his appeal. If dissatisfied with such finding, a formal hearing may be requested within 15 days of such finding of said administrative appeal in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Formal hearing procedure; parking violation hearing officer. 
(1)  The manager shall appoint one or more parking violation hearing officers, other than police officers or persons who issue parking tickets or work in the division of police, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section. 
(2)  The town may, at any time within two years from the expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any alleged violation under any ordinance adopted pursuant to G.S. § 7-148 or G.S. §§ 14-305-14-308, inclusive, send notice to the motor vehicle operator, if known, or the registered owner of the motor vehicle by first class mail at his address according to the registration records of the state department of motor vehicles. Such notice shall inform the operator or owner: (i) of the allegations against him and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due; (ii) that he may contest his liability before a parking violations hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten days of the date thereof; (iii) that if he does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall enter against him; and (iv) that such judgment may issue without further notice. Whenever a violation of such an ordinance occurs, proof of the registration number of the motor vehicle involved shall be prima facie evidence in all proceedings provided for in this section that the owner of such vehicle was the operator thereof; provided, the liability of a lessee under G.S. § 14-107 shall apply. 
(3)  If the person who is sent notice pursuant to subsection (c) of this section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by the town, city or borough. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of the first notice provided for in subsection (c) of this section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated town official shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
(4)  Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested person for postponement or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by a police officer or other issuing officer shall be filed and retained by the town, be deemed to be a business record within the scope of G.S. § 52-180 and be evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the police officer or issuing officer shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. A designated town official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the town. If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against him upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes or ordinances. The hearing officer may accept from such person copies of police reports, department of motor vehicles documents and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of the town. 
(5)  If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk of a superior court facility designated by the chief court administrator within the boundaries of the judicial district in which the town is located together with an entry fee of $8.00. The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such 12-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment and court costs of $8.00, against such person in favor of the town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the general statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such person. 
(6)  A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to G.S. § 52-259, in the superior court for the geographical area in which the town is located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of the superior court. 
(Code 1967, § 6-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-152b. 
Sec. 82-41. - Parking violation fines. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 82-3, 82-6 through 82-8, 82-31 through 82-40, 82-42, 82-63 and 82-96 shall be fined in accordance with the schedule of fines set by the council, provided that the fine is paid at the police station within seven days of the offense or received by mail and postmarked within seven days of the offense; otherwise, the penalty shall be double, up to the maximum allowed by state statute. 
_____ 
Section Violations Fines 82-33 1. Prohibited zone $10.00 82-31(a)(5) 2. Within ten feet of hydrant 25.00 82-31(a)(6) 3. Within 25 feet of intersection 10.00 82-31(a)(6) 4. Within 25 feet of crosswalk 20.00 82-31(a)(6) 5. Within 25 feet stop sign 10.00 82-31(a)(5) 6. Over 12 inches from curb 10.00 82-31(a)(1) 7. Within 50 feet of railroad crossing 10.00 82-31(a)(3) 8. Obstructing traffic at excavation or obstruction in other manner 20.00 82-31(a)(4) 9. Upon any bridge or in highway tunnel 10.00 82-32 10. Left side to curb 10.00 82-33 11. Overtime parking 10.00 82-35 12. Loading or unloading zone 10.00 82-36 13. Parking on treebelt 10.00 82-34 14. Blocking driveway 25.00 82-6 15. Parking on sidewalk 25.00 82-31(a)(2) 16. Within 20 feet of driveway to any firestation or on opposite side of street within 75 feet of such entrance 15.00 82-63 17. Winter snow ban 15.00 82-38 18. Violation of handicapped zone 85.00 82-96 19. Fire lane parking 50.00 82-42 20. Commercial vehicle parking 50.00 21. Other  
(Code 1967, § 6-18; Ord. No. 04-1, § 6-18, 1-20-2004) 
_____
Sec. 82-42. - Parking of commercial vehicles 
    Commercial trailers and motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 5,000 pounds that have either a commercial or a combination registration shall not be parked on any highway. The following vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this article: those which are parked adjacent to property on which construction activities are in progress, provided that such vehicles are involved in such activities; those which are parked adjacent to the site where the installation or repair of public utilities is in progress, provided such vehicles are involved in such installation or repairs; those which are parked adjacent to property on which the performance of landscaping services is in progress, provided that such vehicles are involved in such services; those in the process of providing emergency wrecker services; vehicles making deliveries in the normal course of their business; emergency medical service vehicles; station wagons; compact-type bus vehicles; minivans; sport-utility-type vehicles; and pickup trucks. The parking of any such exempt vehicle is prohibited if it is deemed to be a traffic safety hazard. 
(Code 1967, § 6-20; Ord. No. 04-1, § 6-20, 1-20-2004) 
Secs. 82-43-82-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERIODS OF SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL 

Sec. 82-61. - Purpose of division. 
    It is hereby declared to be in the best interest of the public safety, convenience and welfare of the town to regulate and restrict the parking of vehicles on public highways within the control and limits of the town, to facilitate the plowing and removal of snow and ice or to prevent the obstruction of traffic in times of snowfall or other emergency, so as not to impede the transportation and movement of food, fuel, medical care, fire, health, police protection and other vital facilities of the town. 
(Code 1967, § 6-51) 
Sec. 82-62. - Restrictions generally. 
    Traffic and parking shall be prohibited or restricted within such portion or the whole of any street or highway of the town for such period of time as public necessity, convenience and safety requires, or for such period of time as such street and highway condition continues, or for such period of time as such emergency on such street or highway exists, as may be designated by the town manager or his representative. 
(Code 1967, § 6-52) 
Sec. 82-63. - Parking during storms. 
(a)  No motor vehicle shall be parked on a public street or highway in the town during a snow or ice storm that has an accumulation of three inches or more, unless otherwise posted. 
(b)  Any person found in violation of this section, in addition to the remedies hereinafter provided in sections 82-65 and 82-66, shall pay a fine as provided in section 82-41. 
(Code 1967, § 6-53) 
Sec. 82-64. - Owner presumed responsible. 
    In any prosecution or proceeding under this article, the registered owner of any such vehicle shall prima facie be presumed to have parked or to have authorized the parking of the vehicle in violation of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 6-54) 
Sec. 82-65. - Removal and storage of violating vehicles. 
(a)  Any police officer of the town, by direction of the chief of police, upon discovering any such vehicle so parked in violation of this article and in such a manner so as to obstruct traffic or constitute a hazard, or so as to hinder efficient snow removal operations, may remove or cause the same to be removed at the risk of the owner to a private garage or private parking area and the owner shall pay all expense of such storage. The storage charge shall be in addition to towing charges and penalties provided herein. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer removes or causes the removal of a vehicle from a public highway, as authorized by this article, he shall within a reasonable time report such fact to police headquarters, who in turn shall notify the owner of such vehicle upon the owner's inquiry of the removal and reason therefor and the name and location where the vehicle is impounded. 
(Code 1967, § 6-55; Ord. No. 08-7, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 82-66. - Towing fees. 
    Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle is allowed to remove such vehicle from the place where it has been impounded, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership, sign a receipt for such vehicle, and shall pay expense of such towing. 
(Code 1967, § 6-56; Ord. No. 08-7, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 82-67-82-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE LANES 

Sec. 82-91. - Applicability of division. 
    It is hereby declared that this division shall apply to existing and proposed developments and premises, which developments and premises shall include and be limited to the following: 
(1)  Planned commercial developments; as defined in section 11-1 of this Code; 
(2)  Industrial and commercial developments under unified ownership or control either three acres or more in area or having buildings or structures (any portion of which, whether outside or inside the building, may be more than 100 feet from an accepted town street); 
(3)  Planned residential developments; as defined in article 10, chapter 11 of this Code; 
(4)  Schools; 
(5)  Hospitals; 
(6)  Convalescent homes; 
(7)  Rest homes; 
(8)  Nursing homes; 
(9)  Places of public assembly as defined in the administrative regulations known as the state Fire Safety Code under G.S. § 29-292. 
(Code 1967, § 7-4) 
Sec. 82-92. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Fire lane means a designated unobstructed passageway at least 20 feet in width with an outside turning radius of 50 feet and constructed in a manner to permit free passage of fire apparatus and other emergency equipment from a public highway to all necessary areas around or upon any of the developments and premises enumerated in section 82-91, in all seasons and in all kinds of weather. 
    Parking area means lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of motor vehicles off the street, alley or highway and open to public use with or without charge. 
(Code 1967, § 7-5) 
Sec. 82-93. - Review procedure for establishment. 
(a)  New developments. Applications for all new developments to which this division is applicable shall be reviewed by the fire marshal and/or fire chief, as may be applicable, of the fire district within which the new development is proposed to be located. For the purpose of this section, new development shall include any development within premises previously undeveloped for building purposes, redevelopment of premises, and alterations and additions to existing premises. Such fire marshal and/or fire chief shall submit his recommendations regarding the provisions of fire lanes, in writing, to the town planning and zoning commission who shall receive such recommendations and shall enter those recommendations into the record of any public hearing which shall be held upon any such application for such development. The planning and zoning commission shall consider these recommendations in reviewing such application for such development and shall apply those recommendations as may be required by zoning in appendix B, applicable fire codes, the building code, and any other codes and ordinances which may be applicable, as conditions of approval of such development. The planning and zoning commission in passing upon applications for such development shall implement those recommendations as otherwise may be reasonable and practicable. Public hearing, notice of hearing, and notice of decision for any application for such development shall be in accordance with the provisions of G.S. §§ 8-3c and 8-3d governing special permits. 
(b)  Existing developments. The fire marshal and/or fire chief as may be applicable shall designate fire lanes within existing developments and premises to which this division is applicable by written order, and shall notify in writing both the planning and zoning commission and the owners or agents of such development by certified mail, of any specific requirements for compliance with this division, and shall publish notice of such establishments of such fire lanes once in a newspaper having substantial circulation within the town. The fire marshal and/or fire chief shall file one copy of any order of designation of any such fire lanes with the town clerk. Any person aggrieved by such order may file with the clerk, within 15 days after the date of the receipt of such order, written notice of appeal setting forth therein reasons for aggrievement. A public hearing shall be held by the planning and zoning commission, after which the commission must affirm, modify or rescind such order within 30 days of the public hearing. The commission shall notify the fire marshal and/or the fire chief, as may be applicable, by written communication, of any and all action taken relative to the establishment of a fire lane. 
(Code 1967, § 7-6) 
Sec. 82-94. - Maintenance; identification. 
    Fire lanes established under this division shall be kept free of ice and snow and rubbish containers or other obstructions. The owner, agent or occupant of any development to which this division is applicable shall cause to be erected, installed and maintained at their own expense permanent, adequate signs bearing the words "FIRE LANE-NO PARKING-CARS WILL BE TOWED AT OWNER'S EXPENSE" in such fire lane. Such owner, agents or occupants shall cause such other and further designations as are reasonably required by the fire marshal and/or fire chief to warn persons to keep such fire lanes unobstructed. Failure to maintain a fire lane in accordance with this section shall render the owner, agent or occupant of such development liable to a fine of at least $100.00 per day and no more than $250.00 per day. 
(Code 1967, § 7-7) 
Sec. 82-95. - Compliance with notice. 
    Notice of establishment of fire lanes shall prescribe a reasonable time for compliance. If compliance is not obtained within such time, then such owners or agents shall be subject to a fine of a minimum of $50.00, but not more than $250.00, for each violation. Each day following such specified time for compliance shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(Code 1967, § 7-8) 
Sec. 82-96. - Parking prohibited. 
    No person shall park or permit to stand a motor vehicle in any fire lane that has been established in accordance with this division except when actually picking up or discharging passengers or actively engaged in loading or unloading a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 7-9) 
Sec. 82-97. - Enforcement; penalties. 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the regulations as established in this division, any police officer may attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the regulations. Such owner or operator shall pay the sum of $50.00 if paid within seven calendar days of the issuance of such notice of violation, and the sum of $100.00 if paid beyond seven calendar days of the issuance of such notice of violation. Payment as stated above to the designated authority as stated on such parking violation notice shall be in lieu of a court appearance. The registered owner of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle. Any motor vehicle found parked or standing in a fire lane that has been established in accordance with this division may be towed upon the direction of a police officer to any public or private parking facility, and all expense of such towing and any subsequent storage shall be borne by the registered owner or operator of such vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 7-10) 
Secs. 82-98-82-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS WASTE 

Sec. 82-131. - Purpose. 
(a)  The town council hereby adopts the following regulation to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by identifying and avoiding potentially dangerous situations and enhancing the ability of the police, fire and other services to protect the public by reacting promptly and adequately upon notice of a spill of hazardous waste. In furtherance of this purpose, the article restricts the time and place of transportation on the local streets of the town. 
(b)  It is not intended that these regulations duplicate or contradict, but rather that they supplement the existing state, federal, or municipal regulations designed to protect the environment and water quality including, but not limited to: 
United States Code 
33 USC 1251 et seq.-The Clean Water Act (Water Pollution Prevention and Control Act). 
42 USC 6901 et seq.-The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
42 USC 300F et seq.-The Safe Drinking Water Act. 
15 USC 2601 et seq.-The Toxic Substances Control Act. 
49 USC 1801 et seq.-The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act. 
The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. 
Connecticut General Statutes 
G.S. § 22a-207 et seq. Solid Waste Management 
Municipal Provisions for Disposal of Solid Waste. 
G.S. §§ 22a-1-22a-6-Environmental Protection Department and State Policy. 
Powers of the Commissioner. 
G.S. §§ 22a-36-22a-45d-Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. 
G.S. § 22a-416 et seq.-Water Pollution Control. 
Permit Requirements for New Discharges to the State's Water. 
G.S. §§ 8-2 and 8-23-Municipal Water Supplies and Their Protection. 
G.S. § 22a-114 et seq.-Hazardous Waste. 
Connecticut Public Health Code 
Section 19-13-B20-General Provisions for Disposal of Domestic Sewage. 
Section 19-13-B32-Sanitation of Water Supply Watersheds. 
Section 19-13-B51-Water Supply Well Regulations. 
Enfield Town Code 
Appendix B, Articles I through XII-Zoning Regulations. 
Appendix A, Article I-Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency. 
Chapter 42, Article II-Flood Damage Prevention. 
(Code 1967, § 6-60) 
Sec. 82-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous waste means any waste material which may pose a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly disposed of, treated, stored, transported, or otherwise managed, including (i) hazardous waste identified in accordance with Section 3001 of the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.), (ii) hazardous waste identified by regulation by the Department of Environmental Protection, and (iii) polychlorinated biphenyls in concentrations greater than 50 parts per million, but does not mean byproduct material, source material or special nuclear material, as defined in G.S. § 22a-151, or scrap tires. 
    Street means and includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares within the territorial limits of the town, excluding therefrom those avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges, and the approaches thereto maintained and repaired by the state and/or defined as state highways by the general statutes or regulations of the state. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle (including trailers and semitrailers used for transportation and drawn or propelled by a motor vehicle) used for the transportation of any and all materials, substances and property. 
    Waste materials means the industrial, commercial, residential, and/or recreational products or byproducts (hazardous or nonhazardous) which is/are no longer efficient at and/or no longer desired for its/their original purpose, use or function. 
    Watercourse means all bodies of water, natural or artificial, public or private, having continuous or intermittent flow, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon this state or any portion thereof. Such bodies of water shall include, but not be limited to, rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and manmade drainage or storm sewer systems. 
(Code 1967, § 6-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 22a-115. 
Sec. 82-133. - Regulation on local streets. 
(a)  No person shall transport any quantity of hazardous waste in/on any truck on any street located within the territorial limits of the town without first obtaining a written permit from the town manager. Said permit shall specify the route or routes to be used by said trucks, the times during which said transportation may be made, and the type of hazardous waste to be transported by and/or on said truck. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued by the town manager unless the hazardous waste is to be transported on streets over which it is permissible to transport such hazardous waste under the federal, state, and/or local regulation, statute, ordinance, or standard for a purpose which is not in violation of any applicable federal, state, or local regulation, statute, ordinance or standard. 
(c)  The town manager shall issue permits upon a showing that the transportation of hazardous waste shall: 
(1)  Not occur on weekends, and/or national, state, or local holidays; 
(2)  Take place only from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on nonholiday week days; 
(3)  Not occur should the weather be such as to cause hazardous driving conditions, including snow, freezing rain, sleet, hail, hurricane, tornado, or gale conditions; 
(4)  Not be conducted within 500 feet of a residential area, the population density of which exceeds five persons per acre; 
(5)  Not be conducted within 25 feet of an underground storm drainage system that is connected to footing drains; 
(6)  Not be conducted within the Connecticut River watershed area as designated in the map entitled, "Map Showing Drainage Areas Board Brook Quadrangle, Connection" by Mendall P. Thomas (1974), on file at the town clerk's office; 
(7)  Not be conducted within the Scantic River watershed area as designated in the map entitled "Map Showing Drainage Areas Broad Brook Quadrangle, Connecticut" by Mendall P. Thomas (1974), on file at the town clerk's office; 
(8)  Not be conducted within the primary or secondary recharge areas of the Northern Connecticut River Valley Aquifer as designated in the map of the Town of Enfield, Connecticut entitled, "zoning map," calibrated at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet, the base map of which was prepared by Brown, Donald and Donald/Planning Services, Inc. of Farmington, Connecticut. The map was revised as of June 1980 and approved by the planning and zoning commission on September 25, 1980, and is on file at the town clerk's office; 
(9)  Not be conducted within 500 feet of any inland wetland or watercourse, nor within 500 feet of any intermittent watercourse; 
(10)  Not be conducted within 500 feet of any hospital, school (including public, private, parochial, trade, or academic institution), temporary and/or permanent place of public assembly (either within building or out-of-doors); 
(11)  Not occur on any private property except: To retrieve, pick up, or collect hazardous waste/material from and/or to deliver or transport hazardous waste/material to facility involved in the generation, disposal, processing, treatment, storage, or incineration of said waste/material; to refuel; to remedy an emergency (which for purposes of this section requires the immediate notification of the division of police); 
(12)  Not be conducted within one mile of a public well or a well providing a potable water supply to more than one residence; nor within 300 feet of a private well; 
(13)  Not be conducted on any street, the paved portion of which is less than 40 feet wide. 
(d)  Transportation of hazardous waste from a site located within the town to a site within the town or to a site outside the town may be permitted on local streets that do not satisfy the above criteria if, and only if, no other route is available. The town manager, in issuing such a permit, may take the above restrictions into consideration and thereupon determine and make said permit contingent upon use of the safest and shortest route during the stated optimal times of the day. 
(e)  Applications for permits shall be made to the town manager on forms to be provided by the manager. The manager shall require information concerning the nature and quantity of the hazardous waste to be transported, names and business and residence address of persons authorized to operate the vehicles; if the holder of the permit is an individual, the full name, business telephone number, business address and residence address of the holder and of the person in charge of the holder's activities under the permit; if a corporation, the same information as to each officer, director, statutory agent for service of process and person in charge of activities under the permit, if a partnership or association, the same information as to each partner or associate and person in charge of the activities under the permit, registration number and other identifying information for each vehicle to be used, the manufacturer, serial number, weight, length and other characteristics of the vehicle or vehicles to be used, the times when transportation is to occur, the proposed routes, the purpose for which hazardous waste is brought to any destination within the town and any other information necessary to make a decision on the application for a permit. The manager shall grant or deny the permit within five days of receipt of an application containing all required information. If a permit application is denied, the manager shall state in writing his reasons for the denial. Each permit shall be valid for a period of one year. The expiration date shall be stated on the permit. The original or a copy of the permit shall be carried in each vehicle when transporting hazardous waste on any street in the town. The town manager shall file a copy of each permit granted with the division of police and with the fire departments in which any of the streets to be used for the transportation of hazardous waste are located. 
(f)  The town manager may, based on information received by him, and shall, upon written application supported by an affidavit setting forth facts which if true would warrant suspension or revocation of the permit issued under this section, hold a hearing to make a determination as to whether a permit should be suspended or revoked and whether a penalty and/or fine should be paid by the person violating any section of this article. Written notice of the hearing setting forth the alleged violation and the time and place of hearing shall be given to the holder of the permit at least seven days prior to the date scheduled for commencement of the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time by the manager as the circumstances require. At the hearing, evidence on which a suspension or revocation of the permit may be based may be presented. At the hearing, the holder of the permit may be represented by counsel, may cross examine witnesses and present testimony, documentary evidence, or other evidence. If requested to do so, the manager may allow a reasonable time for submission of written memoranda. Within ten days of the close of the hearing, or the date for submission of memoranda, the manager is to make a decision as to whether or not the permit shall be suspended or revoked and/or whether a penalty/fine as provided in section 1-13 for each violation of the article shall be assessed against violators. Should a violation persist for beyond one day and/or continue beyond a reasonable time for compliance and/or be recurring then each day, continuation beyond a reasonable period of time within which to correct for violation and/or recurrence of the offense shall constitute a separate offense and be subject to an additional fine/penalty as such. The decision shall be in writing and a copy shall be mailed by certified mail or hand delivered to the holder of the permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon the receipt of information by the manager from which there is cause to believe that the holder of a permit is transporting hazardous waste within the town in such a manner so as to create a danger of immediate injury to any person or to the public, he/she shall immediately suspend such permit, which suspension shall be given in writing. The manager shall schedule a hearing as soon as practicable. Based on evidence presented at the hearing, the manager shall make a determination as to whether the suspension shall be terminated or whether the permit shall be suspended for a further period of time or revoked. 
(g)  The permit, and any renewal thereof, issued under the article shall, at all times, be visible to anyone approaching the driver's side or the front of the vehicle and be within the reach of the driver when sitting in the driver's seat. 
(h)  In an action for renewal of any permit or for a new permit with respect to the above activity, an application shall be filed not later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. Any application for a renewal or new permit under this article shall be made in accordance with the rules in this article, except that the application may incorporate by reference any part or parts of the next prior application by the same permittee concerning the same operation or activity. Within 30 days following receipt of any application under this section, the town manager may determine that the application is untimely or insufficient. The town manager shall state briefly in any such determination the basis for it and shall send the determination to the permittee. Any such determination shall not be a rejection for incompleteness, but shall be a final decision, and shall cause the existing permit of the permittee-applicant to expire upon its original expiration date, without regard to the pendency of any actions for renewal or new permit. 
(i)  A minimum nonrefundable application fee of $50.00 shall be paid by the applicant prior to the processing by the town manager of any application for a permit for a new activity or the renewal of an existing activity. This fee is subject to increase to cover the expense of reviewing and processing said application but in no event shall exceed $150.00. 
(j)  The town manager may require additional scientific, technical and/or professional assistance in the review and evaluation of any application submitted for a hazardous waste transportation permit or renewal thereof. Should the town manager require such expertise, the expense of same will be estimated by the manager, based on preliminary estimates from such experts, and said estimate of costs times 150 percent will be paid over to the manager by applicant prior to the review of said application. Upon completion of the technical review and a determination of the costs incurred, any excess will be refunded to applicant. Applicant shall not be responsible for costs incurred in excess of 150 percent of the expert's estimate. 
(Code 1967, § 6-62(a)-(e), (g)-(k)) 
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-3 , adopted Oct. 21, 2013, repealed the former ch. 86., §§ 86-31, 86-51-86-57, 86-81-86-90, 86-111-86-114, 86-131-86-137, 86-181-86-184, 86-201-86-204, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 86 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1967, §§ 8-16-8-43; Ord. No. 02-2, §§ 8-24, 8-27, 8-32, adopted Sept. 3, 2002; and Ord. No. 13-2 , adopted June 3, 2013. 
Charter reference- Supervision and control of sewers, sewage disposal, public and private drains, ch. V, § 9. 
State Law reference- Sewers in municipalities generally, G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(6)(B), 7-245 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS; SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 86-31-86-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 86-51. - Established; designated. 
(a)  The town hereby establishes a water pollution control authority in accordance with the provisions of G.S. ch. 103. 
(b)  The water pollution control authority shall be the town council. 
( Ord. No. 13-3 , 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-52. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Generally. The water pollution control authority shall have all those powers conferred by law, including those powers enumerated in G.S. ch. 103, on sewer authorities, including the power to establish and revise rules and regulations for the supervision, management, control, operation and use of a sewerage system, including rules and regulations prohibiting or regulating the discharge into a sewerage system of any sewage or any storm water runoff which, in the opinion of the water pollution control authority, will adversely affect any part or any process of the sewerage system. 
(b)  Department of public works. The department of public works shall, in accordance with the Charter and the General Statutes, and subject to the limitations of this section, have the control, management and supervision of the sanitary sewerage system, or portions of appurtenances thereof, now or hereafter owned or operated by the town and the water pollution control authority. 
(c)  Personnel. The water pollution control authority shall have the power to engage the services of engineers, bond counsel, other legal and fiscal advisors and such other qualified technical personnel as may be necessary to plan and construct the sewerage system. 
(d)  Annual budget. The water pollution control authority shall annually have prepared a budget setting forth estimated revenues and proposed expenditures at the same time, in the same form, and in the same manner for inclusion in the manager's budget as all other town offices, boards and commissions now or may hereafter be required to submit their budgets to such manager. 
(e)  Accounting. All accounting books and records for the water pollution control authority shall be kept and maintained by the same personnel who are responsible for keeping and maintaining the accounting records of the town, and such records shall be subject to the annual audit of the town as required by law. 
(f)  Fee and rate setting. On an annual basis no later than May 15, the water pollution control authority will propose sewer service fees and rates for the subsequent fiscal year. New sewer rates shall become effective following a public hearing and a majority vote of the WPCA approving such new rates not later than on July 1. The initial sewer fees and rates for the period of January 1, 2014 to June 30, 2014 will be accepted by the WPCA December 1, 2013. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-53. - Authority to take land. 
    The water pollution control authority or its agents may enter upon and take and hold by purchase, condemnation or otherwise the whole or any part of any real property or interest therein which it determines is necessary or desirable for use in connection with any sewerage system. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-54. - Authority to take over other systems. 
    The water pollution control authority is authorized to take over and operate, upon approval of both parties, and make part of any sewerage system of the town the whole or part of any existing private sewerage system and to contract with the owner thereof for proper compensation or allowance therefor in money or otherwise. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-55. - Opening public grounds for construction. 
    The water pollution control authority is authorized to open the ground and to excavate in any streets, highways and public grounds, for the purpose of building, laying down, sinking and repairing such pipes, conduits, drains or sewers as may be required in connection with the sewerage system with the town. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-56. - Authority to enter property served. 
    The water pollution control authority or its agents may, at all reasonable times, and upon written notice, enter all premises connected with such sewerage system, to examine the pipes, drains and fixtures thereon and order repair of the same to prevent waste. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-57. - Malicious damage to property. 
    No person shall uncover, deface, or remove any manhole cover nor deposit solid waste of any kind in any sewer manhole or appurtenance. 
    Any person who willfully, wantonly, maliciously or negligently destroys or injures any pipe, conduit, appurtenance, equipment, machinery, embankment, masonry, building or structure, or other property held, owned or used by the town or for the purposes of this article in connection with such sewerage system, or commits any nuisance therein, shall be liable to the town in treble damages therefor, and shall be fined not more than $250.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Secs. 86-58-86-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND USE OF SANITARY SEWERS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 86-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acceptance: As defined in Enfield Town Code, chapter 86 and at the discretion of the water pollution control authority. 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq., also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
    Adjustment of usage charge means the difference between a usage charge as determined in advance or by historical data and the usage charge as determined from actual, currently available usage data. 
    Application means a submission to the WCPA. 
    Audit of sewer usage charge means a review of data, such as water meter readings, made at the end of the period for which a use charge was assessed, to determine if the use charge was estimated correctly. 
    Authorized representative of the user means a person lawfully authorized to act on behalf of a user in matters relevant to these Regulations. Such persons shall be deemed to include, but shall not be limited to: (1) a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the user is a corporation; (2) the owner or operator of a facility from which a discharge originates; (3) a general partner or proprietor, if the user is a partnership or proprietorship respectively; (4) a managing member of a limited liability company (LLC); and (5) a duly authorized representative of a municipality or local body or other governmental agency, if the user is a governmental entity. Persons other than those designated above may be deemed to be authorized representatives, provided such persons submit to the WPCA adequate written documentation verifying such authority. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand ) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. The terms house connection, service connection, or service lateral shall be considered synonymous terms to building sewer. 
    Bypass means an intentional or negligent diversion of a wastestream, by direct or indirect means, to the sanitary sewer system, from any portion of a pretreatment facility prior to completing pretreatment, or from any industrial process or other source of wastewater prior to pretreatment. 
    Changed use means any change of use of a facility that results in a change in the quantity and content of the sewage discharge such that a different sewer usage charge could apply. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the amount of oxygen required for the chemical oxidation of carbonaceous (organic) material in wastewater using inorganic dichromate or permanganate salts as oxidants in a two-hour test. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Commissioner means the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut. 
    Compatible pollutant refers to biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the WPCF's NPDES permit, where the WPCF is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the NPDES permit. 
    Composite sample means a mixture of aliquot samples obtained at regular intervals over a time period; the volume of each aliquot is proportional to the discharge flow rate for the sampling interval. 
    Connecticut General Statutes means the codified laws and regulations of the State of Connecticut. Where the term is used without reference to a specific section or chapter number, it shall be deemed to include all noncodified public acts and special acts of the State of Connecticut, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Daily average limit means the highest allowable concentration for any pollutant in a waste stream discharged during any one day by a user, based upon a composite sample, or, in the case of a batch discharge, based upon a grab sample. 
    Daily maximum limit means the highest allowable concentration for any pollutant in a waste stream. 
    Direct discharge means the uninterrupted conveyance of waste, including holding tank waste discharge, from a building sewer to the public sewer system. 
    Domestic sewage means sewage that consists of water and human excretions or other waterborne wastes incidental to the occupancy of a residential, commercial or institutional building. 
    Easement means a right held by one person to make use of the land of another. 
    Engineer means a professional engineer, registered with the State of Connecticut. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Equivalent dwelling unit means a unit in which the sewage discharge is comparable in quantity and content to the sewage use of a single-family dwelling unit, estimated at 200 gallons per day. Such usage may include toilets and rest rooms, kitchen facilities for the preparation of food for employees only, laundry facilities for clothes or uniforms of employees only, shower and bath facilities for employees only and other facilities for the personal hygiene of employees. 
    Facilities means physical structures; to include (but not be limited to) sewers, manholes, pumping stations and treatment works. 
    Floatable oil means any vegetable, mineral or synthetic liquid substance having a specific gravity less than water. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility; wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Food preparation establishment (FPE) means all class III, IV-rate food preparation establishments, as defined by the local health district and by Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection. 
    Force main means the pipe discharging from a wastewater pump station. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Gravity sewer means a pipe that receives wastewater flow without the need for a pump station. 
    Gray water means domestic sewage that does not include human excretions. 
    Groundwater means subsurface water occupying the saturation zone from which wells and springs are fed. 
    Hazardous waste means materials meeting the definition of a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR § 261, including, but not limited to, any material in whatever form that, because of its quantity, concentration, chemical composition, infectious characteristics, radioactive characteristics, ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity or toxicity, either separately or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment, when improperly stored, treated, transported, disposed of, used, or otherwise managed. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Home industry means a business conducted principally by family members in a single-family dwelling unit. 
    Hotel/motel means a building or group of buildings designed and used as for temporary residence by seven or more transient guests which may provide accessory services such as food service, places for public assembly, and other appropriate accessory services. 
    Industrial and commercial users means any user of the sewerage system that discharges more than 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary waste, or a volume of process waste or combined process and sanitary waste equivalent to 25,000 gpd of sanitary waste. 
    Infiltration means the water entering a sanitary sewer system from the ground or a water body, including through such means as defective building drains and sewers, pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. 
    Inflow means the discharge into a sanitary sewer system, including service connections, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellars, yards, and area drains, foundation drains, sump pumps, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers, catch basins, storm water, surface runoff, or street wash water. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes for industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Low pressure sewer means a common pipe that receives flow from individual lot grinder pump stations. 
    Meter means a device for measuring the total flow of sewage discharged from a facility. A water meter that measures all of the water entering a facility will be considered to be equivalent unless there is a significant source of additional sewage. 
    National Categorical Pretreatment Standard means the requirements under 40 CFR § 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to a publicly owned treatment works by new or existing industrial sewer users in specific industrial categories that are established as separate regulations under the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) means the program for issuing, modifying, revoking, monitoring and enforcing permits and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements under Section 307, 402, 318 and 405 of the Clean Water Act and Chapter 446K of the Connecticut General Statutes and regulations adopted thereunder. 
    National pretreatment standard means the general prohibitions and specific prohibitions of 40 CFR §403.5(a) and (b), and the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Person means a human being, body of persons, corporation, partnership or other legal entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter solution. 
    New connection means any direct attachment of sanitary waste and disposal lines from a property that has not previously been connected to the public sewer system. 
    Polluted water or waste means any water, liquid, or gaseous waste containing any of the following: soluble or insoluble substances of organic or inorganic nature that may deplete the dissolved oxygen content of the receiving stream; settleable solids that may form sludge deposits; grease and oils; floating solids that may cause unsightly appearance; color; phenols and other substances to an extent that would impact any taste or odor to the receiving stream; and toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, solution, or gases. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard, and except as prohibited by Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.6(d). 
    Private property line means the legally established boundary of a parcel of land. 
    Private sewer means a privately owned sewer installed on private property as a collection system for multiple building sewers that do not connect separately and directly to a public sewer. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means the water pollution control facility operated by the Town of Enfield and its agents, including any devices or systems, whether owned by the Town or under its control, used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, and also including the sewers, pipes, pumping stations and other devices that convey wastewater to the water pollution control facility. 
    Receiving waters means any water body that may be affected by the discharge from the POTW. 
    Record means a book, paper, map, photograph, recorded tape, financial statement, statistical tabulation, or any other documentary material or data, regardless of physical form or characteristics. 
    Registered land surveyor means a land surveyor licensed by the State of Connecticut to practice land surveying for the public. 
    Regulations means these sewer regulations. 
    Residential and small nonresidential users means sewer users including single-family and multifamily dwellings, and commercial and industrial users which introduce no more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of domestic sanitary wastes to the treatment works. 
    Restaurant means a facility for the preparation and/or serving of meals to transient customers. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that collects and conveys sewage from residences, public buildings, commercial establishments, industries, and institutions; a sanitary sewer may also collect and convey permitted industrial wastewater and unintentionally admitted ground, storm, and surface waters. 
    Separator means a device designed and installed to separate deleterious or undesirable matter from normal wastes and to retain such deleterious or undesirable matter while permitting normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the drainage system by gravity. 
    Septage means sewage removed from holding tanks such as chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, cesspools, or similar receptacles. 
    Septage hauler means company that transports septage to the WPCF. 
    Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Septic tank means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed so as to permit settling of solids, the digestion of organic matter, and the discharge of settled sewage. 
    Service lateral means that portion of a building sewer that extends from a private property line to the point of connection on the public sewer. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer connection means the physical attachment of a dedicated private sanitary sewer disposal line from each independent building on a property to the Enfield Sanitary Sewer System. The building sewer shall be at an elevation to allow the basement floor to be served by gravity whenever feasible, and if gravity is not feasible, through alternative means as approved by the WPCA. A connection to public sewer will be made only after inspected, accepted and approved by the WPCA or its agents. 
    Sewer service fee schedule means the schedule of user charges in exchange for sewer services as defined by the WPCA on an annual basis. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant user means a user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6; or a user that meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the sanitary sewer (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater). 
2.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of any design or treatment capacity (i.e. allowable pollutant load) of the wastewater treatment plant receiving the indirect discharge. 
3.  Is designated as such on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the treatment plant or collection system, or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirements. 
    Significant noncompliance means violations that meet one or more of the following criteria are defined as significant non-compliance: 
1.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits; 
2.  Any other discharge violation that the WPCA believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of WPCA personnel or the general public; 
3.  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the WPCA exercising of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
4.  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
5.  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
6.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Solid waste means any unwanted or discarded solid material, putrescible or nonputrescible, including garbage and rubbish. 
    Soluble oil means oil that is of either mineral or vegetable origin and disperses in water or sewage at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius and 65 degrees Celsius). 
    Solution solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published jointly by American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. 
    State means the State of Connecticut. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Superintendent means the director of public works of the town or his designated agent. 
    Suspended solids means a measure of the material present in suspension in the sewage. Suspended solids are determined by filtering a sample and weighing the material filtered from the sample. 
    Town means the Town of Enfield, Connecticut. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of sewage into the town's sewer system. 
    Unpolluted water means water which, after chemical analysis, is determined to be acceptable for direct discharge to any river, stream or ground water application without violating state water quality standards. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities means all physical structures relating to sewage collection and treatment. 
    Water Pollution Control Authority (WPCA) means the agency for the town having all of the powers, purposes, and objectives set forth in Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, or its authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Water Pollution Control Facility (WPCF) means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewerage and industrial waste. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, that are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
    Well user means any user of the sewerage system that do not have metered public water from any of the water companies serving the town. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-2 , 7-7-2014) 
Sec. 86-82. - Discharge of untreated wastes, etc., into natural outlets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(b)  The discharge of any waters to storm sewers or natural outlets requires an NPDES permit from the state commissioner of environmental protection. 
(c)  Any dischargers of industrial or commercial wastewater other than domestic sewage that have not first obtained the necessary permit from the state commissioner of environmental protection pursuant to G.S. 22a-430, are restricted from discharging to the sewer. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-2 , 7-7-2014) 
Sec. 86-83. - Construction or maintenance of privies, cesspools, etc. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-84. - Deposition [of] excrement, etc., upon property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-85. - Abutting owners required to connect with sewer. 
    The owner of all new construction houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the town is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of the official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-86. - Private sewage disposal. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 86-85, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut and the Sanitary Code of the North Central District Health Department. 
(1)  Septage discharge permit: All septage haulers proposing to discharge at the Enfield Wastewater Pollution Control Facility shall be licensed by the state health department. An individual septic discharge permit, issued by the Enfield water pollution control authority, must be obtained for each septage hauler. 
Unless specified otherwise, all charges covered by this permit shall be paid in full, by check or other approved method, upon invoicing. In addition, an applicant shall, prior to issuance of the permit, pay in full, any delinquent bills. Current septage discharge permit fees and septage disposal fees shall be listed on the Enfield water pollution control authority rate schedule. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-87. - Maintenance of sanitary sewers. 
(a)  Public sewers. Public sewers will be maintained by the department of public works and said maintenance shall include cleaning, flushing and rodding as required and such necessary reconstruction as deemed necessary by the director. 
(b)  Building sewers. Building sewers will be owned and maintained by the property owner. Said maintenance shall include cleaning, flushing and rodding as required to ensure proper flow through the building sewer and such reconstruction as needed. Should reconstruction or repair of the building sewer necessitate excavation, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The property owner shall notify the department of public works of the blockage within five calendar days and arrangements will be made to inspect the problem in conjunction with the property owner's plumber. 
(2)  If during the investigation it is determined that the blockage is on private property and requires excavation, the property owner shall be so informed and shall be responsible for completion of the repairs. 
(3)  If however, during the investigation it is determined that the blockage is within the town's right-of-way, the department of public work shall accomplish the necessary work, complete the repairs, and ensure that proper safeguards are provided in roadway construction. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-88. - Protection from accidental discharge. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. The department of public works may require that plans showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted for review and approval prior to construction of the facilities. 
(b)  Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the department of public works, a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the water pollution control facilities, fish kills, aquatic plants, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-89. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The department of public works and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper authorization and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewer or waterways or facilities for wastes treatment. 
(c)  The superintendent or duly authorized employees of the town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-90. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this division shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for therein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in section 1-13. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation. 
(d)  Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Secs. 86-91-86-110. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Building Sewers and Connections 

Sec. 86-111. - Generally. 
(a)  Permit required to connect with public sewers, change character of discharge, etc. No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the department of public works. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the department of public works at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. 
(b)  Classes of permits; applications for permits; fees. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (i) For residential and commercial service, and (ii) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the department of public works. Permit and inspection fees as referenced in the sewer service fee schedule shall be paid to the town at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Opening streets to make connections. Only authorized persons shall open any highway or public ground for the purpose of making any sewer connection, or make or cause to be made any connections, except through the connection branches provided for that purpose. 
(d)  Costs of installation; town indemnified. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer from the building to the sewer main shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(e)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. 
(f)  Sources of surface runoff or groundwater. No person shall make connections of roof down-spouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-112. - Standards of work and specifications of material. 
(a)  Old sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the department of public works, to meet all the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Pipes. The building sewer shall be cast-iron soil pipe, ASTM specifications (A74-12) or equal; polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, ASTM specification (D-3034-SDR35); or other suitable material approved by the department of public works. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. If installed in fill or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, except that PVC pipe may be accepted if laid on a concrete bed or cradled, as approved by the department of public works. 
(c)  Size and slope of sewer. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the department of public works, but in no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(d)  Elevation of sewer into building; low drains. The sanitary sewer will be brought into the building at an elevation of the floor line not less than two inches above the basement floor. Any deviations from this shall be subject to the approval of the department of public works. In all building in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(e)  Excavations; backfill. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the department of public works. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification (C12-58T), except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(f)  Joints generally. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Premolded gasket joints shall utilize materials having resilient properties. Joints using materials having resilient properties shall conform to ASTM specification (C425-60T) and shall be type I or III. 
(g)  Connections generally. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the owner shall at his expense install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the department of public works. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at least eight inches below the crown of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by complete encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the department of public works. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-113. - Notice to inspect; supervision of work. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the department of public works when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the department of public works or its representative. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-114. - Excavations to be guarded. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town. Temporary bridges shall be installed over trenches when deemed necessary, in the judgment of the department of public works, to provide convenient public travel. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Secs. 86-115-86-130. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Use of Public Sewers 

Sec. 86-131. - Discharges into sanitary sewers generally. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground-water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewers. 
(b)  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the department of public works. Industrial unpolluted process water may be discharged, upon approval of the department of public works, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  The discharge of any waters to storm sewers or natural outlets requires an NPDES permit from the state commissioner of environmental protection. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-132. - Specific waters and wastes. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of fat, oil, grease or wax or containing any other substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, gas or vapor. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solids or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; such toxic or poisonous substances shall include but are not limited to cyanides, copper, zinc, nickel, iron, chromium, lead, tin, silver, mercury or salts thereof in concentration of pollutants in excess of the following limits: 
Pollutant Concentration 
Parts per Million 
(mg/l) Arsenic as As 0.05 Barium as Ba 5.0 Boron as B 5.0 Cyanides as CN 
(amenable) 0.1 Fluoride as F 20.0 Chromium (total) 1.0 Chromium (Cr +6) 0.1 Magnesium as Mg 100.0 Manganese as Mn 5.0 Copper as Cu 1.0 Zinc as Zn 1.0 Cadmium 0.1 Lead 0.1 Tin 2.0 Silver 0.1 Mercury 0.01 Nickel 1.0 Note: All metals are to be measured as total metals.  
(8)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other odor-producing or taste-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Discharge or cause to be discharged into the public sanitary sewer, either directly or indirectly, any overflow by draining from manure pits, cesspools or other receptacles storing organic wastes. 
(11)  Connect with the public sanitary sewers either directly or indirectly, any steam, exhausts, boiler blowoffs, sediment traps or pipes carrying hot circulating water. 
(12)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with acceptable state or federal regulations. 
(13)  Materials creating an unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(14)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-133. - Certain discharges subject to review; treatment. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 86-132 and which, in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of wastes flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(c)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-134. - Measurements and tests. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in section 86-89 and section 86-132 shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage" and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 86-137 or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(b)  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, SOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(c)  All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharge as the department of public works and/or other duly authorized employees of the town may reasonably require, including the installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records, and reporting the results of such monitoring to the department of public works. Such records shall be made available upon request by the department of public works to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-135. - Special agreement for treatment of industrial wastes. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the department of public works and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be inspected by the town for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern, provided that such agreements do not contravene any requirements of federal laws and are compatible with any user charge and industrial cost recovery system in effect. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-136. - Special provisions for grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. 
(1)  Special traps. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided and maintained in all drains from garages, filling stations, restaurants, car washes, and cleaning establishments. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the department of public works and the director of health and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(2)  Oil/water separators. Garages, parking lots, and places where petroleum-based products are used or stored, where wastes containing petroleum-based grease are produced or stored, or where oily and/or flammable wastes, sand or other harmful materials are produced or stored shall have separators to intercept such substances prior to their discharge to the sewer system. 
(3)  Grease traps and grease interceptors. All class III and IV-rated food preparation establishments, as defined by the local health district, shall provide an on-site grease recovery unit meeting the requirements of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection's Fats Oil and Grease (FOG) policies and the following standards: 
a.  For food service establishments having a seating capacity not to exceed 35 or providing take-out service to not more than 35 persons per hour, a grease recovery unit, approved by the Superintendent or the WPCA's designated engineer, shall be installed in the existing sewer line and within the space of the existing establishment. The grease recovery units shall be sized in accordance with the standards of the manufacturer of the equipment selected. The units shall be mechanical devices not solely dependent upon the employees of the establishment for maintenance and operation. The units shall be located so as to make them readily accessible for inspection by a representative of the WPCA. 
b.  Grease traps shall be provided at all locations of new building construction covered by this section. Interceptors (grease traps) shall be provided on all kitchen waste lines serving restaurants and food service establishments. 
c.  The capacity of grease traps shall be determined by a professional engineer licensed to practice by the State of Connecticut, utilizing best available control technology (BACT). The grease traps shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
d.  Effluent discharged from the grease trap(s) shall be directed to the building sewer serving the establishment. 
e.  Persons who propose systems within the scope of this paragraph shall submit plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice by the State of Connecticut, for such systems to the WPCA for review and approval. All approved systems shall be inspected by the WPCA during construction. 
f.  Chemical, biological, or physical means shall not be used to release fats, wax, oil, or grease into the sewer, bypass the trap or interceptor, or otherwise make the trap or interceptor operate less effectively. 
g.  Each Food Preparation Establishment (FPE) shall register with the Authorizing Agent (WPCA) on a yearly basis as of July 1. 
h.  A Food Preparation Establishment (FPE) may be subject to periodic inspection, with or without notification by the Authorized Agent (WPCA). 
i.  The following shall each constitute a violation subject to enforcement, including penalties, in accordance with section 86-90 (Penalties) of this article: 
1.  Failure to operate an automatic grease recovery unit (AGRU) or outside grease interceptor in accordance with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection general permit for the discharge of wastewater associated with food preparation establishments (general permit). 
2.  Failure to register a new class III or class IV food preparation establishment (FPE) with the authorizing agent within 30 days of first serving food to the public. 
3.  Failure to file a timely annual registration with or to pay the annual fee to the authorizing agent (WPCA) as required. 
4.  Failure to install and operate an AGRU or outside interceptor by July 1, 2011 or upon opening of food preparation establishment. 
5.  Failure to maintain an AGRU or outside interceptor every 3 months such that either device is less than 25 percent full of FOG at all times, in accordance with general permit guidelines or requirements of the authorizing agent's recommended maintenance cycle, whichever is more stringent. 
6.  Failure to maintain the AGRU or interceptor on-line and operable at all times. 
7.  Failure to notify authorized agent of any malfunction or maintenance problem with AGRU or outside interceptor between inspections. 
8.  Failure to have renderer's paperwork on site and readily available during inspections. 
9.  Failure to have maintenance logs updated and readily available during inspections. 
j.  Costs to remedy documented accumulation of FOG in any portion of the municipal sewer system that can be attributed to specific FPE discharges shall be charged to the responsible FPE(s). 
(b)  The requirement for an external interceptor (grease trap) may be waived by the water pollution control authority (WPCA) for existing buildings where there is a proposed change of use or alternation to accommodate a restaurant or food service establishment, provided that the person proposing the change demonstrates to the satisfaction of the WPCA that the installation of an external grease trap would not be feasible and/or would cause an undo hardship in the utilization of the building as a restaurant or food service establishment. The person seeking the waiver shall submit a written request to the director of the department of public works and the director of the health district for authorization to use an internal component utilizing BACT. The written request shall include sufficient technical data provided operation, and maintenance. The director of the public works department and the director of the health district shall jointly present to the WPCA a report of their review of the requested waiver. In the event such a waiver is granted, the provisions of section 86-132 shall be complied with, either by usage of an internal grease trap system, modification of food preparation procedures, service modifications or other means as approved by the WPCA. Granted waivers shall be valid only for the use proposed by the applicant and the waiver shall be nontransferable. The waiver shall be rendered null and void in the event of the transfer of ownership of the restaurant or food service establishment or any change in the methods of operation. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by, and at the expense of, the owner. The interceptor shall be in continuously efficient operation at all times. The owner shall maintain interceptor and a copy of the contract shall be submitted annually to the director of the department of health. Failure to comply with any provisions of this ordinance shall result in the revocation of any permit for operation of a restaurant or food service establishment, or any waiver of the external grease trap requirement. 
(1)  Fats, oil and grease inspection fee. A use charge shall be paid by all FPE's discharging oils and grease (FOG) to the Enfield Water Pollution Control Authority for routine inspection of their FOG facilities. The FOG inspection fee shall be listed on the Enfield Water Pollution Control Authority Fee Schedule. 
(c)  Regulations for industrial users. 
(1)  Permits. In accordance with Section 25-54i of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, a permit from the Commissioner of Environmental Protection is required prior to the discharge of any wastewaters to a public sewer. See Section 25-54i of the Connecticut General Statutes for specifics of permit requirements. 
(2)  Permit decision. The WPCA will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Regardless of whether the commissioner issues a discharge permit, the WPCA may deny any connection to or use of the sewer system if it finds that such connection or use would harm or interfere with the normal operation of the WPCF; or would be passed through the WPCF without effective treatment; or would cause a violation of the town's NPDES Permit or an unpermitted decline in receiving water quality standards. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-137. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the department of public works, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located on such property and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the department of public works. The manhole shall be maintained by property owner so as to be safe and accessible to the public works department at all times. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Secs. 86-138-86-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CHARGES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 86-161-86-180. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Connections 

Sec. 86-181. - Established. 
    The water pollution control authority shall establish a one-time sewer connection charge for recovering a portion of the cost of the sanitary sewer system constructed since 1965 including trunk sewers, lateral sewers, pump stations and force mains. Persons seeking sewer service shall be liable for such charge which shall be payable in full upon the issuance of a sewer connection permit from the WPCA or its agents for the property to be served. The sewer connection permit shall be valid for a period of 24 months from the date of issuance by the WPCA. Any sewer connections not completed within that 24 month period shall require reapplication for a new permit. That portion of properties already assessed shall not be liable for a connection charge. This charge is intended to recover the portion of capital costs not recovered from benefit assessments. The revenues from this charge shall be placed into the WPCA capital reserve fund and used for system-wide expansion, rehabilitation and replacement. No benefit assessment shall be levied for sewers constructed prior to September 27, 1983. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-2 , 7-7-2014) 
Sec. 86-182. - Amount of charge. 
(a)  The amount of the connection charge shall be in accordance with current sewer service fee schedule adopted annually by the WPC. 
(b)  Houses, commercial and industrial buildings constructed prior to January 1, 2014 but are not connected to the town sanitary system as of January 1, 2014 the following assessments will apply: 
(1)  Residential property: 
a.  On residential property serviced by sanitary sewers installed by the town after 1965, $13.50 per front foot, subject to adjustments for irregular, corner and rear lots and other allowances reflected in the rules of assessment adopted as part of Resolution No. 545, approved February 13, 1969. 
b.  On residential property serviced by sanitary sewers installed by a developer after 1965, $3.50 per front foot, subject to adjustments for irregular, corner and rear lots and other allowances reflected in the rules of assessment adopted as part of Resolution No. 545, approved February 13, 1969. 
c.  In addition to the foregoing charge, $350.00 per unit for apartment or condominium complexes. 
(2)  Commercial property: 
a.  On commercial property serviced by sanitary sewers installed by the town after 1965, the greater of $500.00 per acre or $13.50 per front foot, subject to adjustments for irregular, corner and rear lots and other allowances reflected in the rules of assessment adopted as part of Resolution No. 545, approved February 13, 1969. 
b.  On commercial property serviced by sanitary sewers installed by a developer after 1965, the greater of $500.00 per acre or $3.50 per front foot, subject to adjustments for irregular, corner and rear lots and other allowances reflected in the rules of assessment adopted as part of Resolution No. 545, approved February 13, 1969. 
c.  In addition to the foregoing charge, $200.00 per unit for hotels or motels. 
(3)  Industrial property: 
a.  On industrial property serviced by sanitary sewers installed by the town after 1965, the greater of $700.00 per acre or $13.50 per front foot, subject to adjustments for irregular, corner and rear lots and other allowances reflected in the rules of assessment adopted as part of Resolution No. 545, approved February 13, 1969. 
b.  On industrial property serviced by sanitary sewers installed by a developer after 1965, the greater of $700.00 per acre or $3.50 per front foot, subject to adjustments for irregular, corner and rear lots and other allowances reflected in the rules of assessment adopted as part of Resolution No. 545, approved February 13, 1969. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-2 , 7-7-2014) 
Sec. 86-183. - Developer's credit. 
    To the extent a developer is required by the water pollution control authority to install trunk or other sewer pipe to or through such developer's property of a size exceeding the size needed to service such property, the excess cost resulting from such requirement, as determined by the water pollution control authority, may be deducted from the connection charge. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-184. - Enforcement and lien. 
    Any charge for connection with a sewerage system, not paid within 30 days of the due date, shall thereupon be delinquent and shall bear interest from the due date at the rate and in the manner provided by the General Statutes for delinquent property taxes. Each addition of interest shall be collectible as a part of such connection or use charge. Any such unpaid connection charge shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which such charge was levied from the date it became delinquent. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the general statutes for continuing, recording and releasing property tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens and encumbrances except taxes and may be foreclosed in the same manner as a lien for property taxes. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-258. 
Secs. 86-185-86-200. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Sewer Use 

Sec. 86-201. - Fair and reasonable charge for operation and maintenance of system. 
    The water pollution control authority shall establish and regulate a sewer use charge, which will be a fair and reasonable charge for the costs of operation, repairs, replacement and maintenance of the town sewerage system (WPCF, pumping stations and pipe network) and comply with the established state and federal guidelines for such. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-202. - Reserved. 
Sec. 86-203. - Levying of sewer use charge. 
    In accordance with Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, including Section 7-255, as amended, the water pollution control authority shall levy a quarterly user charge on all properties connected to the town sewerage system for the costs of operation, repairs, replacement and maintenance of the town sewerage system (WPCF, pumping stations and pipe network). The WPCA shall follow the procedures for establishing and revising this charge as outlined in G.S. ch. 103. 
(1)  Sewer use charge structure: The sewer use charge for users shall be based on a two- tiered quarterly metered usage. Current sewer use charges shall be listed on the Enfield WPCA sewer service fee schedule. 
(2)  Adoption of sewer rates: Sewer use charges shall be set by the WPCA based on the costs of providing the service as determined by the public works department and its agents and consultants. New sewer rates shall become effective following a public hearing and a majority vote of the total membership of the WPCA approving such new rates. Sewer use charges shall be listed on the Enfield WPCA sewer service fee schedule. 
(3)  Billing cycle: 
a.  Water meter based billing cycle: Sewer use charges shall be computed and billings distributed on a quarterly basis. Quarterly sewer fees will be based upon quarterly water use. 
b.  Sewer meter based billing cycle: Sewer use charges shall be computed by multiplying the quarterly volume of sewerage from the user by the established sewer use rate. 
c.  Non-meter based billing cycle: Sewer use charges shall be computed by multiplying quarterly average residential or commercial industrial usage by the established sewer rate. 
(4)  Seasonal adjustment: A seasonal adjustment will be applied to all water metered account holders to compensate for the typical water consumption during the summer months that may not flow to the wastewater treatment plant. 
The adjustment shall be computed by multiplying the peak water usage discount rate to the proportion of daily consumption during the months of June, July, and August metered in that billing period. 
The peak water usage discount rate (PWUDR) shall be established and approved annually by the WPCA as part of the sewer service fee schedule. 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-204. - Collection and payment. 
(a)  Sewer user charges shall be billed quarterly through the department of finance and shall be paid in full within a period of 30 days after same is declared due and payable, unless otherwise stated on the billing form. 
(b)  Any charge for the use of a sewerage system, not paid within 30 days of the due date, shall thereupon be delinquent and shall bear interest from the due date at the rate and in the manner provided by the General Statutes for delinquent property taxes. Each addition of interest shall be collectible as a part of such connection or use charge. Any such unpaid use charge shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which such charge was levied from the date it became delinquent. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the general statutes for continuing, recording and releasing property tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens and encumbrances except taxes and may be foreclosed in the same manner as a lien for property taxes. 
(c)  Bill adjustments. The town manager or his designee is empowered to resolve billing disputes upon receipt of a request from a town sewer customer. The town manager will present to the WPCA his recommended dispute resolution process before January 1, 2014. The WPCA shall adopt said dispute resolution process and have authority to amend this process from time to time based upon the recommendation of the town manager. 
(d)  Termination of service. The WPCA reserves the right to terminate services in accordance with current state law (C.S.G. Sec. 16-3-100. Termination of Electric, Gas, Water and Sewage Utility Service). 
( Ord. No. 13-3, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-258; delinquent taxes, interest, G.S. §§ 12-145, 12-146. 
APPENDIX A - WATERWAYS 
ARTICLE I. - INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES AGENCY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 01-3, the inland wetlands and watercourses agency ordinance, as adopted by the council on April 16, 2001, and effective on July 1, 2001. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 2-48. - Establishment. 
    In order to carry out and effectuate the purposes and policies of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act" of the state pursuant to G.S. §§ 22a-36-22a-45, inclusive, there is hereby created an agency of the town to be known as the inland wetlands and watercourses agency, hereafter referred to in this article as the agency. 
Sec. 2-49. - Composition: officers; compensation. 
    The agency shall consist of seven members and three alternate members to be appointed by the town council. The initial appointments shall be three members for a term of two years; two members for a term of three years; and two members for a term of four years; one alternate member for a term of two years and two alternate members for a term of four years. The initial appointments made pursuant to this ordinance shall continue until the expiration of their term. Thereafter, any reappointment or new appointment shall be for a term of four years. The town council may remove any member or alternate member for cause and fill any vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term. All members shall be appointed in accordance with the requirements of G.S. § 9-167a, as revised. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 04-2, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 14-6 , 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 2-50. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-51. - Powers and duties. 
    The agency shall be vested with all powers authorized by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act (G.S. §§ 22a-36-22a-45), as amended, and in particular, shall promulgate such regulations in conformity with the regulations promulgated by the commissioner of environmental protection of the state as are necessary to protect the inland wetlands and watercourses within the territorial limits of the town. 
    The agency shall through regulation provide for (1) the manner in which the boundaries of inland wetland and watercourse areas in the town shall be established and amended or changed, (2) the form for an application to conduct regulated activities, (3) notice and publication requirements, (4) criteria and procedures for the review of applications and (5) administration and enforcement and shall follow the procedures set forth in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act of the state. The agency shall serve as the sale agent for the licensing of "regulated activities" as defined in G.S. § 22a-38(13), within the town. In carrying out its licensing activities, the agency shall follow the standards and procedures set forth in "The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act" of the state. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 22a-42a. 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the zoning regulations, as adopted by the planning and zoning commission on December 20, 2001, effective on January 31, 2002, and revised in its entirety on September 21, 2018 . See Code Comparative Table for detailed analysis of inclusion of revised provisions. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the revised ordinance of September 21, 2018 . Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Charter reference- Planning and zoning commission, ch. V, § 2; zoning board of appeals, ch. V, § 3. 
State Law reference- Zoning, G.S. § 8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION 

Section 1.00. - Short title and history. 
    These regulations shall be known and cited as the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Enfield. Zoning regulations were originally adopted by the Enfield in March of 1925. Major revisions to these regulations were made in November, 1966, July, 1975, and July 2002. 
Section 1.10. - Purpose and authority. 
    These regulations are adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community; for the purpose of lessening congestion in the streets; for the purpose of securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; for the purpose of providing adequate light and air; for the purpose of preventing over-crowding of the land and avoiding undue concentration of population; for the purpose of facilitating adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; for the purpose of conserving the value of building and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town; for the purpose of providing for the public health, comfort, and the general welfare in living and working conditions, and for the purpose of regulating and restricting the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings designed for specific uses; for the purpose of regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected and for the purpose of regulating and determining the areas of yards, courts and open spaces for buildings hereafter erected, and for said purposes to divide the town into zoning districts of such number, shape, and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for its enforcement, in accordance with Chapter 124, Section 8-2 of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revision, as amended. 
Section 1.20. - Interpretation. 
    When interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Except as specifically herein provided, it is not intended by the adoption of these regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provisions adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the erection, construction, maintenance, establishment, moving, alteration, or enlargement of any building or improvement; nor is it intended by these regulations to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties; provided, however, that in cases in which these regulations imposes a greater restriction upon the erection, construction, maintenance, establishment, moving, alteration, or enlargement of buildings, or the use of any such buildings or premises in said several districts or any of them than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or regulation or by such rules, regulation, or permits or by such easements, covenants, or agreements, then in such case the provisions of these regulations shall control. 
Section 1.30. - Establishment of zoning districts and map. 
    For purposes of these regulations the Town of Enfield is divided into the following zoning districts. 
Table 1.10 - List of Zoning Districts 
Residential HR-33 One Family Residence District R-33 One Family Residence District R-44 One Family Residence District R-88 One Family Residence District MFHD Multi-Family Housing District TVC Thompsonville Village Center District Business, Industrial and Other B-L Business Local District B-G Business General District B-P Business Professional B-R Business Regional Shopping District TVC Thompsonville Village Center District I-1 Industrial 1 District I-1M Industrial 1M District I-2 Industrial 2 District IP Industrial Park District SDD Special Development District Overlay Districts CRCOD Connecticut River Conservation Overlay District LO Limited Office Overlay District HDDA Hazardville Design Overlay District A* LFOD Lake Overlay District** KSESDOD King St./Enfield St. Design Overlay District SDOD Scitico Design Overlay District***  
*added 09/08/03 
**added 11/30/09 
*** added 09/08/17 
Section 1.40. - Zoning map and zoning district boundaries. 
    The boundaries of such districts are shown on a map entitled, "Zoning Map of the Town of Enfield, Connecticut" which is filed in the office of the town clerk. Such map with all explanatory matter thereon is hereby declared to be part of these regulations as fully as if set out herein and changes in the boundaries of such districts as shown on said map may be made by the commission in accordance with the provisions of article 12.10 herein. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply. 
    Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center of a street, highway, brook or stream, such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
    Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto, and, at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be construed as being 200 feet from the centerline of a street in a business or industrial district. 
    Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
    Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said railroad line. 
    1.40.1. Thompsonville Village Center district. The boundary of the Thompsonville Village Center district is depicted on the Town of Enfield zoning map. Within this district there are two sub areas, which together do not include the entire Thompsonville Village Center district, as follows: 
A.  Sub-area A: "Core area" defined as the immediate properties abutting the following streets: the west side of North Main Street from Church Street south to Pearl Street, both sides of Pearl Street from North Main Street south to the parcel on the south side of Walnut Street (on the east side of Pearl Street) and south to the parcel on the south side of South Street (on the west side of Pearl Street), both sides of High Street from Spring Street to Wallace Street, also including the building in the northeast corner of High and Wallace Streets, and the south side of Main Street from North Main Street to the Railroad right-of-way as shown on the town zoning map. 
B.  Sub-area B: "Freshwater Brook Access Area" defined as properties abutting the south side of Main Street, from North Main Street to the Railroad right-of-way as shown on the town zoning map. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 2.00. - Interpretation. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense, words used in the plural number shall include the singular number and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number. The word person includes a for-profit or non-profit corporation, company, partnership, or individual. The word shall is mandatory, not directive, and the word may is permissive. 
Section 2.10. - Specific terms. 
A.  The word lot includes the words plot, parcel, and premise. 
B.  The word structure includes the word building. 
C.  Town means the Town of Enfield, Connecticut. 
D.  State means the State of Connecticut. 
E.  Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the Town of Enfield. 
Section 2.20. - Interpretation of other terms. 
    When the precise meaning of other words or terms is in doubt, the Commission shall determine the meaning by referring to the following documents in the order listed: 
1.  The Connecticut General Statutes; 
2.  Webster's Ninth Collegiate Dictionary; 
3.  The New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions; 
4.  A Glossary of Zoning, Development and Planning Terms. 
Section 2.30. - Definitions. 
1.  Accessory apartment: A second dwelling unit located within or added onto a detached single-family dwelling which is situated on an individual lot and which is clearly subordinate to the detached single-family dwelling in size, location and appearance. A second kitchen not part of a self-contained subordinate dwelling unit shall not constitute an accessory apartment. (Amended 4/3/13) 
2.  Acres, developable: The net area of a lot expressed in acres after (i) 50 percent of floodplain and inland wetlands areas, and (ii) 25% of areas with slopes in excess of 25 percent have been deducted. 
3.  Accessory building or use: A building or use, in addition to the principal building or use, which is clearly subordinate to, and customarily incidental to, and located upon the same lot as the principal building or use. Structures which provide access to the principal building, including but not limited to, decks, landings, porches, etc., are considered part of a principal structure and shall not be considered accessory structures. The zoning board of appeals shall have no authority to vary this provision. (Amended 12/07/09) 
4.  Additional finished floor area: Finished floor area in an existing single-family structure that received a building permit within three years prior to the receipt of an application for an accessory apartment under section 4.30.33 of these regulations, and shall include any finished floor area proposed to be added as part of the application. (Amended 4/3/13) 
5.  Agricultural activity: The growing of crops, raising of livestock, storing of crops, processing of crops, and the sale of crops. 
6.  Amusement machine: A machine that is controlled and operated by the insertion of coins or tokens and intended for the amusement of patrons, including, but not limited to, baseball and football games, pinball games, video games, and other similar games. 
7.  Animal hospitals, clinics: A building or group of buildings and facilities used for the treatment, boarding, and care of animals. In the case of a hospital or clinic, the facility must be under the supervision of a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the state. 
8.  Antenna: A devise used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. 
9.  Assisted living facility: An age-restricted managed residential community providing support services that encourages older residents to maintain a maximum level of independence and includes appropriate accessory services and facilities to provide assistance and maintain independence. 
10.  Bed and breakfast inn: An owner-occupied residential facility offering overnight housing in up to five bedrooms and serving breakfast to its guests. 
11.  Boarding house: A dwelling in which the owner or tenant rents rooms and provides some meals for monetary compensation to no more than six persons, not including using the cellar area. 
12.  Buffer yard: An area of land that is landscaped so as to provide a visual barrier between differing land uses. 
13.  Building area: The ground area enclosed by the walls of a building together with the walls of all covered porches and other roofed portions. 
14.  Building: Any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or materials. Any other structure more than eight feet in height shall be considered a building, including a solid fence or wall, but excluding a public utility pole or flag pole. 
15.  Bulky waste: Land clearing debris and waste resulting directly from demolition and construction activities other than clean fill. 
16.  Business services: A business primarily engaged in providing services to other businesses, such as advertising and public relations, computer services and data processing, copying, mailing, management and consulting, advertising and similar services, for a fee. Private individuals may use these same services. 
17.  Cellar: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade, but having at least three feet of its wall height below grade for at least one-half of its perimeter. 
18.  Certificate of zoning compliance: A certificate, signed by the zoning enforcement officer, setting forth either that a building or structure complies with these regulations or that a building, structure or lot may be lawfully employed for specified uses, or both. 
19.  Club, non-profit: A private association of people organized for common social, recreational, fraternal, benevolent, religious, political, or athletic purposes whose activities are confined to its members and guests and is operated on a non-profit basis. A club may own or lease buildings, land and facilities. 
20.  Co-location: The installation of antennas of two or more wireless communications service providers on a single wireless communications facility. 
21.  Commercial recreation facility: A business providing recreation opportunity or service such as, but not limited to tennis, racquet ball, swimming, bowling, game arcade, exercise and health center, miniature golf, driving range and similar uses, and appropriate accessory uses and facilities. 
22.  Commercial vehicle: A vehicle which exceeds a gross vehicle weight of 5,000 pounds, is licensed as a commercial or combination vehicle, and is regularly used in the conduct of a business, profession, or trade. 
23.  Community residence, mentally ill adults: A facility which is defined in C.G.S. § 19a-507a, as the same may be amended from time to time, which is generally defined as "a community based residential facility housing the staff of such a facility and eight of fewer mentally ill adults which is licensed by the State of Connecticut to provide services needed for daily living and other support services." 
24.  Community residence, mentally retarded persons: A facility which is defined in C.G.S. § 17a-220(e), as the same may be amended from time to time, which is generally defined as "a community based residential facility housing up to six mentally retarded or autistic persons which provides services needed for daily living and other support services." 
25.  Congregate housing: An age-restricted residential community with communal dining facilities. 
26.  Continuing care facility: An age-restricted residential facility consisting of any of a range of housing options from single-family detached units to attached units on individual lots or a single lot, with supportive services and a continuum of care provided, which may include extended health care facilities. 
27.  Conversion of buildings for residential uses: The process by which either the use of a building is changed or additional housing units are added to an existing residential building. 
28.  Coverage: The percentage which the aggregate building area of all buildings on a lot bears to the total area of that lot. The area of an above ground swimming pool shall not be counted in determining building coverage for a lot. (Amended 1/01/08) 
29.  Day care facility, adult: A facility for adults which provides a structured program of therapeutic, social, and rehabilitative services in a supportive group setting that is designed to serve four or more persons outside their own homes for a part of a 24-hour period one or more days a week. 
30.  Day care facility, child: A facility which is defined in C.G.S. § 19a-77(a) (1), or as that section may be amended from time to time, but generally defined as "a building where a program offering supplementary care for 12 or more related or unrelated children outside their homes on a regular basis for a part of 24 hours one or more days a week" and is licensed by the State. 
31.  Day care home, family: A facility which is defined in the C.G.S. § 19a-77(a)(3), or as is amended from time to time, and is generally defined as a facility in "a private home where care for not more than six children, including the provider's children not in school full time, where the children are cared for not less than three hours nor more than 12 hours during a 24-hour period and where care is given in a regularly recurring basis and is licensed by the state." During the regular school year, a maximum of three additional children who are in school full time, including the provider's own children, shall be permitted, except if the provider has more than three children who are in school full time, all of the provider's children shall be permitted. 
32.  Day care home, group: A facility which is defined in the Connecticut General Statutes and generally defined as a C.G.S. § 19a-77(a)(2), as may be amended from time to time, facility "which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to not less than seven nor more than 12 related or unrelated children on a regular basis for a part of a 24-hour period on one or more days a week and is licensed by the State of Connecticut." 
33.  Extended family: Persons related by blood or marriage, legal adoption or legal guardianship to the resident owner of a qualifying single-family residence under section 4.30.33 of these regulations. 
34.  Family: Any number of persons related by blood or marriage, legal adoption or legal guardianship, living in the same dwelling unit, or a group of not more than five persons who need not be so related, living and cooking together in the same dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit. 
35.  Farm: A tract of land of three acres or more, used in whole or in part, for agricultural activities, which may include the growing of crops, raising of livestock, storing of crops, processing of crops, and the sale of agricultural products. 
36.  Financial institution: A business which provides financial services to customers, including, but not limited to, banks, credit unions, savings banks, stock brokers' offices and insurance agencies. 
37.  Floodplain: An area designated as subject to periodic flooding due to the 500-year flood as designated by the municipal flood insurance study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
38.  Floor area, finished: All space within the exterior walls of a dwelling unit exclusive of garages, breezeways, unheated porches, cellars, heater rooms, and basements and including all spaces not otherwise excluded above such as: principal rooms, utilities rooms within dwelling units. Finished areas shall have electrical, heating and plumbing service installed and all floors, ceilings, walls and trim in place and have a minimum clearance of six feet, eight inches on the first floor and where a second floor is included in the computations, a minimum height of six feet, eight inches shall exist for 50 percent of the finished area of the second floor. Attic space shall not be considered habitable space. 
39.  Floor area, gross: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings. 
40.  Floor area, gross usable: As applied to non-residential uses, the horizontal area of all floors of a building measured from exterior of outside walls. Gross usable floor area shall not include common hallways, elevators, stairs, common lobbies, terraces not used for customer service, utility rooms, rest rooms, maintenance shops and basements or cellars intended and designed only for storage. Cafeterias may not be deemed as gross usable floor area at the discretion of the commission. 
41.  Garden supply center: An agricultural and associated products retail sales operation where the primary use is the propagation, growth, storage and/or sale of flowers, plants, shrubs, or trees. This use may also include the sale of garden related merchandise and power equipment. 
42.  Grade: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building or at all exterior walls. 
43.  Hazardous material/waste: A material/waste which poses a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
44.  Height, building: The vertical distance from the average finished grade within ten feet of the walls of the building to the highest point of a flat roof or mansard roof including the top of a parapet or to the mean level between the eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
45.  Home occupation: Customary personal service occupation, activity, or use located in the same building occupied by such person as his or her residence that is clearly a customary, incidental, and accessory use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the building, the property, or the residential character of the neighborhood. Home occupations shall not include restaurants, or other eating or drinking places; animal hospitals or kennels; barber or beauty shops; massage establishments; landscaping or tree removal services; or automotive service, supply sales or repairs. (Amended 5/20/13) 
46.  Home professional office: The office of a licensed or recognized professional located in the same building occupied by such person as his or her residence that is clearly a customary, incidental, and accessory use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the building, the property, or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. Group dancing, musical instrument, or voice instructions, restaurants and other places for food service, beauty shops and barber shops, massage establishments, manicuring shops, convalescent homes, funeral/undertaking establishments, and stores, and businesses of any kind not permitted herein shall not be considered home professional offices. The home professional office of a doctor or dentist shall not include any biological or medical testing laboratory, except as an accessory use in connection with his/her practice. 
47.  Hotel/motel: A building or group of buildings designed and used as for temporary residence by seven or more transient guests which may provide accessory services such as food service, places for public assembly, and other appropriate accessory services. 
48.  Housing for the elderly: Age-restricted housing designed for elderly families as set forth in section 4.30.3. (Amended 11/01/08) 
49.  Heliport: An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, appropriately licensed and approved for the landing and take-off of helicopters and including appropriate accessory activities and uses. 
50.  Impervious surface: Any material that inhibits the filtration of water into the ground below and increases the volume of storm water runoff. An impervious surface does not include gravel, stone, or detention ponds. 
51.  Junk: A worn-out, cast-off, or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or material which unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new shall not be considered junk. 
52.  Junk yard: The use of more than 100 square feet of the area of lot, whether inside or outside a building, or the use of any portion of that half of any lot that joins any street, for the storage, keeping, or abandonment of junk. (Junk yards are prohibited within the Town.) 
53.  Kennel, commercial: A commercial operation in an open or enclosed area in which four or more dogs or cats are kept for breeding, boarding, grooming, training, or sale. 
54.  Lot: A parcel or plot of land shown on a valid subdivision plan approved by the commission and recorded in the office of the town clerk or a single parcel or plot of land existing before the adoption of subdivision regulations by the commission, occupied or capable of being occupied by one building and accessory buildings or uses including such yards and areas as are required by these regulations. 
55.  Lot, corner: A lot having two adjacent sides facing a street or streets so that the interior angle of the intersection is not more than 120 degrees. 
56.  Lot coverage: That portion of a lot covered by a building or buildings. 
57.  Lot, frontage: The linear distance measured along the points of intersection of a lot with a street right-of-way. For a lot located on a cul-de-sac, the lot frontage shall be the entire length of any imaginary straight line 1) whose end points touch side lot lines, and 2) which is also tangent to, but not in front of, the minimum front yard setback line for such lot. 
58.  Lot, interior: Any lot other than a corner lot. 
59.  Lot line, front: All the lines dividing the lot from the street or streets. 
60.  Lot line, rear: The lot line generally opposite the front lot line on a lot which is not a through lot or a corner lot. 
61.  Lot line, side: Any lot line that is not a front lot line nor a rear lot line and is extending from the street and divides lots abutting the street 
62.  Lot of record: A lot for which a deed has been recorded in the office of the town clerk and which meets the requirements of these regulations or a lot which is shown on a map filed in the office of the town clerk prior to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the commission. 
63.  Lot, through: A lot other than a corner lot, having street frontage on opposite sides. 
64.  Medical research and technology facilities: Medical facilities that are consistent with the "clean light industrial uses" expected in the industrial-1M and industrial park districts, inclusive of facilities for biomedical research and manufacturing. Facilities may serve patients for specialized testing and treatments that require on-site technology (e.g. MRI, out-patient surgery, dialysis), but shall not provide routine care. 
65.  Non-conforming buildings: A building legally existing at the effective date of these regulations or at the effective date of any amendment to these regulations which would create the nonconformity but which does not conform to all of the current applicable dimensional requirements of these regulations. 
66.  Non-conforming lot: A lot legally existing at the effective date of these regulations or at the effective date of any amendment to these regulations which would create the nonconformity but which does not conform to all of the current applicable dimensional requirements of these regulations. 
67.  Non-conforming use: A use of a lot or building legally existing at the effective date of these regulations or at the effective date of any amendment to these regulations which would create the nonconformity but which does not conform to all of the current use regulations of these regulations. 
68.  Non-profit homeless shelter: A residential facility for people operated by a not-for-profit organization on a not-for-profit basis which may provide temporary living, eating and sleeping quarters and accessory services for up to eight residents. 
69.  Non-profit residential shelter housing: A residential facility for abused and/or battered individual(s) with or without other family members operated by a not-for-profit organization on a not-for-profit basis which may provide housing and ancillary services. 
70.  Open lot sales: Retail display and sales of merchandise taking place on vacant land, usually on a short-term basis. 
71.  Open space: Any part of a lot not occupied by a building, open to the sky, on the same lot as the principal building as distinguished from open space required in single family open space subdivisions which is under common or municipal ownership. 
72.  Outdoor display and retail sales: The display and retail sales of fresh fruits, vegetables, plants, and flowers for sale on a seasonal basis and as an accessory use. 
73.  Outdoor special events: Shows, displays, festivals, promotional activities, carnivals and other events held outdoors for a limited duration, as set forth in section 8.90 et seq. of these regulations, and (1) are located on private property in any zoning district and are open to the public; or, (2) are located on private property in a residential district, which property is occupied by a special permit use; or, (3) are located on residential property or on property in a residential district and have one or more tents with a total combined area greater than 350 square feet, which tents will be set up for more than one day; or,(4) include any commercial filming, photography or promotion projects that involve either a cast and crew of more than seven people or last for more than three hours; or, (5) include amusement devices, such as carousels, roller coasters, whirligigs, merry-go-rounds and Ferris wheels; and/or (6) are cruise nights, car shows or similar events. (Added 5/1/13) 
74.  Personal service businesses: Businesses that provide services of a personal nature to individuals or their personal property rather than to businesses. Personal service businesses include, but are not limited to barber shops, beauty shops, tailors and dry cleaners, custom dressmakers, jewelry repair, and shoe repair. 
75.  Places of worship: A building or group of buildings primarily used for the conduct of religious services and accessory uses and that is controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship and recognized as such for non-profit status by the Internal Revenue Service. 
76.  Planned commercial development: A commercial development under unified ownership or control containing more than 80,000 square feet of gross floor area and occupying a lot of ten acres or more in size. 
77.  Recreational vehicle: A portable vehicle built on a chassis, which can be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily designed to be used as temporary living accommodations for travel, camping, and recreational purposes. 
78.  Regional shopping center: A planned commercial development consisting of a building or group of buildings containing not less than five retail facilities with an enclosed mall and 600,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
79.  Retail sales: The sale at retail of merchandise or services to the public for personal, business, and household use and providing services incidental to the sales of such goods. 
80.  Rooming house: A building in which the owner or tenant rents rooms (not including the cellar area), for monetary compensation, to not more than six persons. 
81.  Senior residential development: An age-restricted residential development of single family detached units. 
82.  Shopping center: A planned commercial development consisting of a building or group of buildings containing more than three retail facilities and 20,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
83.  Sidewalk sale: An outdoor display and sale of merchandise similar to that sold inside the business for up to four days on a sidewalk or adjacent grassed area. 
84.  Signs: Any letters, figures, designs, symbols, trademarks, or illuminated devices, including banners and trade flags, which are situated so that they can be seen from a street and are intended to attract attention for advertising, provide directions, or identification of a legitimate land use on the same parcel of land. 
85.  Solid waste facility: A facility such as a transfer station or recycling facility. 
86.  Special development district: A zoning district created to encourage and enable the rehabilitation and adaptive reuse of underutilized and vacant buildings. 
87.  Special residential developments: Developments consisting of a single family open space subdivision, a senior residential development, or a rear lot or lots 
88.  Story, half: A space under a sloping roof that has the line of intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the floor level and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five feet or less occupies at least 40 percent of the total floor area of the story directly beneath. 
89.  Story: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, between a floor and the ceiling or roof next above it. 
90.  Street line: That line which separates the street right-of-way from adjoining property. 
91.  Street: Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property or a proposed public thoroughfare shown upon a subdivision plan duly approved by the commission. 
92.  Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground, including signs and billboards, but not including fences or walls used as fences. 
93.  Telecommunications tower: A support structure for antennas and appurtenant supporting systems such as platforms, guy lines and other mounting devices which inclusively are considered to be part of the tower. 
94.  Temporary use permit: A permit given by the commission allowing a particular activity to take place in a specified location for a specified time period. 
95.  Transfer station: A central collection location for solid and/or bulky waste collected by the town where such waste is transferred to a different vehicle for transport to another transfer station or a disposal site. 
96.  Visitor information booth: A structure built to provide information to visitors of a planned commercial development, regional shopping center or industrial area. 
97.  Vocational rehabilitation services: A use whose principal mission is to provide support for people with a broad range of intellectual and physical disabilities. This definition includes transportation services and vocational rehabilitation services where the targeted individuals perform production, assembly, packaging, bulk mailing, shredding and other light industrial work. Permitted accessory uses include retail operations under 4,000 square feet in floor area that provide an opportunity for targeted individuals to receive on-the-job training and are limited to sale of by-products of the rehabilitation services as well as donated used clothing and goods. (Effective 7/12/12) 
98.  Wireless communications facilities: The antenna, telecommunications equipment, any telecommunications towers, and/or support structures used together in conjunction with the provision of wireless communications services. 
99.  Yard, front: A required and open unoccupied space between the building, (and any decks, porches, and steps associated with the building), and front lot line, extending the full width of the lot from side lot line to side lot line or in case of a corner lot or through lot extending along all street lines. 
100.  Yard, rear: A required and open unoccupied space between the rear line of the building (and any decks, porches, and steps associated with the building) and the rear lot line of the lot extending the full width of the lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
101.  Yard, side: A required and unoccupied space between the nearest roofed portion of the building and the side lot line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or to a side yard. 
102.  Yard maintenance: A home occupation that is limited to cutting grass, raking leaves, snow plowing and other yard maintenance activities. Yard maintenance does not include landscaping or tree removal services. (Effective 5/20/13) 
103.  Zoning permit: A document issued and certified by the zoning enforcement officer that a proposed use and/or structure is in conformance with the zoning regulations. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Section 3.00. - Conformance with regulations. 
    Uses of land and structures shall comply with the applicable standards of this section. No conveyance of land shall be made that reduces the remaining land of the grantor below the applicable minimum area, frontage, bulk and yard requirements. No building permit, zoning permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for the erection or occupancy of a building or structure on land conveyed in violation of this section. Any use not specified in the use tables, tables 4.20, 5.20 and 6.20, is prohibited. 
    3.00.1. Conformity of buildings and land: Use and occupancy. No building, structure, or premises shall be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. Premises subject to approval of a Special Permit by the commission shall comply with Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, with regard to provision of access for handicapped person. 
    3.00.2. Conformity of buildings: Heights, yards, area. No building, structure, or premises shall be erected, altered or used so as to produce greater heights, smaller yards, or less required floor area than required by these regulations. Additionally, no building, shall be occupied by more families than prescribed for such building, structure or premises for the district in which it is located. 
    3.00.3. Conformity of open spaces. No yard, court or open space, or part thereof, shall be included as a part of the yard, court or open space similarly required for any other building, structure or dwelling under the provisions of these regulations. 
    3.00.4. Reduction of dimensions of lot areas. No lot shall be diminished in area nor shall any yard, court or open space be reduced except in conformity with the requirements of these regulations. 
    3.00.5. Lots in more than one district. Where the lot lies in more than one district, the provisions of the less restrictive district may be applied for a distance of not over 25 feet into the more restrictive district provided that such lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district. 
Section 3.10. - Use of land for access and parking. 
    3.10.1. The use of land for access to or from off-street parking in connection with and adjacent to a use shall be considered to be accessory to and part of such use except that this provision shall be construed to prohibit access across a residential district to a use lying in an industrial district. 
    3.10.2. Only one driveway cut per lot shall be permitted in a residential district unless an approval for an additional drive is granted by the planning and zoning commission. (Added 6/1/06) 
Section 3.20. - Regulations applying to existing lots. 
    Existing lots and lots of record shall meet the requirements of this section. 
    3.20.1. Building on existing lots. A permitted building, or permitted use shall be allowed to be constructed or established on a lot which, at the time of the effective date of the adoption of these regulations, is shown on a subdivision plan for residential property which has been approved, prior to the effective date of these regulations, by the commission or other body exercising the powers of such commission, which plan is filed or recorded with the office of the town clerk, provided that the subdivision has not expired as set forth in Connecticut General Statutes or Regulations or regulation of the town. However, all applicable requirements including, but not necessarily limited to, height, setback, lot coverage, floor area, and parking area shall be adhered to. 
    3.20.2. Lot of record. 
A.  Except as provided for under section 4.30.21 of these regulations, any lot of record having less than 5,000 square feet or having less than 50 feet of frontage shall be considered not buildable. The zoning board of appeals shall have no authority to vary this provision; (Amended 04/19/10) 
B.  Any lot of record not considered merged as set forth below, owned separately from all adjoining lots, and served by municipal sanitary sewers, shall be considered a building lot if it contains at least 5,000 square feet of lot area and has at least 50 feet of frontage on an improved town street; 
C.  A lot of record that has been separated from a merged parcel without approval from the commission or the zoning board of appeals, shall not be deemed "owned separately from all adjoining lots" as set forth in (b) above. A special permit in accordance with (f) below is required prior to developing such lot; 
D.  Any lot of record shall be deemed to have merged with an adjoining lot of record if: 
i.  The common property line has had a building, constructed thereupon at any time; 
ii.  The principal building has been constructed within ten feet of the common lot line; 
iii.  The structure has been constructed on a lot of record which is necessary to a principal building or an adjoining lot of record; 
iv.  The lot of record has been used for driveway or parking purposes for the adjoining lot of record; or, 
v.  The lot of record has been used in conjunction with the adjoining lot; 
E.  Any adjoining lots of record, in common ownership, shall be considered merged until the lot area equals the minimum lot area of the applicable zoning district; 
F.  A division of merged lots may be approved as a special permit by the commission and, where required, a companion subdivision application for merged lots of record has been approved under section 5.g of the Enfield Subdivision Regulations. The special permit for the division of merged lots shall contain the following information: 
i)  A "neighborhood" where the neighborhood is defined as all developed residentially zoned lots wholly or partially within 500 feet of the lot in question having frontage on the same street as the lot in question; however, in unusual circumstances the commission may modify the boundaries of the "neighborhood", where such modification served to best describe the neighborhood of the lot in question. 
ii)  The neighborhood map shall show rights-of-way width, street pavement width, utilities (storm, sanitary, water lines, hydrants, streetlights, etc.) and sidewalks within the neighborhood. 
iii)  Calculations showing (1) all lot sizes and all lot frontages of all developed residentially zoned lots within the neighborhood, and (2) the resultant median lot size and median lot frontage in the neighborhood; 
G.  To approve any special permit for the division of merged lots, the Commission must find that the standards in article IX and the following specific standards and criteria are met: 
i)  All proposed lots shall equal or exceed the median lot size and lot frontage of lots in the neighborhood except that the commission may modify this requirement by not more than ten percent when it finds that this shall result in a more compatible relationship to the neighborhood; however, it no case shall any lot below 5,000 square feet in area nor lot frontage below 50 feet be allowed; 
ii)  All lots of record shall adhere to all the applicable requirements of the district within which they are proposed, including, but not necessarily limited to, height, lot coverage, floor area, and parking as set forth in section 4.10.2.H of the zoning regulation except for the following: 
The required front setback shall be the average of the front setback lines of the main building on the two lots adjacent to or nearest to the proposed lot(s) on the same side of the street, but in no case shall a front setback line greater than the required minimum front setback established for the district be required. (Amended 2/22/05) 
iii)  The proposed plan is compatible with the development patterns of the neighborhood. 
iv)  The resulting development of the parcel will not adversely affect the traffic patterns nor storm water runoff conditions in the neighborhood; 
v)  The new lots shall have frontage on and have access to paved public roadways consistent with the provision of section 5.g. of the subdivision regulations. 
Section 3.30. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
    3.30.1. Projections into yards. 
A.  Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the projection of not more than one foot into a required open space of pilasters, belt courses, sills, cornices, or similar architectural features. 
B.  Chimneys constructed entirely of masonry may project into yards not more than two feet within existing premises only. 
C.  Handicap access ramps, landings and decks required for adequate access and egress of handicapped residents may encroach into the required yard setbacks to the extent necessary to meet the minimum requirements for such access or egress. 
D.  (Added 4/01/06) In any residential district except the TVCZ District, unenclosed front porches may project up to eight feet into the required front yard setback, or beyond the front building line of a pre-existing non-conforming principal structure, subject to the following: 
i)  An unenclosed front porch or an unenclosed front balcony is a roofed structure attached to the front of a unit that is not enclosed in any way by glass, screens, solid panels or any other material, with the exception of a balustrade or railing not to exceed three feet in height above the floor of such front porch or balcony. Decks shall not be allowed to project into the required front setback. 
ii)  Non-enclosed front porch steps may project an additional six feet provided that neither the steps nor the porch may be closer than 15 feet to a front property line. 
iii)  A front-porch roof overhang may extend an additional one foot beyond the porch into the required front setback. 
iv)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary any provision of this subsection. 
    3.30.2. Lots on narrow streets. Where lots front on streets less than 50 feet wide, the front yard required by the provisions of these Regulations shall be increased by one-half the difference between 50 feet and the actual width of the street. 
    3.30.3. Corner visibility. On a corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge, or other structure or planting more than three feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line adjoining said street lines at points which are 50 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along said street lines. 
    3.30.4. Corner lots and odd shaped lots. In the case of a corner lot, all lot lines extending from the front lot lines shall be considered side lot lines. Any lot line not a front or rear lot line shall be considered a side lot line. Where two lot lines extending from the front lot line intersect, both of such lot lines shall be considered side lot lines. 
    3.30.5. Interior lot visibility. On an interior lot, visual obstructions within ten feet of a driveway used by motor vehicles shall be maintained in such a manner as not to create a hazard to pedestrians or other vehicles. 
    3.30.6. Fences. In any residence district, fences shall not exceed six feet in height. Such fences, except those on land used for agricultural purposes, shall be erected so that the finished side of the fence faces the abutting property. 
    3.30.7. Accessory buildings. 
A.  Accessory buildings shall be located according to the following standards. These standards may be waived by the Commission in the HR-33 District. 
i.  (Amended 11/30/09) Except as provided for in the LFOD district below, accessory buildings in residential districts and the TVCZ shall be located behind a line established by the rear of the principal building on the lot and shall be located at least five feet from both rear and side lot lines. Accessory buildings shall not be more than 12 feet in height and not cover more than 20 percent of the area of the required rear yard. 
ii.  (Amended 8/01/07) Accessory buildings in commercial and industrial districts shall be located behind a line established by the front of the principal building on the lot and shall be located at least five feet from both rear and side lot lines provided, 
a.  that they not infringe into any buffer zones otherwise required by these regulations. 
b.  that the property is not located across the street from a residential district, in which case the accessory building shall comply with subsection i. above. 
Accessory buildings in commercial and industrial districts shall not be more than 12 feet in height and not cover more than 20 percent of the area of the required rear or side yard. No accessory building shall be greater than 600 square feet unless a special permit is granted by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission. 
iii.  On corner lots, any accessory structure shall be located no nearer to the principal street line, the principal street being the street from which the property derives its address, behind a line established by the rear of the principal building and no nearer to the other street line than the front yard setback of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
iv.  On through lots, any accessory structure shall be located only in the fourth of the lot farthest removed from the street. 
v.  Any buildings attached to a principal building by structural members, except for a wall or fence not more than six feet high, shall be considered as an integral part of the principal building. 
vi.  Accessory structures used in residential districts shall be limited to structures that are specifically designed and constructed for such use. No part of an inoperable trailer, i.e. the box of a former trailer, shall be allowed as a temporary or permanent structure in residential districts. (Added 4/01/06) 
vii.  Temporary storage containers shall be permitted only in accordance with section 3.30.14. (Added 4/01/06) 
viii.  On lots within a LFOD zone, accessory buildings may be placed forward of the line established by the rear of the principal building on the lot, shall be located at least 20 feet from the front property line, at least ten feet from all side property lines, shall not be more than 12 feet in height, and shall be no larger than 24 feet by 24 feet. The zoning board of appeals shall have no authority to vary this provision. (Added 11/30/09) 
B.  Use requirements for accessory buildings are as follows: 
i.  Construction of accessory buildings shall not begin prior to the construction of the principal building, on the lot. Accessory buildings may be completed prior to the completion of the principal building on the lot. 
    3.30.8. Height exceptions. Spires, cupolas, towers, chimneys, flagpoles, ventilators, tanks and similar features occupying in the aggregate not more than ten of the building area and not used for human habitation, may be erected to a reasonable and necessary height, as determined by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission. (Added 06/04/09) 
    3.30.9. Recreational vehicles and recreational trailers. A recreational vehicle or trailer may be stored on a lot in a residential zone providing it is located no closer to the front property line than the front wall of the residence. The vehicle/trailer may not be used for sleeping, cooking, or operating of a business. Guest recreational vehicles may be located on residential lots, and shall meet the same standards as to location, for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days during a 12-month period. 
    3.30.10. Construction office trailers. The zoning enforcement officer may grant a temporary permit for a trailer to be used as an accessory use on a construction site, as an office, after the permits for the construction of the principal building, have been issued, or in the case of a subdivision, after construction of improvements has been authorized. (Added 4/01/06) The commission may allow an office trailer in an I-1 zone on industrial land for municipal use only during road reconstruction subject to site plan review. 
    3.30.11. Trailers-Temporary living quarters. Where a dwelling unit has been destroyed by a fire or other natural disaster, a trailer/mobile home may be placed on the property and used as the property owner's temporary residence for a period not to exceed one year. A zoning permit is required for the trailer/mobile home. Within 30 days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent dwelling unit on the property, the trailer or mobile home shall be removed from the property. 
    3.30.12. Junk yards. Junk yards are prohibited within the town. 
    3.30.13. Commercial vehicles. (Added 11/25/03) 
A.  The parking of commercial vehicles may be permitted in any residential district as an accessory use only and subject to the following restrictions: 
i.  Only one commercial vehicle not exceeding 11,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) may be parked or garaged on a lot provided it also does not exceed ten feet in height from the base of the wheel to the top (including any cargo) or ten feet in cargo (box) length, subject to the issuance of a zoning permit by the zoning enforcement officer. 
ii.  By special permit, one commercial vehicle exceeding the requirements referred to in paragraph i. may be parked or garaged on a lot, subject to the special permit standards and procedures of section 9.20 of these regulations and following : 
a.  The commission shall consider such factors as proposed screening; proximity to adjacent lots and buildings; the size, intended use, and hours of operation of the vehicle in question; other vehicles on the property; character of the neighborhood. 
b.  No commercial vehicle shall exceed 13 feet, six inches in height from the base of the wheel to the top (including any cargo). 
c.  No commercial vehicle shall exceed 26,000 pounds GVW. 
B.  All commercial vehicles, regardless of GVW, shall meet the following standards: 
i.  No vehicle shall have more than two axles. 
ii.  No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct the view of traffic from adjacent driveways or streets. 
iii.  No vehicle containing hazardous materials or waste may be parked on a residential lot. 
iv.  Construction vehicles, including but not limited to, backhoes, bobcats, bucket loaders, track vehicles, shall not be allowed. 
v.  No tanker trucks or similar type vehicles used for hauling liquids including but not limited to, oil trucks, septic cleanout trucks, etc., shall be allowed. 
vi.  All commercial vehicles shall be parked on the driveway of the occupied residential lot or a parking area leased to the residential occupant, provided no commercial vehicle may be parked closer than ten feet from any adjacent property line. 
vii.  The commercial vehicle shall be owned or operated by the permanent resident of the property on which it is to be parked. 
viii.  No maintenance or repair of a commercial vehicle shall be allowed on the residential property. 
ix.  There shall be no loading or unloading of commercial vehicles between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
x.  No garbage hauling, dump trucks or any other trucks that haul cargo that emits objectionable odors shall be permitted. 
xi.  A copy of any special permit issued shall be forwarded to the tax assessor by the planning department. 
xii.  All vehicles allowed under this regulation are also subject to the town's noise ordinance. 
xiii.  No tractor-trailer, nor the tractor or the trailer, shall be parked in a residential district at any time except in connection with a moving operation. 
C.  All applications for special permits shall include a detailed description of the vehicle to be used including gross vehicle weight, height, total length, box length (if applicable), wheelbase, model and make. Any permits granted shall be for the specific vehicle described in the application. Any changes to the vehicle specifications as approved shall require a new approval by the commission. 
D.  Commercial vehicles subject to special permits shall be screened along the closest residential property line by appropriate evergreen trees, shrubs, fence, or a combination thereof. Exceptions and modifications may be considered by the commission taking into consideration topography and proximity of adjacent residential structures. 
E.  Nothing herein shall be construed to permit a home occupation that is not otherwise permitted under the regulations. Any home occupation that is conducted in conjunction with the parking of a commercial vehicle must meet the applicable requirements and be registered with the zoning enforcement officer. (Amended 08/01/10) 
F.  Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prohibit commercial vehicles parked temporarily while engaged in providing products or services to the owner of the property. 
G.  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit commercial vehicles that are used as part of the following: 
i.  A permitted agriculture, farming, forestry, or nursery gardening use. 
ii.  A permitted earth excavation, removal or deposit activity authorized under section 8-40 of these regulations. 
iii.  A use of facility operated by the Town of Enfield, a fire department, State of Connecticut, or Federal Government; 
iv.  A maintenance facility in support of a multiple dwelling project on the lot, or in support of a special permit use, if authorized under such special permit, 
H.  Pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-6, the zoning board of appeals is prohibited from varying any provision of this section. 
    3.30.14. Storage containers. (Added 4/1/06) 
A.  Storage containers for long term storage: 
i.  For the purposes of this section "longterm storage" shall be defined as more than 30 days. 
ii.  Except as set forth below, storage containers and trailers for storage purposes are permitted only in industrial 1 (I-1), and industrial 2 (I-2) zones subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such containers shall be located in rear yards and shall comply with the standard rear and side yard building setbacks as well as any applicable buffer requirements for the district. In addition, the coverage area of such containers in conjunction with the coverage area of permanent structures shall not exceed the overall building maximum coverage percentage of the zone in which the property is located. 
b.  Storage containers and trailers used for storage shall be screened from any street line by buildings, fences, walls, landscaped berms or evergreen shrubs and trees. In addition, on portions of properties adjacent to any zone other than I-1 or I-2 zones, such containers shall also be screened by means of walls, berms, fences or evergreen plantings from properties in other zones. 
c.  Such containers may not be placed in such a manner as to reduce the number of available parking spaces on the property to less than that required by these regulations. 
d.  Such containers may not be placed on vacant lots or any property without a permanent principal structure. 
e.  The Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission may allow temporary containers in industrial and business districts in conjunction with a site plan approval provided that the need for such temporary containers is identified during the review process and the location and timing are specified on the site plan. 
f.  No hazardous material/waste may be permitted in a storage container unless specifically approved by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission after consultation with the fire marshall and/or North Central District Health Department. 
B.  Temporary truck trailer storage: 
i.  In all business and industrial districts, temporary truck trailer storage shall be restricted to a designated loading area. No such trailer shall be stored for more than seven consecutive days unless a temporary zoning permit is authorized by the planning director or his/her designee. No such permit shall be valid for more than 30 days and may not be renewed or reissued until 90 days have elapsed from the removal of the previously authorized trailer. 
ii.  Retail sales are not permitted from a trailer unless specifically permitted elsewhere in these regulations. 
iii.  A trailer used for these purposes shall be limited to a vehicle mounted on an axle with wheels that is capable of being transported on the public highways. 
iv.  Any trailers authorized under this section shall be removed from the permitted site immediately upon the expiration of the permit. 
v.  No hazardous material/waste may be stored in a storage container unless specifically approved after consultation with the fire marshall and/or North Central District Health Department. 
C.  Temporary storage containers in residential zones: Storage containers in residential zones are allowed after issuance of a temporary zoning permit by the planning director or his/her designee subject to the following standards and conditions: 
i.  The containers shall only be allowed for temporary storage in conjunction with a bona-fide moving operation; a remodeling job on the same premises for which a building permit has been issued; or to store items for a house that has been damaged by fire, explosion or natural disaster and is awaiting repairs. 
ii.  Temporary permits shall expire after 30 days and may not be renewed or re-issued for the same premises until an additional 90 days have passed since the removal of the previous container except in the case of a fire reconstruction where the Planning Department may issue a permit that expires upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or 90 days, whichever is sooner. A resident may petition the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission for a permit for more than 30 consecutive days for other than fire reconstruction if the commission finds a particular situation warrants such a longer time frame. 
iii.  The above notwithstanding, temporary permits may be issued for up to 60 days for containers that are to be used for temporary storage for a municipal uses such as schools, or libraries in residential zones. The Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a container for longer than 60 days if the Commission finds a particular situation warrants such a longer time frame. (Added 04/19/10) 
iv.  All temporary containers must be located behind the property line of the property on which they are located and in no case shall be allowed to obstruct any views of traffic from adjacent driveways or streets. 
v.  Prior to the issuance of any permits, the fire marshall shall sign off on the location of the temporary container. 
vi.  Containers must be removed immediately upon the expiration of the permit. 
vii.  Temporary storage containers used in residential districts shall be limited to containers that are specifically constructed for such use. No part of an inoperable trailer, i.e. the box of a former trailer, shall be allowed as a temporary or permanent structure in residential districts. 
Section 3.40. - Non-conforming uses, structures, and lots. 
    3.40.1. General requirements. 
A.  Any structure, lot or use legally existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations or any amendments thereto, which does not conform to the provisions of these regulations, shall be designated a non-conforming structure, non-conforming lot or non-conforming use. The rules in this section shall apply to such non-conformities. 
B.  Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the strengthening of or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a non-conforming building or structure, or a building, containing a non-conforming use, which building or structure is declared unsafe by a proper authority. When such restoration involves changes to the exterior of a commercial or industrial building, site plan approval is required. 
C.  No building, devoted to a non-conforming use shall be enlarged or extended unless the use therein is changed to a conforming use except in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) below: 
The commission may approve: 
a)  A special permit to allow change to another non-conforming use after making the following findings: 
i.  Such change is more nearly conforming to these regulations; and, 
ii.  Such change is more compatible with abutting land uses. 
b)  A Special permit in accordance with the provision of subsection 3.40.1.D. (Amended 5/9/2016) 
D.  The commission may hold a public hearing and review a special permit application for the expansion of an existing non-conforming use to extend or enlarge a non-conforming use or building. 
The commission may approve such special permit, if it finds that the proposal is consistent with the goals of the plan of conservation and development and is in harmony with neighboring uses and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties. (Added 5/9/2016) 
    3.40.2. Non-conforming structures. Any building, or structure legally in existence at the time of the adoption or amendment of these regulations which does not comply with the minimum floor area, height, bulk, lot coverage, or other dimensional requirements of these regulations shall be considered a non-conforming structure. Such structures may continue to be used, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  A non-conforming structure may be expanded, altered or extended provided such expansion, alteration or extension does not violate or further violate any of the height, bulk, setback or landscaping requirements for the zone in which it is situated. A non-conforming structure may not be moved to another lot or to another portion of the same lot except where such movement would be in compliance with all height, bulk, setback and landscaping requirements for the zone in which it is to be situated. 
B.  A non-conforming structure or building may be repaired or maintained, however it may not be demolished and replaced by a new non-conforming structure except as provided for in this section. 
C.  A non-conforming structure or building which is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion or natural disaster may be reconstructed, repaired, or rebuilt only to its previous floor area, cubical content and exterior appearance provided such reconstruction or rebuilding is commenced within 12 months of such damage. Changes to the exterior appearance of a building, may be permitted following approval of a site plan by the commission when the commission determines that such change is more compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. (Amended 11/19/12) 
    3.40.3. Non-conforming lots. 
A.  Any lot which does not conform to minimum area and frontage requirements for the current zone in which it is located shall be designated a non-conforming lot, providing such lot shall have been shown on map approved by the commission and filed in the office of the town clerk prior to the effective date of these regulations (January 31, 2002), or prior to the adoption of any amendment of these regulations, which would otherwise make such lot unlawful, provided also that the subdivision has not expired as set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations or ordinance of the Town of Enfield. 
B.  Only one single family dwelling and accessory buildings may be erected on a non-conforming lot located in a residential zone, except as stated below, provided all other requirements of the bulk standards of these regulations are complied with. The area or frontage of a non-conforming lot shall not be reduced. 
    3.40.4. Non-conforming uses. 
A.  Any use of a building, or lot which was legally in existence prior to the adoption of these regulations (January 31, 2002), or amendments thereto, and is not permitted within the zoning district in which it is located shall be designated a non-conforming use. Such use may continue subject to paragraphs B, C, and D below, or be changed only to a conforming use, or be modified in accordance with section 3.40.1.C. above, but shall not be extended or expanded except by special permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.40.1.D. 
This prohibition shall include but not be limited to the following: 
i.  The expansion of floor area, volume area or lot area dedicated to such non-conforming use; 
ii.  The expansion of operating hours of a non-conforming use which results in a change of nature of such use; and 
iii.  The addition of new facilities, equipment, products or services to a non-conforming use which results in a change of nature of such use. (Amended 5/9/2016) 
B.  No non-conforming use shall, if once changed to a conforming use, be changed back to such non-conforming use. 
C.  A building, or structure containing a non-conforming use, with the exception of a residential use in a business or industrial district, may be maintained or repaired provided no structural alterations are made. No such building or structure containing a non-conforming use shall be demolished and replaced by a new building or structure except where the use is changed to a conforming use or except as otherwise provided for in this section. 
D.  A building, or structure containing a non-conforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion or natural disaster may be reconstructed, repaired, or rebuilt only to its previous floor area, cubical content and exterior appearance provided such reconstruction or rebuilding is commenced within 12 months of such damage. Changes to the exterior appearance of a building may be permitted following approval of a site plan by the commission when the commission determines that such change is more compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. (Amended 11/19/12) 
E.  Structural alterations which do not materially alter the characteristics or exterior appearance of a building, containing a non-conforming use may be made provided that the total costs of such alterations do not exceed 50 percent of the assessed valuation of such building at the time it becomes non-conforming; 
F.  Structural alterations which alter the characteristics or exterior appearance of a building, containing a non-conforming use or alterations which exceed 50 percent of the assessed valuation of such building at the time it becomes non-conforming may be allowed provided a site plan is approved by the commission. 
    3.40.5. Abandonment (Amended 11/19/12). No non-conforming use which has been abandoned shall be thereafter resumed. A non-conforming use shall be considered abandoned when there is an actual cessation of such use coupled with the intent not to put the premises again to the same use. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 4.00. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of residential zoning districts is to encourage the construction of a variety of single family and other appropriate residential developments; to encourage the creative reuse of existing older buildings to meet the needs of Enfield's citizens; and to encourage quality residential development with adequate public services throughout the town. 
Section 4.10. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    The following table establishes the lot, yard, and bulk requirements for the residential zones. Except as herein otherwise provided, no lot shall have an area or width less than indicated in the table below. 
    Unless otherwise provided for in these regulations, only one principal building is permitted on a lot. A building may contain two dwelling units, except in the HR-33 Zone, where it may contain only one dwelling unit or in the MFHD, a building may contain up to ten dwelling units. 
    In addition, no building, accessory building, or structure - inclusive of any decks, porches, steps, or loading docks, decks, porches, or steps attached to or otherwise associated with such building or buildings - shall encroach upon the minimum setbacks front, side and rear yards indicated below, nor shall they cover a greater area nor shall they exceed in height the amount set forth in the following table. 
Table 4.10 Area and Bulk Requirements 
Minimum Lot and Area Requirements Maximum Requirements District Lot Area Frontage Setbacks Lot Width Density (dwelling units/acre) Coverage (building or structures) Impervious Coverage Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard R-33 33,000 s.f. 150 ft. 40 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 1.25 20% 35 ft. HR-33 33,000 s.f. 150 ft. 40 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 1.25 20% 35 ft. OS R-33 25,000 s.f. 125 ft. 35 ft. 1 20 ft. 40 ft. 150 ft. 1 2 20% 35 ft. R-33-Rear Lot 7 66,000 s.f. 25 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 150 ft. 1 15% 35 ft. R-44 44,000 s.f. 175 ft. 50 ft. 35 ft. 60 ft. 1 15% 35 ft. OS-44 33,000 s.f. 150 ft. 40 ft. 1 30 ft. 50 ft. 175 ft. 1 1.25 20% 35 ft. R-44-Rear Lot 8 88,000 s.f. 25 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 150 ft. 1 15% 35 ft. R-88 88,000 s.f. 175 ft. 50 ft. 35 ft. 60 ft. 0.5 10% 35 ft. OS R-88 44,000 s.f. 175 ft. 50 ft. 1 35 ft. 60 ft. 200 ft. 1 1 15% 35 ft. R-88-Rear Lot 9 132,000 s.f. 25 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 150 ft. 1 15% 35 ft. TVC 6 5,000 s.f. 10 50 ft. 10 ft. 2 0 3 10 ft. 4 5 85% 40 ft. MFHD 60 acres 11 175 1 50 ft. 12 35 ft. 12 50 ft. 12 10 13 30% 66% 35 ft. Note: Maximum story height in all zones is 21/2 stories, except in TVC where the maximum is 3 stories.  
4.10.1 Notes to Table 4.10-Area and Bulk Requirements 
1.  On existing street. 
2.  Commission may approve smaller front yard to achieve compatibility with adjacent structures. 
3.  If provided, must be at least four feet in depth; 20 feet if adjoining a building containing exclusively residential uses. 
4.  Rear yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet in depth if adjoining a building containing exclusively residential use or greater than 50 percent residential uses. 
5.  To be determined by commission. 
6.  Maximum front yard is 25 feet; minimum floor area for residences is 600 square feet. 
7.  Rear lots in single family open space subdivisions shall have a minimum lot size of 50,000 square feet. 
8.  Rear lots in single family open space subdivisions shall have a minimum lot size of 66,000 square feet. 
9.  Rear lots in single family open space subdivisions shall have a minimum lot size of 88,000 square feet. 
10.  Commission may reduce the minimum area to 4,500 square feet by special permit pursuant to section 4.10.4. (Added 4/19/10) 
11.  Only existing lots of 60 acres as of 8/1/12 are eligible. 
12.  Pursuant to article X, section 10.20, landscaping standards, paragraph B(i) buffer yards, the commission may require an "A" buffer yard when a special permit is being approved for such a lot abutting another lot in a residential district. An "A" buffer yard is 25 feet deep. Front, side and rear yard areas can be used to satisfy this buffer yard requirement. 
13.  Per developable acre (See definitions). 
    4.10.2. Cellar and foundation requirements. All buildings used for residential purposes shall have a full cellar and foundation beneath the finished floor area. The minimum height of the cellar shall be seven feet. Additions to the residential building, on slab-type construction or utilizing cellars with less than seven feet in height are permitted, but shall not exceed 50 percent of the original floor area of the building, excluding garages, porches, and breezeways. Portions of the building used for residential purposes which utilize a floor slab as a solar energy retention element of passive solar system may be exempt from the above requirement provided compliance with the intent of this section shall be determined by the commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, slab-type construction, without full cellar and foundation beneath the finished floor area, shall be permitted in the MFHD where each individual dwelling unit has a dedicated garage. 
    4.10.3. Special requirements for legal non-conforming lots under 33,000 square feet. 
A.  Any new construction on a legal non-conforming lot under 33,000 square feet of area developed prior to (effective date of these regulations) shall meet the following requirements: 
Minimum Front Yard: 35 feet Maximum Lot Coverage: 20% Minimum Yard Setbacks:  Front and Rear: 35 feet  Side: 10 feet Maximum Building Height: 35 feet and not to exceed 21/2 stories Minimum Total Finished Floor Area: 1,200 square feet Minimum Total First Floor Area in Two Story Building: 800 square feet  
B.  See also section 3.40 for general requirements for non-conforming uses, structures, and lots. 
    4.10.4. Reduction in lot size for Thompsonville Village Center district (Added 4/19/10). In the Thompsonville Village Center district (TVC) the commission may allow a minimum lot size of 4,500 square feet by special permit only subject to the requirements and criteria of section 9.20 and the following restrictions. 
A.  Any other subsections notwithstanding, only owner occupied single-family and duplex residences will be allowed on lots that are approved under this section. This restriction shall be noted on the mylar plan submitted for signature as well as in the conditions of the special use permit certificate. 
B.  The application shall address how the proposed design and use of the new building is consistent with the purpose of the Thompsonville Village Center zone and the guidelines contained in the appendix entitled, "Preserving a Community-Historic Rehabilitation Standards and Guidelines for the Village of Thompsonville," as may be amended from time to time. In addition to the architectural elevations required under section 9.10.2 of these zoning regulations, each application shall include a drawing at a scale no smaller than one-eighth inch equals one foot showing the following information: 
a.  Design type, style and color of materials for building façade and roof; 
b.  Details of window and door treatment; 
c.  Details and description of other architectural trim and features. 
Section 4.20. - Use requirements. 
    The following table establishes use requirements for residential districts. 

Table 4.20 
Use Table for Residential Districts 
Uses HR-33 R-33 R-44 R-88 TVC MFHD Accessory Apartments SP SP SP SP Agricultural Activities (1) SP SP SP SP Assisted Living Facilities SP SP SP Bed and Breakfast Inns, Boarding/Rooming Houses (2) SP SP SP SP SP Cemeteries SP SP SP SP Child and Adult Day Care Facilities SP SP SP SP R Commercial/Recreational Vehicles or Boats (3) A/SP A/SP A/SP A/SP A/SP Community Residences, Mentally Ill Adults R Community Residences, Mentally Retarded Persons R R R R R Continuing Care Retirement Communities SP SP SP SP Conversion of Buildings for Residential Use SP SP SP SP Duplex Residences SP SP SP R Family and Group Day Care Facilities (4) R R R R R Farms (5) R R R R Golf Courses (6) SP SP SP Governmental Buildings and Offices/Facilities (7) SP SP SP SP SP Helicopter Landing - Temporary (See Sec. 4.60.9) S/SP S/SP S/SP S/SP S/SP Home Occupations, Home Professional Offices (8) A/SP A/SP A/SP A/SP A/SP Housing for the Elderly SP SP SP Multi-family Residential Uses R SP Non-profit Homeless Shelters, Housing SP SP SP SP SP Non-profit Residential Housing SP SP SP SP SP Parking A A A A A Places of Worship SP SP SP SP SP Public Utility Buildings/Facilities SP SP SP SP SP Renting of Rooms to No More Than Two Guests (12) A A A A A Schools, Public and Private (9) SP SP SP SP SP Senior Residential Developments SP SP SP Single-Family Residences (10) R R R R R Solar Energy Systems, Small-Scale (13) A A A A A Swimming Pools A A A A A Tool, garden, and other out buildings (11) A A A A A Undertaking/Funeral Businesses SP Wireless Communications Facilities SP SP SP SP SP  
* Uses allowed by Right still require a Zoning Permit 
4.20.1 Notes to use table. 
(1)  Agricultural activities which require a special permit include: all processing or manufacturing of agricultural products, whether such products are grown on or off the premises; the storage of all agricultural products produced or grown off the premises; and roadside stands larger than 200 square feet in size, for the sale of any and all farm products, regardless of where the products are processed or manufactured. The majority of all products sold at the roadside stand must be raised or produced on the premises. For the purposes of this use, off the premises means that the growing and processing/storage of products takes place on property under different ownership than the property upon which the products are sold. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast inns, boarding houses and rooming houses must maintain the appearance of owner-occupied residential buildings. 
(3)  All/recreational vehicles must be stored inside garages or to the rear of the existing front building line. Commercial vehicles in residential districts are allowed only in accordance with section 3.30.13 of these regulations. (amended 11/25/03) 
(4)  New buildings and new or renovated landscaping shall conform to general standards of the surrounding neighborhood. When family day care facilities are proposed in buildings containing more than one dwelling unit, a special permit from the commission is required. 
(5)  All Farm buildings and uses, other than the growing of crops and raising of livestock, shall meet special permit standards. A farm stand of less than 200 square feet in size is permitted as of right; such farm stand shall be at least 20 feet from the street line and at least 100 feet from any intersection. Buildings used for the storage of agricultural products are an accessory use. Operating dairy farms may sell products raised or produced on such farms at farm stands or from buildings on the premises. Buildings used for the storage of motor vehicles and equipment used in the operation of the farm are permitted as an accessory use. The repair of such vehicles and equipment within buildings on the farm is permitted. Commercial piggeries, fur farms, goat farms and similar uses are prohibited. 
(6)  Restaurants with full liquor or beer and wine permits may be permitted by the commission, except in the HR-33 district, as an accessory use to a golf course. Such use shall require a special permit. Both the golf course and restaurant use shall be on the same parcel and under the same ownership. The use of any portion of the premises as a tavern, cocktail lounge, nightclub, or discotheque is prohibited. 
(7)  Only government offices and buildings for offices and public assembly are permitted in the Thompsonville Village Center zone. Other government facilities, even when owned by the town are not permitted in the Thompsonville Village Center zone. 
(8)  Home occupations/professional offices are accessory uses and shall not change the residential character of the building; shall be registered with the zoning enforcement officer; only residents are permitted to work on the premises; minimal customers may visit the business on a regular basis; if the operator of the home occupation/professional office wants to have non-residents employed on the premises, the zoning enforcement officer shall require that a special permit be approved by the commission, but in no instance shall more than two non-residents be employed on the premises; adequate on-site parking must be provided for employees and customers. See section 4.50.2 for specific standards. 
(9)  Private high schools are prohibited. 
(10)  Single family residential uses are allowed in the I-1, 1-2, and I-P districts by special permit. See Section 9.20. 
(11)  Excludes housing of poultry and livestock. 
(12)  Renting of rooms to no more than two guests is allowed only as an accessory use to a principal dwelling used by the owner as his or her dwelling and requires commission approval as a special permit. 
(13)  See section 8.80.1 for specific standards. 
Section 4.30. - Supplemental requirements for residential uses requiring a special permit, non-age restricted. 
    4.30.1. Bed and breakfast inn, boarding/rooming house. 
A.  The building, must retain its residential character. 
B.  No parking areas may be in the front yard and all parking areas must be screened from the street. 
C.  Cellar space may not be used as living space. Attic space may not be used as living space. 
D.  All exterior stairwells must be enclosed and may not be visible from the street. 
E.  The site must be served by both public sewer and public water. 
F.  A permit for the continued use of the building must be renewed annually by the zoning enforcement officer. 
    4.30.2. Conversion of buildings for residential purposes. 
A.  Existing buildings may be converted from one-family residential or from other use buildings to two-, three-, or four-family buildings with a minimum building size of 1,600 square feet of floor area after the conversion. 
B.  The gross ground floor area on the lot does not exceed 25 percent lot coverage after the conversion. 
C.  Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 600 square feet of floor area after the conversion, provided, however, that the conversion shall result in not more than one additional dwelling unit per lot, nor more than two bedrooms in each additional dwelling unit 
D.  The conversion shall have a minimal impact on traffic in the neighborhood. The commission shall make a finding that: 
i.  Two parking spaces per dwelling unit have been provided; 
ii.  All state and town codes and regulations have been met in undertaking the conversion; 
iii.  The exterior architectural style and appearance of the building and lot have been maintained; and 
iv.  The square footage of the dwelling unit(s) to be added to an existing building shall not exceed 75 percent of the gross square footage of the original existing building. 
E.  All exterior stairwells shall be enclosed. 
F.  Additional cellar space does not have to be provided if the existing building has a cellar meeting the zoning regulations standards and free and clear access to that cellar is available, and that a distinct portion of that cellar, at least 25 percent of the total cellar floor area, is set aside for the new dwelling unit. 
G.  Conversion of existing non-residential buildings, such as industrial and/or mill buildings to multi-family dwellings may take place under this section. The requirements of sections B and C above may be waived for such conversions. 
    4.30.3. Duplex residences. 
A.  Only one building is permitted on a lot. 
B.  The density shall not exceed the existing density of all lots within 500 feet of the subject lot. Only lots with certificates of occupancy shall be considered when making density calculations. All lands used as or reserved for public right-of-ways shall be deducted from the 500 feet calculations. All buildings for which applications for conversion are made shall be legally occupied for residential purposes. 
C.  At least half of the lots abutting the subject lot shall contain at least one building having at least two dwelling units with certificates of occupancy. 
    4.30.4. Non-profit homeless shelters/housing. 
A.  The property shall be designed and landscaped so as to maintain the property's architectural compatibility with surrounding development and the neighborhood. The commission shall determine such compatibility. 
B.  All parking areas shall be designed and landscaped to maintain the residential character of the property. 
C.  A non-profit homeless shelter/housing facility shall be separated from any other such facility by a distance of at least 2,000 feet. 
    4.30.5. Renting of rooms to not more than two guests. 
A.  Rooms for rental shall not be in a cellar area. 
B.  Meals may be provided. 
C.  Off-street parking shall be provided. 
D.  The single family residential character of the building shall be maintained 
Section 4.40. - Supplemental requirements for residential uses requiring a special permit, age restricted. 
    4.40.1. Assisted living facilities. 
A.  Assisted living facilities must meet the following area and bulk requirements: 
Minimum Lot Area: 10 acres Maximum Density: R-33 10/acre R-44 8/acre Maximum Lot Coverage: 25% Minimum Yard Setbacks:  Front: 60 feet  Side and Rear: 50 feet Maximum Building Height: 35 feet Minimum Gross Floor Area: Studio/Efficiency: 450 square feet 1  One Bedroom: 525 square feet  Two or more Bedrooms: 700 square feet  
1 Studio/efficiency: If all the units in a building are studio/efficiency units and the residence management, as part of its core services, provides three meals a day in a communal dining room to all the occupants, the gross minimum floor area may be reduced by 150 square feet to 300 square feet. 
B.  Age Restrictions: Residents shall be at least 62 years old, and in the case of multiple occupancy of a unit, one person shall be at least 62 years old and the other resident shall be at least 55 years old. The commission may require that the owner/management annually report to the commission (zoning enforcement officer) on compliance with this standard. 
C.  The development shall contain appropriate accessory uses as determined by the commission. 
D.  The site shall be served by both public sewer and public water. 
E.  No assisted living facility shall be converted in any degree to a senior residential development. 
F.  An assisted living facility may be a stand-alone facility or part of a continuing care facility. 
G.  Each dwelling unit shall have an emergency call/intercom system connected to a central station staffed 24 hours/day. 
H.  Each dwelling unit shall have a full bathroom consisting of at least one toilet, one sink, and one shower, all handicapped accessible. 
I.  Each dwelling unit shall have a mini-kitchen consisting of at least a refrigerator and a microwave oven. 
J.  Outdoor recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, landscaped walking trails and community gardens (flower and vegetable), shall be provided. 
    4.40.2. Continuing care communities. 
A.  Continuing care communities shall meet the following area and bulk requirements: 
Minimum Lot Area: 30 acres Maximum Density R-33 5/acre; R-44 3/acre Total Maximum Lot Coverage: 25% Minimum Yard Setbacks:  Front: 60 feet  Side and Rear: 50 feet Maximum Building Height: 35 feet Minimum Floor Area:  Studio/Efficiency: 600 square feet  One Bedroom: 800 square feet  Two or more Bedrooms: 1,000 square feet  
B.  Age restrictions. (Amended 8/15/05) 
i.  Occupants shall be at least 55 years old, and in case of multiple occupancy of a dwelling unit, at least one resident shall be at least 55 years old and all other residents at least 50 years old. 
ii.  Age restrictions shall be part of every sales or rental contract. 
iii.  The age restriction requirements shall be included within the declaration of common interest community for each development. 
iv.  The commission may require that the owner/management annually report to the commission through the zoning enforcement officer on compliance with these standards. 
C.  The development may contain appropriate accessory uses. 
D.  All dwelling units shall be individual dwelling units in detached, semidetached, or attached buildings. 
E.  Facilities may include an extended health care facility, congregate housing, and other facilities and uses determined to be appropriate by the commission. 
F.  The site shall be served by both public sewer and public water. 
G.  Sidewalks shall be provided throughout the interior of the site. 
H.  All community facilities, as required by the commission, shall be completed and ready for use prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling units. All community facilities must be maintained continuously, thereafter. The declaration of common interest community, the by-laws of any resident association formed, and a deed restriction placed on the town land records in the office of the town clerk, shall prohibit the elimination of any community facilities without the commission granting permission to do so prior to said elimination. 
I.  Each dwelling unit shall have an emergency call/intercom system connected to a central station staffed 24 hours/day. 
J.  Outdoor recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, landscaped walking trails and community gardens (flower and vegetable), shall be provided. 
K.  If built, the extended health facility shall have a minimum of 60 beds but a total not to exceed 30 percent of the total number of units in the facility. 
L.  No continuing care facility shall be converted in any degree to a senior residential development. 
    4.40.3. Housing for the elderly. 
A.  Housing for the elderly shall meet the following area and bulk requirements: 
Minimum Lot Area: 21/2 acres Maximum Density: 16 Dwelling Units/acre Maximum Lot Coverage: 25% Minimum Yard Setbacks:  Front: 60 feet  Side and Rear: 50 feet Maximum Building Height: 35 feet and not to exceed 21/2 stories Minimum Floor Area:  Studio/Efficiency: 600 square feet  One Bedroom: 800 square feet  Two Bedrooms: 1,000 square feet  
B.  The use of property as a housing for the elderly development shall be guaranteed in perpetuity by deed restrictions, approved as to both form and content by the town attorney, and recorded in the office of the town clerk. All deed restrictions and approvals of both the special permit and site plan approvals also shall be recorded in the appropriate records of the commission. 
C.  Such approvals shall terminate only upon the approval by the Commission of the demolition of the development or the approval of a change in use of the property. 
D.  The development may contain appropriate accessory uses. 
E.  Outdoor recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, landscaped walking trails and community gardens (flower and vegetable), shall be provided. All such areas shall be handicapped accessible. 
F.  Maximum density permitted is 16 dwelling units per acre. 
G.  Public sewer and public water shall serve the site. 
H.  The Commission may increase building height by not more than 40 percent, or one and one-half stories, or may decrease the minimum gross unit floor area, exclusive of common areas, by no more than 33 percent upon a finding by the commission that such a change is compatible with the neighborhood and promotes the health and safety of the residents. 
I.  In addition to the requirements set forth in subsections A through G., inclusive herein, in evaluating non-subsidized, privately owned, housing for the elderly, the commission shall determine that the proposed development meets the special permit criteria in article IX, as well as the specific criteria set forth in 4.70.3 (i)-(ix). (Added 11/01/08) 
J.  Age restrictions: (Added 11/01/08) 
i.  Occupants shall be at least 62 years old, and in case of multiple occupancy of a dwelling unit, at least one resident shall be at least 62 years old and all other residents at least 50 years old. 
ii.  Age restrictions shall be part of every rental contract. 
iii.  The commission may require that the owner/management annually report to the commission through the zoning enforcement officer on compliance with these standards. 
iv.  The use and occupancy of such a development shall be secured by a deed restriction. Up to ten percent of the units may be occupied by families with handicapped members, regardless of the age of family members. 
    4.40.4. Senior residential developments (SRD). 
A.  Senior residential developments shall meet the following area and bulk requirements 
Minimum Lot Area: 10 acres Maximum Density: R-33: 3/developable acre R-44: 2/developable acre R-88: 1/developable acre Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage: R-33: 40% R-44: 30% R-88: 25% Maximum Building Height: 24 feet Minimum Floor Area: 900 square feet 2  
2 Exclusive of all halls and bathrooms. 
B.  Age restrictions: 
i.  Occupants shall be at least 55 years old, and, in the case of multiple occupancy, a spouse must be of similar age. 
ii.  A surviving spouse may retain occupancy. 
iii.  A resident whose spouse has entered into a long-term continuing care facility may retain occupancy. 
iv.  When a remaining spouse remarries or cohabits, the other occupant shall meet all of the above age restrictions. 
v.  One child 21 years of age or older may reside with his or her parent(s). 
C.  Occupancy is limited to three people. 
D.  Home occupations/professional offices may be approved by the ZEO following the standards and procedures of these regulations. 
E.  All SRDs shall be common interest ownership communities as defined in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. 
F.  All SRDs shall [be] served by both public water and public sewers. 
G.  The minimum distance between dwelling units shall be 30 feet. 
H.  Streets within a SRD may be public or private. In either case, all streets shall be constructed to the standards of the "Technical Subdivision Regulations" of the town. The commission may waive such standards in the same manner as provided for in the technical subdivision regulations. 
I.  At least one of the required parking spaces for each unit shall be provided within an attached garage that shall be directly accessible from within the unit. A minimum of 25 percent of the units shall accommodate a two car attached garage. All unit driveways shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length. 
J.  Each dwelling unit shall have a full basement. 
K.  Buildings shall be of a design and use building materials that are compatible with a single-family residential character and design. 
L.  Buildings containing dwelling units (including deck and porches) shall conform to the following standards: 
i.  Be no closer than 25 feet to private streets or parking areas; 
ii.  Be no closer than 30 feet to other residential buildings; 
iii.  Be no closer than ten feet to accessory buildings; and 
iv.  Be no closer than 50 feet to an exterior lot line. 
M.  All proposed accessory buildings shall be shown on the plans submitted and shall observe the following standards: 
i.  Be no closer than 25 feet to a development's main streets; 
ii.  Be no closer than ten feet to cul-de-sacs or parking areas except all driveways shall be at; least 20 feet in length; 
iii.  Be no closer than ten feet to other accessory buildings; 
iv.  All accessory buildings, other than garages, shall be located in the rear yard behind the back line of the principal building; and 
v.  Be no closer than ten feet from any property line. 
N.  Buffer yards, as detailed in article X, shall be provided as follows: 
i.  When an exclusive use area is equal to or exceeds 75 percent of the minimum lot area for the underlying zone, no buffer yards shall be required; and 
ii.  When the exclusive use area is less than 75 percent of the minimum lot area for the underlying zone an "A" buffer yard shall be provided between the SRD and any adjoining single family residential buildings. 
O.  Units shall be owner-occupied with the following exceptions: 
i.  A non-resident may purchase and/or own a unit provided that a family member or family members occupy the unit, limited to a parent, child or legal ward, whom meet the residency requirements set forth above; 
ii.  A unit may be leased for a term of not more than one-year to a tenant or tenants who are not members of the owner's family provided that the tenant or tenants meet the residency requirements set forth above, and provided that the unit owner(s): 
a.  Occupied the dwelling unit immediately prior to the commencement of the lease term; and 
b.  Intends to immediately re-occupy the dwelling unit upon the end of the lease period; and 
iii.  All such leases shall be reported to the office of the director of planning. 
P.  There shall be a minimum set aside of open space equal to 2,500 square feet per unit. Areas with greater than 15 percent slope or wetlands soils as identified by a certified soils scientist shall not count toward meeting this minimum requirement. Any undeveloped areas that are used for determining permitted density shall be reserved for open space or recreational purposes approved by the Commission. 
Q.  A walking trail system may be provided within the proposed development. Unpaved walking trails may be counted as open space. 
R.  Sidewalks and curbing shall be as required by the town's technical subdivision regulations. These standards may be waived or altered by the commission by three-quarters vote. 
S.  Management plan: A management plan shall be submitted along with the SRD site plan as a requirement of the special permit. This management plan shall describe, to the satisfaction of the commission, that the dwellings shall be owned and shall be conveyed only to persons aged 55 years or older, subject to the age restrictions and exceptions set forth above; and that the maintenance and repair of the exterior of dwellings, in developments in which the unit is defined as including exterior walls, roofs, decks and other exterior features, shall be enforced by covenant, deed restriction or other similar instrument; and that the perpetual maintenance and replacement of commonly-owned facilities and property shall be guaranteed. In addition, the management plan shall provide a detailed description of the schedule, responsibility, and financial plan for providing the following: 
i.  Operation and maintenance of commonly owned utilities such as water and wastewater treatment systems. 
ii.  Operation of community services such as refuse collection and the community building, if any. 
iii.  Maintenance of grounds, streets and driveways, storm water drainage system, signage, and roadway illumination system. 
iv.  Maintenance of individual dwellings, storage of motor vehicles and trailers, placement of temporary structures, and general external housekeeping. 
Any subsequent changes to the terms of the management plan shall require the commission's approval as an amendment to the approved special permit. 
T.  Criteria for evaluation and decision making: In evaluating a proposed SRD, the commission shall consider and shall base their decisions on all evidence presented to it at public hearing, their own knowledge of the site, data submitted by the applicant, information provided by the public, and data and analysis provided to the commission by the town staff consisting of at least the director of planning, director of public works, fire marshal and traffic safety officer. The commission will utilize this information to determine compliance to the following specific criteria for SRD as well as the general considerations for special permits found in article X: 
i.  The proposed development is found consistent with the standards of the special residential developments found above, and with the standards of the SRD Regulations found above 
ii.  The SRD shall be screened from all abutting streets, single family buildings, and town lands by the use of existing land forms or vegetation, by supplemental plantings, adequate setbacks and/or sensitive and compatible building design. 
iii.  The proposed development of the SRD is such that it does not have a negative impact and becomes a compatible land use to the surrounding existing development and/or potential surrounding future development. 
U.  Effect on prior planned residential development (PRD) approvals: Any planned residential development existing or under construction as of the date of these amendments shall be maintained in accordance with any conditions of approval and the regulations existing at the time of their approval. Any changes to any previously approved PRDs shall require a special permit from the commission. 
Section 4.50. - Requirements for accessory uses and accessory structures. 
    4.50.1. Accessory buildings (see section 3.30.7). 
    4.50.2. Commercial vehicles (see section 3.30.13). 
    4.50.3. Fences (see section 3.30.6). 
    4.50.4 Garage or tag sales (Added 5/14/12). Garage or tag sales on residential properties are subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Sales shall be limited to a maximum of four occurrences per year, per address. 
B.  Each occurrence shall not exceed three days in duration. 
C.  Hours of operation shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
D.  Products shall not be displayed within the street right-of-way. 
E.  All signs advertising garage or tag sales must be legally placed and removed within 24 hours of event completion. 
F.  All products shall be removed from view within 24 hours of event completion. 
G.  Goods offered for sale shall consist of unwanted household items previously used by the homeowner or other participating households only. No goods shall be brought to the premises that have been specifically purchased for resale. 
H.  The Town of Enfield Police Department reserves the right to prohibit or cease the operation of any garage or tag sale that presents a public safety problem. 
I.  This section is not intended to limit the duration or frequency of sales, bazaars, or auctions sponsored by religious, fraternal and other non-profit organizations for the purpose of fund-raising. 
    4.50.5. Home occupations/home professional offices. 
A.  If no changes to the property are required, including any increase in the arrangements for or layout of parking areas, and only residents of the premises are employed, the office of the director of planning and/or the zoning enforcement officer may approve home occupations/home professional offices. Such approvals shall be reported to the commission monthly. 
B.  If any persons who are not residents of the building are employed, a special permit is required. 
C.  Under no circumstances shall more than two non-residents be employed. 
D.  All parking areas providing three or more spaces must be paved and landscaped as required by article 10. 
E.  The office of the director of planning shall determine design and construction standards for all parking areas. 
F.  Not more than 25 percent of the residential structure shall be used for business purposes. 
G.  The residential character of the building shall be maintained. 
H.  Customer visits and deliveries by any trucks shall be kept to a minimum. 
I.  Such uses shall be limited to the primary building on the lot except as may be allowed under the provisions of subsection J. below. 
J.  Pet grooming may be permitted as a home occupation by special use permit subject to the general standards for home occupations as set forth in sections A through I, inclusive, above and the following additional standards: (Added 1/01/08; Amended 5/20/13) 
i.  The residential lot on which the home occupation is to be conducted shall have a minimum lot area of one and one-half acres. 
ii.  Any wastewater from the proposed use shall be discharged into the town sewer system subject to approval from the water pollution control division. 
iii.  The water supply to the use shall be equipped with a backflow prevention device. 
iv.  No more than four animals may be serviced per day. 
v.  No overnight kenneling shall be allowed. 
vi.  No signage may be allowed. 
vii.  Hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday with no Sunday hours. 
viii.  If the proposed use is to be located in an accessory structure, such structure shall be located at least 50 feet from the nearest neighboring residential building. 
K.  (Effective 5/20/13) Yard maintenance services are permitted as a home occupation subject to the general standards for home occupations set forth in sections A through I, inclusive, above and the following additional requirements: 
i.  All storage and maintenance of tools and equipment must be inside the dwelling or inside an accessory structure. 
ii.  All storage and maintenance of any products including, but not limited to, fertilizer, lime, mulch and the like, must be inside the dwelling or inside an accessory structure. 
iii.  Only one commercial vehicle may be kept on the property, subject to the standards of section 3.30.13. 
iv.  Only one trailer may be kept on the property provided it is located no closer to the front property line than the front wall of the residence and does not exceed a length of 12 feet. The trailer shall contain no advertising. 
v.  The property shall not be used as a staging or parking area for carpooling or for collecting tools and equipment. 
vi.  All tools and equipment used by the yard maintenance service shall be limited to those typically used for yard maintenance work performed on residential properties. 
vii.  Yard maintenance services are prohibited as a home occupation on any properties located within an aquifer protection area. 
L.  (Effective 5/20/13) Contractors may obtain a home professional office permit subject to the standards set forth in sections A through I, inclusive, above, and to the following additional requirements: 
i.  The activity shall be conducted strictly as a home professional office only; 
ii.  Contractor home occupations are limited to employees who reside at the home. Notwithstanding Table 4.20, Note (8), no other employees are allowed on the property. The property shall not serve as a meeting or gathering point in the course of business activities; 
iii.  No building or other materials associated with the home-based business shall be stored or accumulated on the property. This shall include any debris or refuse generated as a result of the business activity. 
iv.  All equipment and tools shall be stored indoors. No heavy equipment shall be stored on the property except those tools and machinery normally used on a residential property. Heavy equipment includes, but is not limited to, dump trucks, trailers and trailer-mounted equipment, "bobcats", backhoes, and scaffolding. 
v.  Only one commercial vehicle may be kept on the lot subject to the standards of section 3.30.13. 
    4.50.6. Recreational vehicles and recreational trailers (see section 3.30.9). 
    4.50.7. Swimming pools. 
A.  Swimming pools may be installed in any district as an accessory to a dwelling unit for private uses of the owners or occupants of such dwelling (s) and their families and guests. 
B.  Swimming pools shall only be built in the rear yard of the lot, or in that portion of the side yard that lies at least 50 feet from any street line. 
C.  Swimming pools shall be at least five feet from the rear and side property lines of the lot, or in the case of a corner lot, at least 25 feet from any property line abutting a street. 
D.  Swimming pools shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the area of the rear yard excluding all garages and other accessory structures occupying such rear yard. 
E.  Notwithstanding the language of subsections B., C., and D., above, in-ground swimming pools located within the interior of a principal residential structure shall be considered an integral component of that structure. The portion of the principal building containing an in-ground swimming pool shall not be considered an accessory structure. Only the portion of the building containing the in-ground swimming pool and equipment necessary for the use and maintenance of the in-ground swimming pool and subsurface areas necessary for the lateral support of the swimming pool shall be exempt from the requirements of section 4.10.2 specifically concerning the requirement for cellars. Principal residential structure containing an in-ground swimming pool, together with any improvements and spaces related to the pool, shall be subject to the area and bulk requirements of section 4.10. (Effective date 2/10/2015) 
    4.50.8. Storage containers (see section 3.30.14). 
    4.50.9. Solar installations (see section 8.80). 
    4.50.10. Temporary conversions to allow accessory apartments. (Added 4/3/13 - Amended 7/25/13). In HR-33, R-33, R-44 and R-88 Districts, the Commission may allow by Special Use Permit the temporary conversion of a single-family dwelling to incorporate one accessory apartment in order to provide for the temporary housing needs of members of an extended family. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this section is to: 
i.  Provide a process to assist family members desiring to address the housing and social needs of extended family members, among them the elderly and the disabled; 
ii.  Provide an alternate housing arrangement, which can adequately and comfortably house elderly and disabled extended family members in a non-institutional manner; 
iii.  Promote stronger family ties by providing living arrangements for extended family members; 
iv.  Reduce the necessity for public agencies to provide housing and support services when extended family members are able and willing to provide same; and 
v.  Establish a procedure to minimize potential impacts from accessory apartment conversions on abutting single-family uses. 
B.  Conditions. The following conditions shall be the minimum applied to all special use permits approved under this section. 
i.  The applicant shall provide a site plan, floor plan, and building elevations in sufficient detail as required by the commission to evaluate the request for an accessory apartment. 
ii.  The lot of the single-family unit shall conform to the minimum area requirements of the underlying district except that pre-existing non-conforming lots must have a minimum of 17,000 square feet of area. 
iii.  At the time of application and every two years subsequent to the date of approval, the applicant shall present an affidavit to the town, executed by the property owner(s), swearing or attesting that: 
a.  The owner will continue to reside on the premises; and 
b.  The occupant(s) of both units are related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
iv.  The commission shall determine that the accessory apartment can be easily integrated back into the single-family dwelling upon expiration or termination of the special use. 
v.  The accessory apartment shall be clearly subordinate in size to the single-family dwelling with a minimum finished floor area of 400 square feet and a maximum of 750 square feet. 
vi.  Except when approved within a proposed new single-family home, the accessory apartment shall meet the following floor area requirements: 
a.  Any accessory apartment to be located within the existing single-family dwelling shall not result in the finished floor area for the existing single-family dwelling to be less than 800 square feet after conversion. 
b.  When an accessory apartment cannot be accommodated entirely within the existing single-family dwelling in accordance with subsection (a), the accessory apartment may include additional finished floor area not to exceed 750 square feet. 
c.  For existing single-family dwellings that exceed a finished floor area of 1,600 square feet, the commission shall not approve applications under this section that include greater than 150 square feet of additional finished floor area. 
d.  For the purposes of this section, an attached garage shall be considered existing finished floor area when converted to an accessory apartment. 
e.  For any additional finished floor area to be permitted the lot must be able to meet the applicable coverage requirements of the underlying district without the need for a variance. 
vii.  No additional entrances shall be located on any wall plane facing any street. 
viii.  No additional mailbox or mail slot shall be provided for the accessory apartment. 
ix.  In addition to the additional finished floor area permitted in subsection v. above, an existing attached garage may be used for conversion to an accessory apartment. 
x.  The accessory apartment shall have safe and convenient access to the outside. 
xi.  The lot must be served by public water and sewer. The commission may waive the requirements for connection to sewer and water lines upon a favorable report from the North Central District Health Department. 
xii.  The commission may waive or modify any parking requirements or standards in these regulations for the accessory apartment, based on the specific circumstances surrounding each application. The number of off-street exterior parking spaces shall not exceed four. 
xiii.  Upon written notice of termination of the special use by the zoning enforcement officer due to failure to comply with the occupancy requirements of subsection iii. above, the accessory apartment shall be removed within 120 days. The removal of all kitchen appliances and fixtures, and the utility lines and pipes servicing them, or the permanent and safe cutting and/or capping of these lines and pipes to the satisfaction of the building official and zoning enforcement officer shall constitute removal of the accessory apartment. The zoning enforcement officer may allow the removal of the pre-existing kitchen instead of the kitchen in the accessory apartment. 
xiv.  The special use shall terminate upon the death(s) or relocation(s) of all qualifying occupant(s) of either unit (i.e. the owners and/or their relatives) or upon transfer of title to the property to a non-qualifying household or other entity. This condition shall appear on the special use permit that must be filed on the land records. 
xv.  The applicant shall sign an agreement stipulating agreement with provisions of this section regarding the termination of the special use and the removal of the accessory apartment. 
    4.50.11. Trailers-Temporary living quarters (see section 3.30.11). 
Section 4.60. - Requirements for non-residential uses in residential zones. 
    4.60.1. Adult and child day care facilities. 
A.  Must be licensed by the state. 
B.  Parking areas and drop-off and pickup areas must provide direct access from cars to building, in a safe manner and be built so as not to cause cars to use the street as queuing area. 
C.  All outdoors and play areas must be fenced. 
D.  If a single-family residential building is used as adult and child day care facility, the building and lot must maintain their residential character. 
E.  All outdoor play areas shall be screened in such a manner so as to insure visual and auditory privacy to adjacent property owners. 
F.  May be permitted as an accessory use to a special permit use. 
    4.60.2. Agricultural activities and farms. 
A.  All farm buildings, except for farm stands, shall be at least 100 feet from the street line and from all residential buildings under separate ownership. 
B.  All farm stands shall be at least 20 feet from the street line and at least 100 feet from any intersection. 
C.  All farm stands larger than 200 square feet in area shall require a special permit. 
    4.60.3. Cemeteries. 
A.  Two acre minimum site. 
B.  All required parking must be provided on-site. 
C.  When cemetery properties are enlarged, whether for immediate or future use, buffer yards meeting the standards of a "C" buffer yard as specified in section 10.10 shall be provided where such expansion is adjacent to a property in residential use. 
D.  No burial plots shall be within 35 feet of a property line. 
    4.60.4. Golf courses. 
A.  Golf courses shall have a minimum of nine holes and shall be a minimum 2,750 yards in length. 
B.  Restaurants with a restaurant liquor permit may be permitted by the commission, except in the HR-33 district, as an accessory use by a special permit. Both the golf course and the restaurant shall be located on the same lot. 
C.  Use of any portion of the premises as a tavern, cocktail lounge, nightclub or discotheque is prohibited. 
D.  All parking shall be provided on site. 
    4.60.5. Places of Worship. 
A.  All required parking shall be provided on-site or off-site as provided in article X, section 10.10, table 10.10 of these regulations. 
B.  All parking areas shall be landscaped as provided in article X, sections 10.10.6 parking design, layout and location, 10.10.7, parking area setbacks and landscaping standards, and in 10.20 landscaping standards. 
    4.60.6. Schools, private and public. 
A.  All required parking shall be provided on-site or off-site as provided in article X, section 10.10, off-street parking and loading regulations and table 10.2. 
B.  Private high schools are prohibited. 
    4.60.7 Temporary helicopter landings (Approved 4/22/04). The planning and zoning commission may allow the temporary landing and takeoff of a helicopter in a residential zone in conjunction with a special event sponsored by the municipality or a non-profit community organization. Any person or organization proposing such an event shall file an application with the commission with a map or plot plan showing where the landing will occur together with a narrative plan indicating the proposed purpose of the event, its duration, and the safety measures that will be employed. No public hearing will be held unless the commission finds that the particular circumstances of the application warrant a special permit. 
    4.60.8. Undertaking/funeral businesses. 
A.  Undertaking/funeral businesses shall be located on lots having a minimum of three acres area. 
    4.60.9. Wireless communications facilities. 
A.  Buildings and grounds shall conform to the general style of architecture and landscaping in the adjacent neighborhood. 
B.  Each principal building shall be constructed on a lot containing the minimum frontage and lot area required in the applicable district. 
C.  Buildings shall conform to all bulk standards. 
D.  Other specific site plan requirements for wireless communications facilities are found in article VIII, special regulations. 
    4.60.10. Chickens/fowl on residential properties. (Added 04/05/18) 
    4.60.10.1. Statement of purpose. It is the intent of this section to allow for the keeping of domestic chickens/fowl in residential areas for the sole use and enjoyment of the residents of the lot on which such chickens/fowl are kept and not for commercial purposes. It is also the intent of this section to protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of residents by limiting the number of chickens/fowl that can be kept in order to protect the quality of life of the surrounding neighborhood. 
    4.60.10.2. Locations allowed. The keeping of chickens/fowl is allowed as an accessory use on any lot which is at least one-quarter acre (10,890 square feet) in size in single ownership, located in a residential zone, and which contains a detached single-family home. 
    4.60.10.3. Number and type of chickens allowed. No more than six chickens/fowl of any breed may be kept on residentially zoned properties of at least one-quarter acre in size. Six additional chickens/fowl may be kept on properties for each additional acre for properties greater than one acre as indicated in the table below. Roosters are prohibited on properties less than three acres. 
Number of Chickens or Fowl < 1/4 acre Not Allowed 1/4 acre up to 1 acre 6 > 1 acre up to 2 acres 12 > 2 acres up to 3 acres 18 = 3 acres Farm 
Table 4.20 Use Table for Residential Districts  
    4.60.10.4. Limitations. The keeping of chickens/fowl shall be for personal or household use only and the owner of the chickens/fowl must be a resident of the dwelling situated on the lot where they are kept. The chickens/fowl shall be kept to the owner's property at all times and shall not be permitted to roam onto adjacent properties. A building or enclosure is required for housing the chickens/fowl (i.e. chicken coop including chicken tractors or henhouse). Audible predator alarms are prohibited on properties less than five acres. 
    4.60.10.5. Buildings housing chickens/fowl and fenced enclosures. Any building or enclosure used for housing chickens/fowl and associated fenced enclosures shall be located behind the rear line of the house and be at least ten feet from side and rear property lines, and at least 25 feet from any residential dwelling on adjoining property. 
    4.60.10.6. Applicable authorities. All chickens/fowl shall be kept in a manner that conforms to all applicable regulations of the public health code, the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), CT Department of Agriculture, and CT General Statutes. 
    4.60.10.7. Odor and waste. The property owner will maintain the chicken/fowl environment in such a manner as not to create a nuisance to adjoining properties due to odor and waste. 
    4.60.10.8. Roosters. Roosters are limited to farms greater than or equal to three acres. 
    4.60.10.9. Number of chickens on farms. The number of chickens and fowl allowed on properties designated as farms will be determined by the submission of a site plan for any amount greater than 150. 
Section 4.70. - Special residential developments. 
    Special residential developments, which include single family open space subdivisions, senior residential developments (SRD), multifamily housing district (MFHD) and rear lots, due to their unique nature as alternate types of single family residential developments, require a more intensive review by the commission. Therefore, a procedure with an additional level of review applies to all applications for such types of development. In addition to the materials normally required for special permits (article IX) the procedures in this section shall also apply: 
    4.70.1. Special procedures. 
A.  Administrative review team: The applicant shall submit all proposals for special residential developments to the administrative review team, through the office of the director of planning, prior to the submission of an application for informal review by the commission. The director of planning shall report the findings of the administrative review team to the commission. 
B.  Informal review by the commission: The applicant shall submit all proposals for special residential developments to the commission for an informal review prior to the official submission of an application. 
    4.70.2. Submission requirements. 
A.  Following the above informal reviews, a special permit application shall be submitted to the commission that includes all the information contained in the relevant sections of Article IX, Site Plan and Special permit standards and procedures. In addition, all applications for special residential developments shall include all of the information listed in paragraphs B, C, and D below. The specific requirements of paragraphs B, C, and D are mandatory for all developments of 25 or more units. However, the commission may require such information for any special residential developments application regardless of the number of units proposed, when in their opinion it is necessary for the proper evaluation of the proposal. 
B.  In addition to the data required for the zoning data table - site plans in article IX, section 9.10.2.B, the following shall be included: 
i.  A listing of the locations of all areas set aside as open space/recreation space and the size of each area in square feet and acres of open space/recreation space; 
ii.  Names of all school districts, fire district, water company; and 
iii.  Number of proposed buildings, units and bedrooms. 
C.  Traffic analysis: A traffic study shall by submitted by a licensed engineer who qualifies as a member of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) for all special residential developments containing 25 or more residential units that shall include the following: 
i.  Average daily traffic (ADT) on streets providing access to the development site, including a.m. and p.m. peak periods; 
ii.  Intersection turning movement analyses for all intersections likely to be impacted by the development; 
iii.  Inventory of the characteristics of the roadway network in the vicinity of the development including number of lanes, sidewalks, traffic control devices, condition of improvements, and any other inventory information requested by the town or commission; 
iv.  Estimated trip generation of proposed development with ADT, with AM and PM peak periods; 
v.  Estimated directional split of new trips; 
vi.  Projected traffic counts on existing street system following development of project showing ADT, AM and PM peak periods; 
vii.  Project impacts on "levels of service" (LOS) at existing and proposed intersections and roadway and intersection capacities; and 
viii.  A statement identifying necessary street system and traffic control improvements needed as a result of the developments impact on surrounding streets and relevant intersections. 
D.  Impact analysis: An impact analysis shall be submitted for all special residential developments containing 25 or more residential units showing the anticipated impacts of the proposed development on the town, fiscal and otherwise, including impacts on school capacity by school, public safety services, emergency service requirements, public utilities, recreation facilities, and any other potential demands for municipal services. 
E.  Site plan data: In addition to the requirements of section IX, site plans, submitted site plans shall show the following: 
i.  Areas of steep slope (15 percent or greater); 
ii.  Soil types as defined by the Hartford County Soil Survey; 
iii.  Significant vegetation including, but not limited to major tree lines; edge of vegetation; specimen trees; and wooded areas by major species; 
iv.  Identification of significant views from the site; 
v.  Identification of significant negative noise/visual impacts affecting the site; 
vi.  Significant natural or manmade features on the site; 
vii.  Abutting buildings and land uses surrounding the site identifying potential views and possible impacts and/or opportunities; and 
viii.  Composite map showing land worthy of being preserved in a natural state and land capable of development. 
    4.70.3. Special residential development criteria. 
A.  During the review of all special residential development proposals, the commission shall determine that the proposed development meets the special permit criteria in article IX, as well as the following specific criteria: 
i.  The proposed plan is in harmony with the purpose of the zoning regulations; 
ii.  The proposed plan is in harmony with the goals and objectives of the Enfield Plan of Conservation and Development; 
iii.  The site's significant natural features are preserved in their natural state to the greatest extent possible by limiting excessive grading and tree and soil removal; 
iv.  The character of the neighborhood will be maintained or enhanced; 
v.  Any proposed open space is of the size, design and quality to be of recreational value to the existing neighborhood as well as to the residents of the proposed development; except in the MFHD, any proposed open space is of the size, design and quality to be of recreational value to the residents of the multifamily housing development only, unless said open space is deeded to the Town of Enfield or any other entity as directed by the commission; 
vi.  The scale and massing of buildings are compatible with those prevalent in the neighborhood particularly in relation to abutting single-family dwellings; 
vii.  Buildings and site layout permit easy access by public safety and emergency personnel and equipment; 
viii.  Where applicable, improved access to, or the development of additional connections is made to adjoining systems of open space, paths, streets, or utility systems; and 
ix.  Estimated future populations, development density, and traffic generated can be appropriately serviced by the available system of streets, school, emergency services and other infrastructure facilities. 
_____
    4.70.4. Requirements for open space subdivisions. 
A.  Open space single family subdivisions shall meet the following area and bulk requirements: 
Minimum Lot Size: 15 acres Density Factor  R-33 1.32 lots/acre  R-44 1.00 lot/acre  R-88 0.50 lot/acre  
The permitted number of lots shall be determined by the following formula: 
PL = TSA - (.07 TSA +.5 IW/F + .25 S) x D where: PL = Permitted Lots TSA = Total Site Area IW/F = Areas of Inland Wetlands or Floodplain S = Slopes in excess of 25% D = Density Factor  
_____ 
B.  When the permitted number of lots using the formula above equals or is greater than one-half, the total number of lots permitted shall be the next highest whole number. 
i.  All single family open space subdivisions require separate applications to the commission as both 1.) a special permit and 2.) a subdivision. Approvals as both a special permit and subdivision are required prior to the start of construction. The following additional materials shall be submitted with an application for a single family open space subdivision: 
ii.  Concept plans, one depicting a conventional subdivision development and one depicting a single-family open space subdivision; 
iii.  A description of all uses proposed for the open space; 
iv.  A statement explaining how the intent of these regulations would be satisfied by development of the parcel as a single family open space subdivision; 
C.  Open space criteria and dedication. 
i.  Open space shall be dedicated in an amount equal to the percentage of lot reduction resulting from the application of the standards of this Section as follows: 
a.  R-88 - 50 percent open space. 
b.  R-44 - 25 percent open space. 
c.  R-33 - 25 percent open space. 
ii.  A minimum of 33 percent of the area of the open space shall not be encumbered by wetlands, floodplains, or steep slopes equal to or greater than 15 percent . 
D.  Method of dedication: Permanent dedication of each area of open space shall be accomplished by one, or a combination, of the following preservation techniques: 
i.  Transfer of title to land in fee simple to the town, if the town council agrees to accept such land; 
ii.  Creation of a public conservation easement in favor of the town; 
iii.  Creation of a private conservation easement in favor of the town; 
iv.  Transfer of title to land in fee simple to a non-profit, tax exempt entity (such as a private land trust) deemed acceptable to the commission; 
v.  Transfer of title in fee simple to the State of Connecticut in connection with an approved state park plan (i.e., Scantic River State Park). 
vi.  Transfer of title in fee simple to a Connecticut non-profit corporation of which all owners of land within the subdivision are members; or, 
vii.  Any other method which accomplishes permanent dedication in accordance with the intentions of this section. 
E.  Evidence of acceptance: If open space is to be owned by a private not-for-profit conservation trust or corporation, or another entity, the application shall contain written evidence from the proposed entity satisfactory to the commission, stating that it is willing to accept ownership of and responsibility for the preservation and maintenance of the open space. 
F.  Form of conveyance: Whenever any dedication of open space is made as part of a single family open space subdivision, the deed, declaration or other instrument containing the conveyance shall be in a form prepared by the commission, and shall provide, at a minimum: 
i.  That all covenants and/or restrictions shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of all present and future owners of the land within the subdivision. 
ii.  That such covenants and/or restrictions may be enforced by each present and future owner of land within the subdivision and also by the Town by appropriate action in court for damages or for affirmative or negative equitable relief. 
iii.  That the rights and duties created by such covenants and/or restrictions shall not in any way be modified or amended without the prior written approval of the commission. 
iv.  That if at any time maintenance, preservation and/or use of such open space area shall not comply with or fulfill the provisions of such covenants and/or restrictions, the town may, at its election, take any or all such action as may be necessary or appropriate to assure or enforce compliance and to assess against the owners of land within the subdivision either jointly or severally, all costs incurred by the town for such purposes. 
G.  Access to open space: All open space dedicated under this section of these regulations is open for the use and enjoyment of all residents of the town, except all open space dedicated through a private conservation easement or non-profit corporation may be reserved for the exclusive use and enjoyment of all present and future owners and/or renters of land within the single family open space subdivision and occupants of the subdivision. 
H.  Design standards for open space. 
i.  Open space requiring a right of access shall have such access on a public street with a minimum frontage of 40 feet, and maximum gradient of 15 percent. 
ii.  Any land dedicated as open space shall be left in its natural state by the subdivider, except for any improvements that may be required by the commission. 
iii.  The Commission may require that open space be developed for parks or playgrounds, or passive recreational purposes. Such improvements shall be bonded as a public improvement pursuant to section 4.c of the Enfield Subdivision Regulations. 
I.  Design standards for lots. 
i.  Where lots in a single family open space subdivision front on an existing public street, the commission shall require, wherein its judgment it is feasible, the transfer of all possible frontage lots to interior portions of the subdivision. Such frontage shall then be incorporated into the system of open spaces established for the parcel, and shall serve as a permanent buffer for single family lots from the public street and adjoining properties. The commission may require supplemental buffer plantings in accordance with section 10.10. 
ii.  Should the commission find that the transfer of lots fronting an existing street to the interior portions of the subdivision not to be feasible, such lots shall be developed as conventional lots meeting appropriate bulk requirements of these regulations (see section 4.10). 
iii.  The design of the subdivision shall provide for the retention of existing wooded areas of sufficient density to provide a natural buffer between proposed dwelling units, abutting recreation areas, and existing land uses. In the absence of any such natural buffering, the commission may require a planted buffer in accordance with section 10.10. Wherever possible, site design shall utilize natural site features to enhance separation of potentially incompatible uses and densities. 
iv.  All lots shall front directly on a public or private street that shall be designed in conformance with the standards for public streets of the technical subdivision regulations of the town. 
J.  Permitted uses: Uses permitted in single family open space subdivisions shall be limited to single family dwelling units, accessory uses permitted in section 4.20, and home offices/home occupations. 
K.  Approval and maintenance of private streets: The commission may approve private streets within a single family open space subdivision. All such private streets shall be built to the standards of the town's technical subdivision regulations. Upon written request of the applicant and the receipt of staff comments, the commission may waive any of the standards of the town's technical subdivision regulations by a three-fourths vote. The subdivider shall provide for the perpetual maintenance of the street and drainage systems in a form acceptable to the town attorney and commission ensuring that the town will not have to assume responsibility for neither the maintenance nor improvement of the private street system. All documents required under this section shall be recorded prior to the signing of the final mylars. 
L.  Utilities: 
i.  All single family open space subdivisions in R-33 and R-44 zones shall be serviced by both public sewer and water. 
ii.  All single family open space subdivisions in R-88 zones shall be served by public water, and may be served by on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems approved by the North Central District Health Department. 
M.  Decision criteria: In considering any application for a single family open space subdivision, the commission shall consider all of the information submitted as part of the applications for both the special permit and rezoning, shall apply the criteria contained in article IX, consider information from other town commissions and boards (such as the conservation commission), and the following: 
i.  Traffic access to and from existing streets; 
ii.  Existing patterns of development; 
iii.  The likely impact on the availability and capacity of storm drainage systems, and other utilities; 
iv.  The likely impact on natural environmental systems; and 
v.  The presence of other land characteristics which favor the development of the parcel as a single family open space subdivision. 
    4.70.5. Requirements for senior residential developments (see section 4.40.4). 
    4.70.6. Requirements for multifamily housing developments in the MFHD (Added 8/1/12). 
A.  Multifamily housing developments in the MFHD shall meet the following area and bulk requirements: 
Minimum Lot Size: 60 Acres (Note: Only existing lots of 60 acres as of 8/1/12 are eligible) Maximum Density: 10 Dwelling Units per Developable Acre Maximum Lot Coverage 30% (Note: Maximum Lot Coverage, defined as building coverage) Maximum Impervious Coverage: 66% (Note: Maximum Impervious Coverage to include pavement) Minimum Yard Setbacks:  Front: 50 feet  Side: 35 feet  Rear: 50 feet (Note: Pursuant to article X, section 10.20, landscaping standards, paragraph B(i) buffer yards, the commission may require an "A" buffer yard when a special permit is being approved for such a lot abutting another lot in a residential district. An "A" buffer yard is 25 feet deep. Front, side and rear yard areas can be used to satisfy this buffer yard requirement.) Maximum Building Height: 35 feet Maximum Bedrooms per Dwelling Unit: 2 bedrooms Minimum/Maximum Floor Area  One Bedroom Minimum 900 square feet, Maximum 1,200  Two Bedroom Minimum 1,100 square feet, Maximum 1,700  
B.  Site to be served by public water and municipal sewer. 
C.  The MFHD may contain accessory buildings or uses, as approved by the commission. 
D.  Design standards: 
i.  Each dwelling unit shall have individual laundry facilities. Residential buildings in the MFHD may not include a communal laundry area. 
ii.  Each dwelling unit shall have only private entrances. There shall be no common entrances, hallways or corridors. 
iii.  Each dwelling unit shall have its own dedicated garage and parking space. 
iv.  Centralized mailbox building center for resident use. 
a.  The interior of said mailbox center building shall provide mailboxes for all residents of the multifamily housing development and may provide a community bulletin for residents as well as free-standing newspaper stands for newspaper purchase. 
v.  Centralized enclosed recycling facilities for resident use. Any and all dumpsters shall be screened and concealed. 
E.  Amenities: Multifamily housing development within the MFHD shall provide at least four of the following amenities: 
i.  Walking/hiking trails; 
ii.  Pedestrian areas with benches; 
iii.  Scenic area displaying natural or artificial water feature; 
iv.  Planting areas; 
v.  Outdoor picnic area; 
vi.  Fitness center building; 
vii.  Sports court (court used for tennis, basketball, and/or volleyball); 
viii.  Outdoor pool; 
ix.  Indoor pool; 
x.  Putting green; 
xi.  On-site storage facility. 
xii.  Other deliberately shaped area(s) or focal feature(s) that enhance community space, as determined by the commission. 
F.  Open space. There shall be a minimum set aside of open space equal to 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit. Areas with greater than 15 percent slope or wetlands soils as identified by a certified soils scientist shall not count toward meeting this minimum requirement. Any undeveloped areas that are used for determining permitted density shall be reserved for open space or recreational purposes, as approved by the commission. A walking/hiking trail or other pedestrian area may be counted as open space. 
G.  Management plan. A management plan shall be submitted along with the site plan as a requirement of the special permit. The management plan shall outline the maintenance and management plan for the multifamily housing development, including: 
i.  Schedule of dwelling unit inspections to perform preventative maintenance and observe compliance with lease terms; and 
ii.  Operation and maintenance of grounds, streets, driveways, storm water drainage system, signage and roadway lighting as well as general landscaping. 
H.  Parking: Parking standards shall apply in accordance with article X, site development regulations, table 10.10.2, which requires two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
    4.70.7. Requirements for rear lots. All proposed rear lots require separate applications to the commission as both 1.) a special permit and 2.) a subdivision in addition to meeting the appropriate requirements of sections 4.40 and of 4.40.1, if requested by the commission. Rear lots are permitted only as follows: 
1.  In single family open space subdivisions and 
2.  On lots created prior to December 4, 1987 having frontage on streets that existed prior to the original division or subdivision of their parent parcel. (Amended 6/03/04) 
    Except for paragraph 2 above, rear lots are prohibited in conventional subdivisions or subsequent re-subdivisions. Further, the commission must make a finding that all rear lots meet the following criteria: (Amended 6/03/04) 
A.  The commission must make a finding that all rear lots are: 
i.  In harmony with the area in which they are proposed; 
ii.  Designed to protect the privacy and values of neighboring properties; 
iii.  Designed to be compatible with the sites natural features; 
iv.  Determined to be the most appropriate use of such land; and 
v.  Not in conflict with future public access needs of the neighborhood in which they are located based on the plan of conservation and development. 
B.  Applicability: Rear lots shall be used for only one single family dwelling per lot and permitted accessory buildings and are permitted only in the R-88, R-44 and R-33 zones. 
C.  All rear lots shall meet the following criteria: 
i.  The front yard of the rear lot shall be measured from the rear lot line of the lot between it and the street or as determined by the Commission; 
ii.  On a rear lot the residential structures shall be located no further than 750 feet from the street to which the rear lot has access. This distance shall be measured along the centerline of the driveway providing access to the street. 
iii.  When the principal entrance of the residential structure on a rear lot is located further than 200 feet from the street to which the rear lot has access, a residential sprinkler system designed and installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. Standards (13D) may be required by the commission. Such a system must be designed and installed by a properly licensed person or firm and all such systems shall be inspected by the local fire marshal or his or her designee prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
iv.  The driveway providing access to the rear lot shall consist of a minimum ten-inch depth crushed stone base acceptable in design to the director of public works, the fire marshall, and fire chief of the appropriate fire district, and the commission and capable of accommodating fire department equipment. The surface of the driveway shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide for its entire length. The driveway shall have an additional passable area of at least three feet on each side capable of supporting fire apparatus and free of obstructions. No structure or landscaping shall be placed within this required 18-foot wide access area. The commission may require the driveway to be paved in total, or in part, based upon its length, slope and design. The lot owner shall maintain a vertical clearance of 15 feet along the entire length of the driveway. 
v.  Only two rear lots may be accessed over a single common driveway. An access easement identifying maintenance obligations shall be filed on the land records prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
vi.  No more than two contiguous rear lots may be approved. 
vii.  Driveways serving rear lots shall be located no closer together than 300 feet at the street line when located on the same side of the street and located in such a manner as to avoid traffic congestion and conflicts. 
viii.  No parking shall be permitted within the 18 feet wide driveway described in paragraph iv. Above and such a restriction on parking shall be recorded in the office of the town clerk as an encumbrance on the lot. 
ix.  A car turnaround designed and built to standards established by the director of public works shall be provided at the terminus of each driveway to a rear lot. 
x.  The street entrance to each rear lot shall be posted with a sign containing the house number and street name of the rear lot. Such a sign shall be a minimum of one and one-half square feet per side and a maximum of three square feet per side, and of such a design that it provides clear indication of the address of the rear lot. 
xi.  The area of the driveway shall not be used to determine the minimum lot area for a rear lot. 
xii.  The commission may require the planting of an evergreen screen within any or all yard setback areas to ensure privacy of lots adjacent to rear lots. Evergreens shall be used for such screening and shall be a minimum of four feet in height at time of planting and shall be planted in staggered rows no further than six feet on center. 
xiii.  The commission may require additional yard setbacks, landscaping/screening, or fire protection measures. 
xiv.  The commission shall find that the subject site is more appropriate for rear lot development than for conventional development and that the proposed development will not have negative impact on adjacent properties nor preclude the appropriate development of adjacent properties including connective street patterns to presently vacant land. 
xv.  All rear lots in an open space subdivision shall have the minimum frontage on an existing or proposed public road. Proposed rear lots on lots created prior to December 4, 1987, may be served by a minimum 25-foot permanent easement provided a shared driveway is utilized with the front lot. The proposed easements and shared driveway agreements must be submitted along with any application and shall filed on the land records prior to or at the same time as the final record plan. (Amended 6/03/04) 
    4.70.8. Large flexible residential housing. (added 09/21/18) 
A.  Purpose: The goals of this section are the following: 
1.  To provide a choice in the types of multifamily residential living units available for present and future residents of the Town of Enfield. 
2.  To provide for a transitional use from residential zones to industrial and commercial zones. 
3.  To provide an alternate form of residential development so that multifamily housing units can be located in appropriate areas close to commercial and business zones. 
4.  To allow a mixed use of residential and business uses within the same overall area as a transition between zones. 
5.  To permit flexible site design which is in harmony with the residential and commercial units in the area. 
B.  Applicability: This section shall only apply to any parcel or adjacent parcels under the same ownership that comprises 25 or more contiguous acres, which parcel shall be zoned both residential and commercial or industrial, of which a minimum of 15 acres shall be zoned residential and the residential development shall be in the residential zone portion of the parcel and such parcel shall be located in the I-91 Corridor. The I-91 Corridor is defined for the purpose of this regulation as land in the Town of Enfield which is located within one mile of the State of Connecticut right of way lines or boundary lines for I-91. 
C.  Application requirements and procedures. 
1.  The applicant shall apply for a special permit consistent with the requirements of sections 4.70.1, 4.70.2, 4.70.3, and 9.20. The use will be allowed in all residential zones except R-88. 
2.  The development shall be connected to public water and public sewer and shall have gas service if a gas line is adjacent to the site and available to the site. 
3.  The development is located on a "collector road", as determined by Connecticut DOT standards and has adequate access from major streets and highways and will not adversely impact vehicular or pedestrian traffic patterns or public safety. 
4.  In making its decision to issue a special permit, the commission, in addition to the criteria set forth in section 9.20 shall determine that the proposed development shall have an appropriate range of services including at least four of the following amenities: 
a.  Scenic area displaying natural or artificial water feature; 
b.  Planting areas; 
c.  Outdoor picnic area; 
d.  Fitness center facility; 
e.  Sports court (court used for tennis, basketball, and/or volleyball); 
f.  Outdoor pool; 
g.  Indoor pool; 
h.  Putting green; 
i.  A community building or space 
j.  Outdoor recreational facilities, including but not limited to landscaped walking trails and pedestrian area with benches or community gardens (flower or vegetable 
k.  Other deliberately shaped area(s) or focal feature(s) that enhance community space. 
5.  A management plan shall be submitted along with the site plan as a requirement of the special permit. The management plan shall outline the maintenance and management plan for the large flexible residential housing, including the operation and maintenance of grounds, streets, driveways, storm water drainage system, signage and roadway lighting as well as general landscaping 
6.  The concept of the large area flexible residential housing should be an area of land uses that serve to insulate and protect the integrity and environmental health of adjacent residential areas. 
7.  The commission shall determine the adequacy of buffer areas for abutting properties and areas taking into consideration the requirements included in other parts of these regulations. No buildings shall be located within 100 feet of any existing single-family homes. 
8.  Open space: There shall be a minimum set aside of open space equal to 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit. The commission may reject any area used in the open space calculation which due to steepness of slopes, or wetlands concerns such as flooding should not be considered in the open space calculation. Any undeveloped areas that are used for determining permitted density shall be reserved for open space or recreational purposes as approved by the commission. A walking/hiking trail or other pedestrian area may be counted as open space. 
9.  Basements or cellars shall not be required but are not precluded. All units shall be provided with reasonable onsite storage in the same building where the unit is located. 
10.  The commission will permit uses on the non-residential zone portions of the parcel consistent with these regulations. A special use permit shall be required for all non-residential uses as allowed under this subsection. Any such application for non-residential uses shall demonstrate that the proposed uses are compatible with the residential units and shall not negatively impact the residential units. 
11.  The layout and plans for buildings shall be designed for the safety and convenience of the residents. 
12.  Sidewalks shall be required. 
D.  Design standards. 
1.  Residential developments shall meet the following area and bulk requirements: 
Allowed Housing Types: Multi-unit buildings, townhouses, garden apartments, planned unit developments Minimum Lot Area: 25 acres Maximum Density: 16 Units per Developable Acre Maximum Lot Coverage: (Note: Maximum Lot Coverage, defined as building coverage) 30% of Developable Acres Maximum Impervious Coverage: 66% of Developable Acres Minimum Yard Setbacks: Front: 50 feet Side: 35 feet Rear: 50 feet Maximum Building Height: 3 occupied stories with the eve line of the roof not to exceed 36 feet and the ridge line of the roof not to exceed 45 feet. Minimum Residential Floor Area: Studio/Efficiency: 600 square feet One Bedroom: 700 square feet Two Bedrooms: 900 square feet Maximum Bedrooms per Dwelling Unit: 2 bedrooms  
2.  Parking standards shall apply in accordance with article X, site development regulations, table 10.10.2, and a portion of the parking areas may be located in other zones on the parcel. 
Section 4.80. - Special provisions related to the lake overlay district. (added 09/08/17) 
A.  Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for standards for the Crescent Lake and Shaker Pine Lake districts aka the lake overlay district. 
B.  The Crescent Lake and Shaker Pine Lake district pose unique zoning issues for the Property owners in that the lots are mostly if not all non-conforming and many of the structures are also non-conforming. 
    In addition, the mean high-water mark of the lakes varies. The front yard of the properties is defined as the lake side elsewhere in these regulations. 
C.  This section provides a method for property owners of the lake districts to apply for improvements to their property. 
    Property owners within the two lake districts may apply for a special permit to improve the main structure or add an accessory structure. 
D.  The commission shall use the criteria required for the review of a special permit to consider such applications. The commission may reduce the front, rear, or side yard by no more than what is consistent with the average front, rear or side yards existing for the block face on which the property is located as of July 1, 2017. 
ARTICLE V. - BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Section 5.00. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of the business districts is to allow for a variety of commercial areas that can be economically viable and of a scale, intensity, and type of use that can be supported by necessary utilities and highways, and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
Section 5.10. - Lot and bulk requirements. 
    The following table establishes the lot, yard and bulk requirements for the business, Thompsonville Village, and special development districts. Except as herein otherwise provided, no lot shall have an area or width less than indicated in the table below. In addition, no building or buildings (including accessory buildings), as well as any loading docks, decks, porches, or steps attached to or otherwise associated with such building or buildings, shall encroach upon the minimum front, side and rear yards indicated below, nor shall they cover a greater area or exceed in height the amount set forth in the following table. 
Table 5.10 - Lot and Bulk Requirements 
Minimum Lot and Yard Requirements Maximum District Lot Area (sq. ft.) Frontage (feet) Front Yard (feet) Side Yard (feet) Floor Area (sq. ft.) Rear Yard (feet) Imperv. Coverage Bldg. Coverage Height (feet) B-L 30,000 150 35 20 20 66% 35% 24 1 B-G 22,500 150 35 10 20 66% 35% 36 1 *BL-H 10 30,000 150 10 20 20 66% 35% 24 *BG-H 10 22,500 150 10 10 20 66% 35% 36 B-P 3 Acres 2 300 2 35 20 30 60% 35% 36** B-R 9 5 Acres 250 3 35 3 30 80,000 30 66%/ 4 45% 72 1 L-O 12,500 75 25 20 20 60% 35% 12 35 TVC 10 5,000 13 50 10 5 0/4/20 6 0/600 7 10/20 8 85% 65/85% 14 40 SDD 5 Acres 10,000 11  
* Added 9/8/03 
**Approved 06/04/09 
5.10.1 Notes to area and bulk requirements. 
1.  For each additional five feet of front yard setback above the minimum requirement, an additional one foot of building height is permitted, but in no case shall such additional height exceed 24 feet. If the building height listed in the table above is to be exceeded, then the minimum side and rear yards shall be increased by one foot for each one foot of additional building height permitted. 
2.  Lot area may be reduced to one acre and frontage to 200 feet when the commission approves an overall plan of traffic circulation, curb cuts, and access easements. The easement agreements shall be effective in perpetuity and the overall plan shall achieve a minimum of curb cuts and a circulation plan that preserves the safety of the traveling public. 
3.  Except as provided in section 5.30.2. 
4.  May be increased to 70 percent for a regional shopping center when the commission determines that offsite drainage will not be increased in a manner to be detrimental to downstream properties. 
5.  A smaller front yard may be approved to achieve compatibility with adjacent structures. 
6.  No side yard is required, but if provided, must be a minimum of four feet. A 20-foot side yard is required if the adjoining lot contains a building used exclusively for residential purposes. 
7.  No minimum floor area required for non-residential uses; 600 square feet per residential unit. 
8.  Rear yard increased to 20 feet when adjoining lot contains at least one building that is devoted predominately to residential use. 
9.  The requirements of this section with respect to the business R district shall apply only to the area of the entire site included in the approved special permit plan and, except for the maximum building height, shall not apply as a restriction to any subdivision of the original special permit plan area. 
10.  The maximum front yard in the TVC, BL-H and BG-H districts is 25 feet. The minimum building height is two stories. (amended 9/8/03) 
11.  The minimum existing floor area. 
12.  A single building is limited to 2,000 square feet. A building size of up to 5,000 square feet. may be approved for lots of record with more than 200 feet frontage. On consolidated lots with 150 feet or more of frontage and a single shared access drive, a building size of 4,000 square feet may be permitted. 
13.  Commission may reduce the minimum area to 4,500 square feet by special permit pursuant to section 4.30.21 (Added 4/19/10) 
14.  New construction 65 percent, existing construction 85 percent. (Added 09/08/17) 
15.  More than one principal building on a lot. The commission may consider more than one principal building on a lot via special permit in any business district zone. The following standards will apply. 
a.  The overall site plan must be consistent with the standards of the district. 
b.  The commission shall determine that the building sizes and locations are consistent with the design standards of the district. 
    5.10.2. Supplemental bulk requirements. A. Freestanding canopies attached to a building may be erected forward of the front building line subject to special permit approval, but in no case shall freestanding canopies be erected closer than ten feet to the front property line. Freestanding canopies shall not be enclosed or have any completely enclosed buildings beneath them forward of the front building line. The ground projection of any canopy shall be computed as building ground coverage. (Note that the TVC is exempt from this requirement.) B. In business L and business G districts, one side yard of each lot may be omitted and buildings may be built to the common lot line provided the party or other walls separating them are of masonry construction and without openings. 
(Ord. No. XZA 17-01 , 7-14-2017) 
Section 5.20. - Use requirements. 
    The following table establishes use requirements for the business, Thompsonville Village center, and special development districts: 
Table 5.20 
Use Table For Business, Thompsonville Village, Hazardville and Special Development Districts 
USE DISTRICT BL BG BL-H * BG-H * BR TVC BP SD LO Adult/Child Day Care Facilities SP SP SP SP SP SP S 
E 
E 
  
  
S 
E 
C 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
  
5.60 S 
E 
E 
  
  
S 
E 
C 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
  
5.70 Agricultural Activities (20) SP SP Amusement Machines (4) SP SP SP SP SP SP Animal Hospitals, Kennels and Veterinary Offices S SP (19) Assisted Living/Continuing Care Facilities SP Auction Rooms S S SP SP Bed and Breakfast Inns SP SP SP SP Building Material Stores S (5) S (5) SP SP SP (5) S (5) Business Services S S S S SP SP SP Business/Professional Offices S S S S SP S S Business-Residential Mixed Use SP SP SP SP SP SP Car Washes S Child Day Care Centers SP SP SP SP SP S SP Commercial Recreation, Outdoors SP SP SP Commercial Recreation (6) SP S SP SP Dry Cleaners S S (8) SP SP SP (8) S (8) Farming Activities (10) SP Financial Institutions (11) S S (12) SP (22) SP (22) SP (12) S S (12) Gasoline Service Stations S SP Governmental Buildings and Offices/Facilities S S SP SP SP S (13) S Health Clubs SP S SP Heliports (amended 4/01/04) SP (25) SP Hotels and Motels S SP Laundries S S SP SP SP S Liquor Permits SP SP SP (23) SP (23) SP SP Liquor Permits with Any Entertainment SP SP SP Medical Laboratories S S Medical Offices (14) S S S S SP S S Motor Vehicle Repair Garages SP SP Motor Vehicle Sales (15) SP SP Museums S S S Non-profit Clubs S S SP SP SP Open Lot Sales(21) S Other Retail Food Services S S S S SP S Outdoor Dining (amended 7/30/02) S/SP S/SP S/SP S/SP S/SP S/SP Package Stores SP SP SP SP SP SP Parking Lots SP SP SP SP SP SP Personal Services S S S S SP S Places of Worship (17) (amended 11/01/04) S S S S SP S SP Printing and Publishing S Public Utility Buildings/Facilities SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Radio/Television Stations and Towers S S SP Research Laboratories SP S Residential Dwelling Units SP (9) SP (9) SP(9) SP(9) SP (9) S (9) Restaurants (2) S S S (24) S (24) SP S Restaurants, Drive-in S Retail Stores (1), (16) S S S S SP S (3) Schools, Commercial /Trade S S S S SP S Solar Energy Systems, Small-Scale (26) S S S S S S S Theaters (7) SP SP SP SP SP SP Undertaking/Funeral Businesses S Visitor Information Booths SP Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (18) SP SP SP SP SP  
*BL-H and BG-H added 09/08/03 (See also Section 8.70) 

5.20.1 Notes to use table. 
1.  Retail sales include the retail sales of goods and/or services to the general public for personal or household use. Repairs to goods sold on the premises or goods similar to those sold on the premises are permitted. 
2.  The sale of liquor is permitted only with a special permit obtained from the commission. 
3.  Retail stores are limited to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  The zoning enforcement officer may approve up to two amusement machines at any single location. Additional machines require a special permit obtained from the planning and zoning commission. 
5.  No outdoors sales or storage of merchandise or materials permitted, except accessory outdoor storage is permitted when completely screened from view by a uniformly painted solid fence or wall not over eight feet in height and only in the BG district. 
6.  Commercial recreation includes amusement machine establishments; off-track betting parlors, shops, or theaters; horse and dog racing; Jai Alai facilities; and bowling alleys. 
7.  Theaters include activities inside of buildings where live or filmed entertainment is presented. 
8.  Dry cleaners may include dry cleaning and processing equipment. 
9.  In the TVC, residential uses may include single family, duplex, and multi-family residential uses. Otherwise, dwelling units are only in combination with the use of a premises for professional practice. 
10.  Farm activities include horticulture, forestry, truck and nursery gardening, and greenhouses, storage of agricultural products whether grown on-or off-site, and temporary farm stands. (See definitions of agricultural activities and farms in article II.) 
11.  Financial institutions include banks, loan offices, credit unions and all are permitted to have walk-up automatic teller machines (ATM). 
12.  Drive-through facilities must be part of a financial institution on the same parcel and are only permitted by special permit in BL, BG, and BR districts. 
13.  Governmental buildings and facilities must be of design and scale to complement the TVCZ. 
14.  Medical offices may include appropriate laboratory facilities to serve the needs of the office staff itself. 
15.  Motor vehicle sales facilities may include appropriate repair facilities. 
16.  Outdoor display of merchandise is permitted on a seasonal basis, including sidewalk sales. 
17.  Places of worship include buildings designed and used for the purpose of conducting religious services and may include residential uses for staff and teachers at related religious schools. 
18.  Wireless telecommunications facilities utilizing existing structures may not require a special permit and may be permitted with site plan approval. See section 8.20. 
19.  Kennels are prohibited. 
20.  Agricultural activities shall be subject to the same standards and procedures as apply in residential zoning districts. See notes 1 and 3 under section 4.20.1, as well as section 4.30.1. 
21.  A short term open lot sales permit, approved by the zoning enforcement officer, is required for sales of 30 consecutive days or less and may not be renewed until 60 consecutive days have passed from the expiration of the permit. A long-term open lot sales permit, approved by the commission, is required for sales of 31 days or more, up to a maximum of one year and may be renewed annually. The fee for a sales permit shall be: short-term residential - $5.00; short-term non-residential - $25.00; long-term residential - $5.00; long-term non-residential - $75.00. 
22.  Only financial institutions without drive-through windows may be permitted in BG-H and BL-H Districts. (Added 09/08/03) 
23.  Only class 1, class 3 and class 4 liquor permits (as defined in section 8.10.2) may be permitted. (Added 09/08/03) 
24.  Only restaurants without drive-through windows may be permitted in BG-H and BL-H districts. (Added 09/08/03) 
25.  Heliports in the BR zone are permitted only in planned commercial developments consisting of more than 50 acres and must meet the following criteria: (Added 04/01/04) 
a.  The heliport shall meet the criteria set forth in the Federal Aviation Administration's Heliport Design Guidelines, Advisory Circular No. 150/5390-2A dated January 20, 1994, Chapter 2 - Private Use Heliports, as may be subsequently amended. 
b.  The heliport shall receive and maintain any and all federal and state licenses required for the operation of a private heliport. 
c.  The heliport may be used for private use service only and only as an accessory use to the primary use on the property. A revenue producing public helicopter passenger service shall not be permitted. 
d.  The heliport shall not be within a 300-foot radius, as measured from the center of the heliport pad, of a residential building, school building or other structure housing a place of worship located outside of the planned commercial development. 
e.  Except in the case of emergency, landings and take-offs shall be restricted to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
f.  No maintenance activities other than for emergency purposes and no supply facility for fuel shall be permitted on the site. 
g.  The flight paths of the incoming and outgoing helicopters shall be established by the applicant with due consideration for minimizing disturbance to surrounding residential properties, if any. 
h.  The heliport shall be designed, operated and maintained in such a manner as to prevent volatile levels of flammable liquids or the vapors of such liquids from entering buildings, spreading onto automobile parking areas, roads and drives and from entering the drainage systems of the site, roads or adjacent properties. 
i.  The heliport shall comply with all requirements set forth in section 7.10, performance standards. 
j.  The applicant shall provide a plan that illustrates the vertical and horizontal landing and take-off zones. 
26.  See section 8.80.1 for specific standards. 
    5.10.2-5.10.13. Reserved. 
    5.10.14. More than one principal building on a lot (added 07/14/17). The commission may consider more than one principal building on a lot via special permit in any business district zone. The following standards will apply. 
1.  The overall site plan must be consistent with the standards of the district. 
2.  The commission shall determine that the building size and locations are consistent with the design standards of the district. 
    5.20.2. Other use requirements. 
A.  Uses determined by the commission to be similar to and compatible with the uses listed in table 5-2 may be permitted as a special permit use. 
B.  All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except for uses noted in subsection 5.20.2.c, below. 
C.  Within the B-L, B-R, B-G, and the TVC districts, the outside display of fresh fruits, vegetables, plants and flowers may be permitted on a seasonal basis as an accessory use to a similar principal use contained within a completely enclosed building, provided that the owner shall submit, and have approved by the zoning enforcement officer, a site plan showing the following: 
i.  The limits of the outside storage area; 
ii.  Maximum sq. ft. of the outside storage area; 
iii.  The types of products to be displayed; 
iv.  The method of outside display; 
v.  The seasonal limits of the products to be displayed; 
vi.  All site signage; and 
vii.  Any outside display area shall be not less than ten feet from the adjoining street right-of-way and shall be so arranged so as to provide for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians onto, within and exiting the site. 
D.  In the B-L and the B-G districts, the parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business, shall be limited to vehicles of not over 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight when located within 150 feet of a residence district boundary line. In the B-G district, trucks in excess of 26,000 pounds gross vehicle used in conjunction with the operation of any business permitted in this district, shall not be parked in the open within 150 feet of a residence district except during normal business hours. (Amended 11/25/03) 
E.  Within the B-G district, except for driveways providing access to public streets, all buildings, driveways, and parking areas shall observe the buffer yard standards found in section 10.10. 
F.  (Amended 7/30/02) In any business district, except BP, the planning and zoning commission may grant approval for seasonal outdoor dining areas for restaurants, as defined in these regulations, as an accessory use, subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Outdoor dining area cannot be located on public property (town sidewalk, right-of-way, etc.). Outdoor dining may be allowed on porches or decks, provided all of the other conditions are met. 
ii.  Outdoor dining does not result in interference with or hazards to, or visibility problems for pedestrians on sidewalks or vehicular traffic. 
iii.  Any non-vegetative shading devices shall be of a nonpermanent type (umbrellas, retractable awnings, etc.) and shall be safely anchored. 
iv.  Areas on which required parking exists cannot be used for outdoor dining. 
v.  If required, additional parking must be provided to accommodate additional patrons. 
vi.  Adequate self-closing trash receptacles must be provided, and the restaurant is responsible for cleanup of all trash generated from the outdoor dining (including the restaurant site and surrounding areas). 
vii.  Tables must be located in such a manner as to maintain access to the building for emergency services. 
viii  No outside audio systems are permitted. 
ix.  In addition to required parking for indoor seating, outdoor dining requires one parking space for every four seats. 
x.  All tables, chairs, trash receptacles, etc., shall be removed at the end of each outdoor dining season. 
xi.  Outdoor dining area cannot exceed four tables/16 seats unless there are waitpersons to serve patrons. Where all food service is conducted by waitpersons, outdoor dining area cannot exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the indoor dining area; and cannot exceed 50 percent of the number of tables/seats within the indoor dining area. 
xii.  Procedure. Applicants may apply to the planning and zoning commission for an outdoor dining permit, as follows. 
1.  Permit for four tables/16 seats or less. The applicant shall provide an adequate plan indicating location of tables, chairs, etc., associated with the outdoor dining in relation to the location of buildings, sidewalks, parking spaces, and driveways. This type of application may be approved by the director of planning after consultation with relevant town staff results in a determination of zoning compliance and no adverse impacts on surrounding properties. Any such approvals shall be reported to the commission at its next regular meeting. 
2.  Permit for more than four tables/16 seats. Applicant must provide the following information on a site plan of development prepared in accordance with section 9 of the zoning regulations. The commission may require a public hearing on the application. 
-  Location of building(s); 
-  Number of parking spaces required for entire restaurant, plus location of required parking; 
-  Location of proposed outdoor dining, including surface upon which tables will be placed (for example, existing sidewalk, new flagstone patio, etc.); 
-  Number of tables/seats identified; 
-  Written description of outdoor dining area amenities; for example, "15 wrought iron tables, 30 wrought iron chairs, an umbrella over each table, new awnings", etc. 
Section 5.30. - Special requirements pertaining to the B-R district. 
    Only planned commercial developments, including regional shopping centers, containing more than 80,000 square feet of building floor area, occupying a parcel ten acres or more in area, and under unified ownership or control, shall be permitted, subject to a special permit. Additionally, those uses proposed within the portion of the Enfield Memorial Industrial Park which is within the business regional district shall, require the preliminary approval of the Enfield Development Agency. 
    5.30.1. Requirements for gasoline service stations and motor vehicle repair garages within any planned commercial developments. 
A.  Within each planned commercial development, as defined in section 2.30.75, the commission may approve only one gasoline service station and only one motor vehicle repair garage. For the purpose of these regulations, repairs shall not include any body or frame repairs or painting. 
B.  A repair use shall have as its principal means of business the sale of parts and accessories; the installation of such parts and accessories shall be secondary to the principal use. No such repair use shall have direct access to any public street, but shall be planned so that access uses the vehicular circulation system within the center in which the use is located so that the flow of traffic both into and within such planned commercial development is not impeded. 
    5.30.2. Requirements for public garage for the storage of motor vehicles, motor vehicle repair garages, and gasoline service stations in all other all zones. 
A.  Public garages for the storage of motor vehicles, motor vehicle repair garages, and gasoline service stations shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  No permit shall be issued for a public garage for the storage of motor vehicles, a motor vehicle repair garage, or a gasoline service station if such proposed use is within 2,000 feet of a lot used for a public garage for the storage of motor vehicles, a motor vehicle repair garage, or a gasoline service station except as provided in sections 5.30.1. 
ii.  No permit shall be issued for a public garage for the storage of motor vehicles, a motor vehicle repair garage, or a gasoline service station if located within 1,000 feet of a lot used or reserved to be used for: 
a.  Any public or parochial school giving regular instruction at least five days a week for eight or more months in the year; 
b.  Any hospital maintaining a minimum of 15 beds for patients; or 
c.  Any church, public library, public playground, park or youth center. 
iii.  The required minimum distances between the uses listed in i. and ii. And the uses listed in ii. A., b., and c. above shall be measured between two nearest points of the lots extending to and along the center line of the right-of-way of the public streets that would produce the shortest route between the two points. 
B.  No unregistered motor vehicle, or motor vehicle registered to the dealer, shall be stored or parked nearer to the street than the building line, and all mechanical and repair operations shall be carried on within a building. Said restrictions shall not apply to new and used car dealerships which have as their principal means of business the sale of motor vehicles. The layout of such display area shall as approved by the commission through the site plan approval process. 
C.  New and used car dealerships shall be permitted only after a special permit has been granted by the commission. (Amended 2/1/12) 
D.  Gasoline service stations shall provide public sanitary facilities for both sexes, facilities for the inflation of pneumatic tires which shall be accessible to the public, and facilities for the disposal of travel trash. 
E.  Gasoline service stations shall have a backup generator capable of powering all the pumps during power outages. (Effective 2/1/12) 
F.  Damaged and inoperable vehicles shall not be stored in the front yard of any commercial premise. Such vehicles shall be: 
i.  Stored within a building, or, 
ii.  Stored in the rear or side yard. Fencing or screening shall be used to minimize visibility from the street or adjacent properties. 
    5.30.3. Requirements for retail sale of new and used motor vehicles. 
A.  Planned commercial developments under unified control in units of control of ten acres or more in area for the principal use of the retail sale of new and used motor vehicles may be permitted by the commission subject to the following restrictions: 
i.  The uses permitted within such planned commercial developments for the principal use of the sale of new and used motor vehicles shall be limited to new and used motor vehicle dealerships; State of Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles inspection and registration facilities; motor vehicle body repair shops; garages for the limited repair of motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts storage, new and used motor vehicle preparation facilities, and outdoor storage and display of new and used motor vehicles only when accessory to the principal use of retail sale of motor vehicles; underground fuel storage for fuel not for retail sale and for the sole use of new and used motor vehicle dealers; premises of financial institutions which have as a significant percentage of their business within such premises the financing of the purchase of new and used motor vehicles; automobile parts and accessories supply stores independent of new and used motor vehicle dealerships; and restaurants and offices may be permitted by the commission. 
ii.  The minimum building area within any unit of control shall be in aggregate not less than 30,000 square feet. The minimum building area per parcel with such units of control shall be 7,500 square feet. 
iii.  Separately owned and financed parcels containing any of the above permitted uses may be less than ten acres in area, but in no case, may be less than two and one-half acres in area. "Units of control not less than ten acres in area" shall mean for the purpose of these regulations, land ten acres or more in area, containing one or more parcels occupied and used exclusively by the uses permitted in this section, which parcel or groups of parcels shall be subject to any operation agreement between the owners of said parcels, their heirs and assigns, which agreement shall be effective in perpetuity and which operating agreement shall provide for the common maintenance of said unit of control, the organization and the control of all traffic within the unit of control, and common easements and right of way as may be necessary to maintain cross-easements and common rights of way enabling and guaranteeing the feasibility of access to the unit of control as approved by the commission. 
iv.  The operating agreement shall be subject to the approval of the commission and shall be subject to the review of the town attorney as to its feasibility in accomplishing the intent of the commission in approving said agreement. Furthermore, said agreement shall be integral with and inseparable from any plans which may be approved by the commission as required under article IX hereof. No changes or modifications to said plans or to said operation agreement, their heirs or assigns without the express written consent of the commission. Said agreement shall be recorded in the land records in the office of the town clerk both as an integral part of any deed or any other instrument for any parcel subject to the agreement and with the site plan for the unit of control as approved by the commission. 
    5.30.4. Requirements for garden-shop facility-Outdoor display. The outside display/storage of such items as plants, trees, shrubbery, landscaping materials, mulch, soil, compost, fertilizers, stone, tools, seasonal items, lawn mowers, snow blowers and other similar type items, are permitted as an accessory use to a principal use of retail sales contained within a completely enclosed building requires site plan approval as to location and design by the commission. The garden-shop facility shall be attached to the building containing the principal use and shall be completely enclosed with a screening wall, which may contain, without limitation, such materials as coated chain-link fence, wrought iron fencing and masonry columns. The design of such screening shall be compatible in architecture and materials to that of the principal building. 
    5.30.5. Requirements for visitor information booths. 
A.  Visitor information booths may be permitted only as an accessory building to a single tenant corporate or industrial complex. The following specific standards shall apply: 
i.  The booth is situated no closer than ten feet from the right-of-way; 
ii.  A pull-off lane is provided to safely stack cars off the adjoining roadway or driveway; 
iii.  The booth is compatible with the architectural style of the principal buildings on the property; 
iv.  The booth is on the same property as the complex to which it relates and the parcel size is at least ten acres in size; 
v.  The booth is no smaller than 100 square feet nor larger than 200 square feet. 
Section 5.40. - Special requirements for the Thompsonville Village Center zone. 
    The purposes of the Thompsonville Village Center Zone are 1) to encourage revitalization and compatible new development within the historic center of Thompsonville; 2) to promote a mix of compatible land uses such as retail, service, office, entertainment, government, residential and open space uses, developed in a pedestrian environment while retaining the historic village character; and 3) to accomplish the objectives set forth in the Thompsonville Revitalization Strategy and the Enfield Plan of Conservation and Development. 
    5.40.1. Application procedures. Any proposals for or changes to the types of uses or the architectural elevations of the buildings within the Thompsonville Village Center zone shall require approval of the commission. The following shall be the procedure for such approval. 
A.  Administrative review team: Prior to a formal application to the commission, it is recommended that the applicant file a preliminary plan with the office of the director of planning for the purpose of conducting an administrative review of the proposal. The director of planning shall report on the administrative review to the commission. 
B.  Informal review by the commission: The director of planning may recommend, or the applicant may request, an informal discussion with the commission in order to receive general guidance regarding the proposed development. Such an informal review must precede any formal application to the commission. 
C.  Plan submission requirements: Following the above informal reviews, a formal site plan or special permit application, as required by article IX of these regulations, shall be submitted to the commission. A copy of the plans and application shall be referred to the Enfield Revitalization Strategy Committee (ERSC) for the purpose of generating a recommendation from the committee to the commission. The ERSC shall have 35 days from the date of referral within which to respond to the commission. 
D.  The commission shall consider any recommendation received from the ERSC concerning the compatibility of the proposal to the findings of the "Thompsonville Revitalization Strategy" as adopted by the town and, if applicable, the guidelines contained in the appendix entitled "Preserving a Community-Historic Rehabilitation Standards and Guidelines for the Village of Thompsonville", as may be amended from time to time.(Amended 3/1/09) Failure of the ERSC to submit comments and recommendations in a timely fashion shall not be construed as a positive or negative recommendation and shall not be considered as a reason for any action taken by the commission. 
    5.40.2. Special permit uses. 
A.  Demolition: A special permit is required for any demolition or substantial demolition of the exterior of any structure in existence as of the date of the adoption of these regulations provision. The commission shall make the following findings prior to the granting of such an approval: 
i.  The objectives of the Thompsonville Revitalization Strategy is furthered by said demolition; 
ii.  The demolition is proposed in conjunction with a formal application and site plan for new construction at the same location, consistent with the Thompsonville Revitalization Strategy; and 
iii.  The proposed design and use of the new building is consistent with the purpose of the Thompsonville Village Center zone and the guidelines contained in the appendix entitled "Preserving a Community-Historic Rehabilitation Standards and Guidelines for the Village of Thompsonville" as may be amended from time to time. (Amended 3/1/09) . 
B.  A special permit is required for any single use which encompasses more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. The commission shall specifically make the following findings prior to approval of such use: 
i.  The dominant frontage of the street does not interrupt the pedestrian oriented "shopping street" environment; 
ii.  The peak traffic, and parking associated with such use will not adversely affect the adjacent street system nor public parking areas. 
iii.  The proposed design and use of the new building is consistent with the purpose of the Thompsonville Village Center zone, the Thompsonville Revitalization Strategy and the guidelines contained in the appendix entitled "Preserving a Community-Historic Rehabilitation Standards and Guidelines for the Village of Thompsonville" as may be amended from time to time. (Amended 3/1/09) 
    5.40.3. Design standards. 
A.  Building design. 
i.  No changes shall be made to the architectural features (including, but not limited to, window treatment, door locations, roof design, changes to siding material, architectural trim and features) of any building in the Thompsonville Village Center zone without approval of the commission. The standards of this section shall apply to renovation of existing building as well as new construction. 
ii.  In addition to the architectural elevations required under section 9.10.2. of these zoning regulations, each application shall include a drawing at a scale no smaller than one-eighth inch equals one foot showing the following information: 
a.  Design type, style and color of materials for building façade and roof; 
b.  Details of window and door treatment; 
c.  Details and description of other architectural trim and features; 
d.  Details of types of awnings, building mounted lighting and signs (or sign theme for a multi-tenant building); and 
e.  For building containing a mix of commercial and residential uses, information will be provided to demonstrate how noise transmission will be minimized between different uses to the satisfaction of the commission. 
iii.  In reviewing and approving the building elevations, the commission shall use the following criteria: 
a.  Compliance with the objectives of the Thompsonville Revitalization Strategy; 
b.  Compliance with the theme set forth in the design schematics contained in the Thompsonville Revitalization Strategy and as shown in figure 1; and, the guidelines contained in the appendix entitled "Preserving a Community-Historic Rehabilitation Standards and Guidelines for the Village of Thompsonville" as may be amended from time to time, and (Amended 3/1/09) 
c.  A statement or drawing to show how the proposed design encourages the pedestrian oriented "shopping street" environment at the street level. 
    5.40.4. Sub-area regulations. 
A.  Core area. 
i.  The first floor of all buildings shall be restricted to retail, service, small professional and medical offices, recreation, government, and similar uses which in the opinion of the commission are part of active, pedestrian oriented shopping district. 
ii.  The following uses shall specifically be permitted only above the first floor: 
a.  residential; 
b.  offices other than small professional and medical offices; 
c.  dance studios; and 
d.  business and trade schools. 
B.  Freshwater Brook Access Area: New developments, additions and renovated buildings within the Freshwater Brook Access Area shall provide public access adjacent to the brook which access shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide unless waived by the commission. Such public access shall be dedicated as such in the deed of the property. Access shall be provided from the public street as deemed necessary by the commission. 
    5.40.5. Accessory uses. Any accessory use which is clearly subordinate and incidental to the list of uses permitted in the TVCZ and located on the same lot, in particular public amenity uses such as landscaped pedestrian plazas, gardens, courtyards, fountains, public seating areas, and similar uses are permitted and encouraged. 
Section 5.50. - Special requirements pertaining to the B-P district. 
    5.50.1. Access requirements. 
A.  Access shall be limited to one curb cut per lot at a location approved by the commission following receipt of a recommendation by the town traffic authority. 
B.  Use of a single common curb cut to serve adjacent lots is encouraged. 
C.  No access driveway shall be permitted to Middle Road (except emergency access approved by the commission). 
D.  Any development plan shall provide for the necessary right-of-way for any transportation improvements shown in the plan of conservation and development. 
    5.50.2. Accessory parking in adjacent zones. Parking areas on an accessory parcel servicing uses on an adjacent primary parcel within a business professional zone may be allowed through approval of a special permit. The following criteria shall be considered by the commission with each application: 
A.  When the proposed site is residentially zoned, the area of land used for parking shall be a reasonable extension of the non-residential land area considering topography, tree lines, wetlands, and streams. 
B.  All off street parking areas shall be located on land under the same ownership as the primary business use; the nearest property line of such land shall be located within a radius of 400 feet of any part of a building it is intended to serve; and the proposed site shall have a common boundary of at least 100 feet in length with the adjacent primary business use. 
C.  In order to minimize impact on adjoining streets and properties, access into the proposed parking area should be exclusively through the parcel containing the primary use. 
D.  No more than 25 percent of the required parking spaces shall be located in the accessory parking area. 
E.  A minimum 50-foot-wide "B" buffer yard shall be provided from all rights of way, and a minimum 35-foot-wide "C" buffer yard shall be provided from all other property; lines; except no buffer is required between the primary parcel and the parcel containing accessory parking areas. 
F.  The maximum area covered by paving in the proposed site shall not exceed 50 percent of the area of that parcel. 
G.  Lighting shall meet the standards of the performance standards of section 7.10.6. Light standards shall be no higher than 14 feet. 
H.  The accessory parcel shall not be taken into consideration in determining the permitted building coverage of the parcel containing the buildings to which the parking is accessory. 
    5.50.3. Buffer yard and setback requirements. 
A.  A lot used for accessory parking shall be considered a lot in business use for the purpose of determining buffer yard requirements. 
B.  When a parcel within the BP district is developed in conjunction with accessory parking in an adjoining residential zone under the same ownership, as provided in section 5.50.2, no setback shall be required from the common lot line. 
Section 5.60. - Special requirements for the special development district. 
    The sole purpose of the special development district (SDD) is to enable the rehabilitation and/or adaptive reuse of vacant, deteriorated or underutilized buildings and their sites. 
    5.60.1. Criteria. The commission may establish a special development district for one or more contiguous lots containing vacant, deteriorated or underutilized buildings when a proposal for the rehabilitation and reuse of the property and buildings is proposed, if the commission finds the proposal meets all of the following criteria: 
A.  Existing building(s) contain a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more; 
B.  The proposal area contains a contiguous land area of five acres or more; 
C.  The building(s) have a vacancy rate of 80 percent or more of the existing gross floor area for a continuous period of 24 months or more immediately preceding the date of application; 
D.  Substantial inability to develop the project under the provisions of any other zoning district; 
E.  The proposal will provide a substantial benefit to the town and the immediate neighborhood; 
F.  The proposal exhibits compatibility with the character and density of land use abutting the site; 
G.  The proposal exhibits compatibility with zoning districts adjacent to the site; and 
H.  The proposal is compatible with the town plan of conservation and development. 
    5.60.2. Permitted uses. Any use or uses, which the commission may find meets all of the criteria set forth in section 5.60.1 of these regulations, may be permitted in the special development district. Allowance of a use or uses not permitted under the existing zoning district classification shall not, by itself, serve as justification for the application of the special development district. 
    5.60.3. Procedure. 
A.  Application for a special development district shall be made in accordance with both the change of zone procedures in section 12.10 and site plan approval procedures in section 9.10.1. The map or maps included with the applications shall include the entire area proposed to be rezoned as a SDD. 
i.  If residential uses are a proposed use for a part or all of the SDD, the requirements of sections 4.10.2.G., H. and J.,4.30.19 and 4.40 of these regulations shall apply to those residential portions of the SDD as deemed appropriate by the commission. 
ii.  Procedures for the construction of buildings shall apply only to residential units partially or wholly within additions to existing structures and to new construction. Provisions regarding building height and basement height, shall apply only to proposed additions to existing buildings and proposed new buildings. 
iii.  The maximum overall density of dwelling units in the proposed development shall be determined by the commission as appropriate for the general vicinity of the proposed SDD. To aid in the determination, the applicant shall submit, as part of the site plan application, a detailed map showing all existing land uses, including the number of dwelling units per lot, for all lots within 500 feet of the proposed SDD. 
iv.  If residential uses are proposed in a mixed-use development, the commission may approve shared parking. If shared parking is permitted, the total number of parking spaces required for the entire site shall be at least twice the number of proposed dwelling units. 
B.  Child and/or adult day care center shall be permitted within a SDD. 
    5.60.4. Buildings and conformity. 
A.  No new buildings shall be constructed within a special development district until all existing structures have been fully rehabilitated in accordance with approved plans, and certificates of occupancy have been issued for all such rehabilitated structures. Accessory buildings incidental to a proposed use or uses within structures undergoing rehabilitation may be constructed as rehabilitation proceeds. 
B.  Additions to existing buildings may be permitted, but only as part of and in conformity with the overall design of the SDD. Such additions and any new buildings shall follow the dimensional setback requirements of the underlying zoning district of the site. Section 3.40, concerning additions, shall also apply but no existing nonconformity shall be increased. 
Section 5.70. - Special requirements pertaining to the limited office (LO) overlay district. 
A.  Purpose: The purpose of the limited office overlay district is to create a special overlay district which serves as a transitional area between residentially zoned properties and nonresidential uses and zoning districts and/or less desirable conditions such as state highways, traffic generators, business/industrial uses, and similar uses. The LO overlay district provides a means of using existing residential buildings for nonresidential uses or encouraging the development of new buildings while attempting to maintain the quality of existing residential uses and zoning which may be adjacent and encourages the maintenance of the New England character throughout such areas. 
    5.70.1. Criteria. The commission may establish a limited office overlay district for any group of properties, the majority of which are currently occupied by residential buildings which front on state highways are across the street from major traffic generators, business/ industrial uses and similar uses and are, therefore, no longer appropriate for single family residential use. 
    5.70.2. Permitted uses. Single family dwelling units that exist on the effective day of these regulations, except that any conversion, alteration or enlargement that creates additional dwelling units is prohibited. The zoning board of appeals shall not vary this section. 
    5.70.3. Special permit uses. 
A.  The commission may approve any of the following special permit uses and the zoning board of appeals shall not vary this section: 
i.  Business/professional offices; 
ii.  Financial institutions, except that drive-in facilities are prohibited; 
iii.  Medical offices; 
iv.  Government offices. 
    5.70.4. Special standards. 
A.  The following special standards shall apply to the LO overlay district: 
i.  Business hours: Business hours shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
ii.  Exterior lighting: All exterior lighting, except for security lighting, shall be turned off one hour after the close of business. Flood lights are prohibited. 
iii.  New construction and/or renovations: All new construction and/or renovations shall appear to be residential in nature and in keeping with a "New England" character of scale and appearance with pitched roofs, building materials and architectural features. 
iv.  Parking: No parking shall be permitted in a required front yard. On a corner lot, where the commission may permit parking on the side of the building behind the front yard setback line. 
v.  Consolidated lots: When feasible, lots within the limited office overlay district shall be consolidated to create a better use of the limited amount of land and to provide less obtrusive parking areas. When a consolidated lot is developed, in addition to the plans required by section 9.10, a specific plan showing the consolidation of lots and the integration of old and new buildings, parking and loading areas, curb cuts and driveways, and landscaping shall be submitted as part of the application for the special permit. When lots are consolidated, easements providing access across all of the consolidated lots shall be prepared and must be approved by the commission. Such easements shall be approved as to form by the town attorney. 
ARTICLE VI. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 6.00. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of the industrial zone is to establish a district for manufacturing, industrial and other compatible uses to encourage the most appropriate development of industrial land, in harmony with the neighborhood. 
Section 6.10. - Lot and bulk requirements. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no lot shall have an area or width less than indicated in the table below. In addition, no buildings (including accessory buildings), as well as any loading docks, decks, porches, or steps attached to or otherwise associated with such building or buildings, shall encroach upon the minimum front, side and rear yards indicated below, nor shall cover a greater area nor shall exceed in height the amount set forth in the table below. 
Table 6.10.1 Lot and Bulk Requirements 
Minimum Lot, Bulk, and Yard Requirements Maximum District Lot Area (sq. ft.) Frontage (feet) Front Yard (feet) Side Yard (feet) Rear Yard (feet) Bldg. Area (sq. ft.) Building Coverage (%) Height (stories/ 
feet) Impervious Surface (%) I-1(M) 40,000 200 40 25 1 20 50 25 2 66 I-2 40,000 200 40 25 1 20 50 25 2 66 I-P 3 87,120 200 60 25 1 30 5,000 20/25/33.3 4 2 1/2 /30 2 66  
6.10.1 Notes to area and bulk requirements table 
1.  When railroad sidings are necessary to service a building, the side yard requirements adjacent to such railroad sidings may be omitted. 
2.  For buildings exceeding this requirement, the front, side and rear yards, as required in the above table, shall be increased in width or depth by one foot for each additional one foot of building height above 25 feet. 
3.  The configuration of a lot shall be such that a square of 200 feet on each side can fit within the boundaries of the lot. 
4.  Twenty-percent coverage shall apply to lots between two and three and ninety-nine-hundredths acres; 25 percent to lots four to ten acres; and thirty-three and thirty-three hundredths to lots greater than ten acres. Additionally, parcels abutting "open space" as defined on the "Comprehensive Plan for the Enfield Memorial Industrial Park" and the "Final Subdivision Plan, Enfield Memorial Industrial Park", may exceed the building coverage in the above table according to the following schedule: 
Table 6.10-A Building Coverage Exceptions 
Parcel Size Abuts Open Space 
1 side Abuts Open Space 
2 sides Abuts Open Space 
3 sides 2-3.99 acres 30% 40% 50% 4-10 acres 40% 50% 60% 10+ acres 50% 60% 70%  
    6.10.2. Additional setback and buffer requirements applicable to all industrial districts. 
A.  No industrial use of any parcel within any of the industrial districts, including, but not limited to, accessory uses such as parking and loading and recreational facilities, shall be permitted within 150 feet of any abutting residential district or within 50 feet of the right-of-way of any street abutting a residential district. 
B.  A buffer strip 100 feet in width and meeting the standards found in section 10.20 shall be provided on properties within industrial districts abutting any residential district. 
C.  A performance bond shall be required to be posted by the applicant for required improvements prior to approval of any building permits for any industrial development regulated by this section. 
D.  Parking of trucks in the open within 150 feet of a residence district boundary line shall be limited to vehicles of not over 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. Trucks in excess of 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight used in conjunction with operation of any business permitted in this district shall not be parked in the open within 150 feet of a residence district, except during normal business hours. (Amended 11/25/03) 
Section 6.20. - Use requirements. 
    The following table establishes use requirements for the industrial and industrial park districts: 

Table 6.2 Use Table For Industrial and Industrial Park Districts 
Use District I-1 I-1M I-2 I-P 2 Accessory Recreational Facilities S S Agricultural Activities 7 (Added 2/1/12) SP SP SP SP Agricultural Products, Manufacturing and Storage 1 SP SP SP Auto Body Repairs Garages SP Automobile Sales, Wholesale 3 SP Banquet, Catering, and Conference Center Facilities SP* SP* SP Child and Adult Day Care Facilities SP/A SP/A SP/A Commercial Recreation Facilities SP SP Conference Centers S Construction Offices and Facilities SP SP S S Governmental Buildings and Offices/Facilities S S S S Heliports SP SP SP Manufacturing, Fabricating, Processing, Assembling, Cleaning, Servicing, Testing or Repairing of Materials S S S S Medical Research and Technology Facilities SP SP Motor Vehicle Repair Garages and Body Shops S Offices Accessory to Principal Use S Offices, Business and Professional S S S Offices, Private, Public, or Institutional S Offices, Corporate S S S S Package Stores SP SP Parking Garages/Lots S S S 5 Printing and Publishing S S S Public Recreation Facilities S S S Public Utility Building/Facilities S S S S Radio/Television Stations and Towers S S S Research and Testing Facilities S S S S Residential Uses 4 SP SP SP SP Restaurant Liquor Permits/Commercial Recreation 6 A/SP A/SP Retail Outlets SP SP S 2 Solar Energy Systems, Large Scale 8 ** S S S S Solar Energy Systems, Small-Scale 9 ** S S S S Trade Schools and Training Facilities S S S S Truck Sales/ Truck Terminals SP Visitor Information Booths SP SP Vocational Rehabilitation Services 10 + S S Wholesale, Warehousing, and Distribution Facilities S S S S  
* Added 6/27/11 
** Added 3/19/12 
*** Added 7/12/12 
6.20.1 Notes to use table 
1.  The storage of agricultural products which are produced or grown on the farm premises is a use by right and requires no approvals under these regulations. The storage of products grown or produced off the farm premises requires a special permit. 
2.  Uses determined by the commission to be similar to and compatible with the uses listed for the I-P district in table 6-2 may be permitted as a special permit use in the I-P district; only parks and playgrounds are permitted. 
3.  Wholesale auto sales are limited to a maximum of five motor vehicles at any one time. 
4.  Residential use and buildings shall be limited to one dwelling unit for a watchman or caretaker on the lot used for industrial purposes or a farm residence. 
5.  Parking lots/garages in the I-2 district, other than as accessory uses, shall be for the storage of private passenger vehicles only. 
6.  Restaurant liquor permit allowed only as an accessory use to a commercial recreational facility. 
7.  Agricultural activities which require a special permit include: all processing or manufacturing of agricultural products, whether such products are grown on or off the premises; the storage of all agricultural products produced or grown off the premises; and roadside stands larger than 200 square feet in size, for the sale of any and all farm products, regardless of where the products are processed or manufactured. The majority of all products sold at the roadside stand must be raised or produced on the premises. For the purposes of this use, off the premises means that the growing and processing/storage of products takes place on property under different ownership than the property upon which the products are sold. (Effective 02/1/12) 
8.  See section 8.80.1 for specific standards. 
9.  See section 8.80.2 for specific standards. 
10.  See section 6.30.4 for specific standards. Retail services up to 4,000 square feet conducted as part of an approved Vocational rehabilitation services use are allowed by site plan review and are not subject to section 6.30.4 provided, however, that no outside storage or display shall be permitted. (Effective 7/12/12) 
Section 6.30. - Other use requirements. 
    6.30.1. Commercial recreational uses. 
A.  The following additional standards shall apply to commercial recreational facilities: 
i.  Minimum lot area - Five acres; 
ii.  Minimum setback of all recreation buildings and accessory parking, loading areas and driveways from any abutting residential district - 150 feet; 
iii.  Minimum separating distance between each commercial recreation use approved under this section - 2,000 feet (such distance is measured as set forth in section 8.10.3 A). (Amended 11/15/04) 
iv.  The commission may permit indoor accessory uses to the principal use when in the opinion of the commission the proposed uses are compatible; these uses may include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Restaurant, banquet facility, meeting rooms, snack bar with or without a liquor permit; 
b.  Interior exhibition area; and 
c.  Pro shop, newsstand, bank and/or automatic teller machine and other similar uses intended for the sole use of the customers of the recreation facility. 
B.  The commission shall consider the following factors when reviewing the application for a special permit use: 
i.  Impact of increased traffic from the new development based on a traffic study prepared by a professional traffic engineer who qualifies as a member of the ITE, paying particular attention to adjacent residential streets and intersections; 
ii.  Possible negative impacts on adjacent uses, particularly residential uses, resulting from lighting, noise, or other factors; 
iii.  Impacts to the overall purpose of the industrial district; 
iv.  Architectural compatibility of the proposed development with other buildings in the surrounding area, and other potential buildings and uses typically allowed in the industrial district, in terms of quality of materials, architectural details and style. 
C.  The commission may impose conditions on any approvals under this section including, but not limited to, the following: 
i.  Conditions to enforce the items contained in the above sections; 
ii.  Maximum hours of operation to avoid impacting adjoining uses; 
iii.  Maximum seating capacity of any recreational facility proposed; 
iv.  Roadway and transportation improvements necessary to support the facility and its operations; and 
v.  Conditions necessary to allow and control the use of reserve parking areas for overflow parking to support occasional large events. 
    6.30.2. Activities limited to enclosed buildings and limited outdoor storage provisions. 
A.  Activities limited to enclosed buildings. All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
B.  Limited outdoor storage. Limited outdoor storage may be considered by the planning and zoning commission via special permit in any industrial zone. The following standards will apply 
1.  Limited to no more than 20 percent of the rear outdoor space. 
2.  Limited to uses associated with on-site uses only. i.e. any outdoor storage must be directly connected to activities conducted inside the buildings. 
3.  All outdoor storage must be screened from public view. 
4.  Outdoor storage must be in defined area(s) and not scattered about or throughout the site. 
    6.30.3. Visitor information booths. 
A.  Visitor information booths may be permitted by a special permit, as an accessory building to a single tenant corporate or industrial complex, when the commission determines that the following specific standards have been met: 
i.  The booth is situated at least ten feet from the right-of-way; 
ii.  A pull-off lane is provided so that automobiles may pull off the right-of-way in a safe manner; 
iii.  The booth is compatible with the architectural style of the principal buildings on the property; 
iv.  The booth is on the same property as the complex to which it relates and the parcel size is at least ten acres in size; 
v.  The booth is no smaller than 100 square feet nor larger than 200 square feet. 
    6.30.4. Retail outlets. 
A.  Retail outlets, including accessory storage and display for goods produced on the premises, may be permitted as an accessory use; 
B.  Retail outlets shall be no larger than ten percent of the gross building area of the entire premises; however, such area shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in area regardless of the gross building area of the entire premises; 
C.  Establishments servicing only wholesale, jobbing and/or professional accounts may also maintain an accessory sales area, including any office and storage areas integral with the sales activity, in an area not to exceed 2,000 square feet or a maximum of ten percent of the gross building area of the premises, whichever is the less; and 
D.  In no case shall outside storage or display be permitted. 
    6.30.5. Construction operations. Construction operations may be permitted by special use permit issued by the planning and zoning commission where the commission finds that the criteria in section 9.20.2 and the following standards have been met: (a) the primary use is contained within a completely enclosed building; (b) all repair and all other operations, other than parking and storage, shall occur within a completely enclosed building; (c) the outside storage area is accessory to the primary use; (d) a maximum of six construction vehicles may be parked in the outside storage area; (e) the outside storage area shall be buffered from street view and from abutting properties by means of a solid fence, wall or "B" buffer yard as described in section 10.20.; and, (f) all other applicable standards found in article VI are found to be satisfied. 
    6.30.6. Special requirements for the industrial park district. 
A.  The plan entitled, "Comprehensive Plan of Development for the Enfield Memorial Industrial Park" dated March 7, 1974, and adopted March 21, 1974, is by deed covenant applicable to the industrial park district. All applications for development within the Enfield Memorial Industrial Park shall conform to this plan. 
B.  In addition to those uses shown in table 6.20, business uses defined within the "Comprehensive Plan of Development for the Enfield Memorial Industrial Park" which are shown located with the industrial park district are permitted. 
C.  The following specific design controls shall apply to all uses proposed within the industrial park district: 
i.  All public utility wiring shall be underground. All at grade public utility installations and structures shall be appropriately screened and landscaped. 
ii.  All refuse, trash and scrap materials shall be kept in appropriately designed containers which shall be screened and landscaped and so located as to be shielded from the public view. 
iii.  The entire lot area not occupied by buildings, off-street parking or loading or other permitted accessory uses requiring a structure shall be maintained in a natural state or, in lawns or plantings which shall be maintained by the occupant. 
iv.  Roofscapes, including accessory mechanical equipment and structures, shall be designed to be an integral part of the building and shall be shielded from public view. 
    6.30.7. Agricultural activities and farms. 
A.  All farm buildings, except for farm stands, shall be at least 100 feet from the street line and from all residential buildings under separate ownership. 
B.  All farm stands shall be at least 20 feet from the street line and at least 100 feet from any intersection. 
C.  All farm stands larger than 200 square feet in area shall require a Special Permit. 
(Ord. No. XZA 17-02 , 7-14-2017) 
ARTICLE VII. - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Section 7.00. - Purpose. 
    Special supplemental standards and requirements are provided to enable nuisances to be measured in terms of their potentially dangerous or objectionable elements, as well as to provide standards for avoiding nuisances. 
Section 7.10. - Performance standards. 
    7.10.1. Dust, dirt, fly ash and smoke. No dust, dirt, fly ash and smoke shall be emitted into the air so as to endanger the public health and safety, to impair the value and enjoyment of other property, to constitute a critical source of air pollution, or to create a nuisance. 
    7.10.2. Odors, gases and fumes. No offensive odors or noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases shall be emitted into the air except for the odors in connection with the spreading of manure or fertilizer. 
    7.10.3. Noise. All operations and uses of land shall conform to the town noise ordinance. 
    7.10.4. Vibrations. With the exception of vibrations necessarily involved in the construction or demolition of buildings and other structures, no vibration shall be transmitted outside the property where it originates. 
    7.10.5. Radioactive materials. No radioactive materials shall be manufactured or disposed of within the town. 
    7.10.6. Outdoor lighting. All external illumination shall be directed or shielded in such a manner that the source (bulb, tube, etc.) of light will not be visible from any street or from any adjoining property. No light shall be directed outside the lot where it originates. All lighting shall be shielded or otherwise designed to provide down lighting so as to minimize night glare. 
    7.10.7. Drainage. No structure shall be used, erected or expanded and no land shall be graded or paved unless provisions have been made for the proper disposal of drainage water, particularly from parking areas and driveways, from the areas contiguous to property lines and from low areas which tend to collect water. 
    7.10.8. Refuse and pollution. 
A.  No refuse or other waste materials and no liquids shall be dumped on any lot or dumped or discharged into any river, stream, water course, aquifer, storm drain, pond, lake or swamp so as to constitute a source of water pollution. 
B.  No garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste materials of any kind shall be disposed of by abandonment or accumulated for commercial purposes, including the establishment, operation of maintenance of a motor vehicle junk yard or motor vehicle junk yard business, except by or under the direction of the Town or with the approval of the commission. 
    7.10.9. Interference with communications. No use on any lot shall cause interference with radio and television reception on any other lot, and any use shall conform to the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission with regard to electromagnetic radiation and interference. 
    7.10.10. Storm water runoff. Uses requiring site plan approval shall, when appropriate and practical, provide a storm water and site development design that maximizes the amount of storm water runoff that can directly precipitate on and percolate into the soil. Alternatively, wherever commercial and/or industrial use(s) greatly inhibit natural percolation, said use(s) shall detain all storm water runoff from parking areas and roof drains, for discharge to surface watercourses during and after site development, so as to minimize adverse ground water quality impacts. Mechanisms for this purpose shall be designed to accommodate storm water runoff in amounts up to and including the 50-year, 24-hour storm peak discharge. 
Section 7.20. - Erosion and sedimentation control requirements. 
    7.20.1. Activities requiring a certified soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre. 
    7.20.2. Exemptions. A single-family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations. 
    7.20.3. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on a proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the "Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" (1985), as amended. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the commission. Such plan shall contain, but not be limited to: 
A.  A narrative describing 
i.  The development; 
ii.  The schedule for grading and construction activities 
iii.  Start and completion dates; 
iv.  Sequence of grading and construction activities; 
v.  Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; and 
vi.  Sequence for final stabilization of the project site. 
vii.  The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
viii.  The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water facilities. 
ix.  The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; and 
x.  The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
B.  A site plan map at a sufficient scale to show: 
i.  the location of the proposed development and adjacent properties; 
ii.  the existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies; 
iii.  the existing structures on the project site, if any 
iv.  the proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, streets and, if applicable, new property lines; 
v.  the location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
vi.  the sequence of grading and construction activities; 
vii.  the sequence of installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; and 
viii.  the sequence for final stabilization of the development site. 
C.  Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the commission, its designated agent, or the department of public works. 
    7.20.4. Minimum acceptable standards. 
A.  Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the "Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" (1985), as amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation. 
B.  The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the "Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" (1985), as amended. The commission or the Hartford County Soil and Water Conservation District may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented. 
C.  The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the "Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" (1985), as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the commission. 
    7.20.5. Issuance of denial of certification. 
A.  The commission shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of these regulations or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations. 
B.  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124 or 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
C.  Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the town may be reviewed by the Hartford County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within 30 days of the receipt of such plan. 
D.  The commission may forward a copy of the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan to the director of public works or other agencies and/or advisors for review and comment. 
    7.20.6. Conditions relating to soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
A.  The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, shall be covered by a completion bond or other assurance acceptable to the commission and the director of finance. A cost breakdown forming the basis of the amount of bond to be posted shall be prepared and submitted to the commission by the applicant with the application for approval of a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
B.  Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional and a completion bond has been posted in a form and an amount acceptable and approved by the commission and the director of finance. 
C.  Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. 
D.  All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan. 
    7.20.7. Inspection and bond release. 
A.  Inspections shall be made by the engineering division of the department of public works during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are property performed or installed and maintained. The commission may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained. 
B.  Upon completion of all work specified in the certified plan, the applicant shall notify the commission thereof and submit a report, including maps as necessary, certifying that the soil erosion and sediment control measures have been completed as approved or may have been modified with the prior approval of the commission. Upon receipt of the report and inspection of the site by the director of public works, the commission may release any bond posted upon the finding that the provisions of the certified plan have been complied with and a written request for the release of the bond from the party placing the bond. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS 

Section 8.00. - Purposes. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide standards for a variety of uses so that their location and operation will be consistent with the protection of the public's health, safety, and welfare. 
Section 8.10. - Retail sale of alcoholic liquor. 
    All uses operating under a permit issued by the State Liquor Control Commission shall comply with the requirements of this section. Furthermore, a special permit shall be required for the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
    8.10.1. Definitions. All definitions of words used in this chapter shall be the same as defined in Section 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, unless herein specifically otherwise stated. "A Regional Shopping Development" shall mean only a planned commercial development permitted to be constructed in a business regional district (section 5.30). "Permit premises" shall mean only that area of a particular building that is actually used for the sale or storage of alcoholic beverages. "Specified land use" shall mean a lot or part of a lot used or reserved to be used for the purposes of a public school, public playground, a church, or a building used as a place of worship. 
    8.10.2. Classification of permit premises. All permit premises are classified as follows: 
A.  Class 1 - A hotel permit, a hotel permit for the sale of beer only, a restaurant permit, a restaurant permit for the sale of wine and beer only, a restaurant permit for the sale of beer only. 
B.  Class 2 - Tavern permits and cafes. 
C.  Class 3 - Package store for the sale of all alcoholic beverages, and druggist permits for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
D.  Class 4 - Package store for the sale of beer only, grocery stores for the sale of beer only, and druggist permits for the sale of beer only. 
E.  Class 5 - Premises holding a club permit. 
    8.10.3. Separation requirements. 
A.  Measurement of separation distances: Separation distances shall be measured along the center line of the public right of way from the principal front entrance of the existing use to the principal front entrance of the building where the proposed use will be conducted. Included in this measurement will be the distance to the entrance to the building(s) as measured from the centerline of the street. 
B.  Permit premises shall observe the following separation requirements: 
Table 8.10.3 - Separation Distances 
Classes Separation from Same Class Separation from Specified Land Use Class 1 0 1,000 feet 1 Class 2 1,000 feet 1,000 feet Class 3 1,000 feet 1,000 feet Class 4 1,000 feet 1,000 feet Class 5 1,000 feet 1,000 feet 1  
1 The commission may grant a special permit to reduce or waive this separation requirement. 
    8.10.4. Requirements concerning retail sale of alcoholic liquor within planned commercial developments within a business regional district. 
A.  The commission may, using special permit procedures, waive any of the separation requirements between permit premises and specified land uses. 
B.  The commission may, using special permit procedures, waive the separation requirements between like classes providing the following conditions are met: 
i.  The development contains a minimum of 120,000 square feet of gross floor area. This threshold may permit up to two like classes to exist in the development without the specified separation requirements. 
ii.  Additional like class permit premises may be approved providing there shall be at least 75,000 square feet of gross floor area for each two permit premises for any one class. 
iii.  The commission shall take into consideration the number of approved locations for all classes of permits within the business regional district, the effect which a new permit location may have on the business regional district, and whether another permit premises in the locality is in the best public interest. 
Section 8.20. - Wireless communication facilities. 
    8.20.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit wireless communication facilities within the town while protecting the public and the town's neighborhoods and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless communication facilities. More specifically, the purposes are: 
A.  To encourage creative design measures to minimize adverse visual effects; 
B.  To provide standards for design, siting, and vegetative screening to minimize adverse visual effects; 
C.  To reduce the number of antennas and towers needed in the future; 
D.  To accommodate the need for wireless communications towers and antennas while not unreasonably regulating their location and number; and 
E.  To encourage the joint use of any existing or new towers. 
    8.20.2. Locational preferences. The order of preference for siting the equipment associated with wireless communication facilities shall range from 1, as the most preferred, to 6, as the least preferred, as noted below: 
1.  On existing structures such as buildings, water towers, and utility poles; 
2.  On existing approved towers; 
3.  On new towers less than 80 feet in height located in commercial or industrial zones; 
4.  On new towers less than 80 feet in height located in residential zones; 
5.  On new towers 80 feet or greater in height located in commercial or industrial zones; or 
6.  On new towers 80 feet or greater in height located in residential zones. 
    8.20.3. Special standards. 
A.  No lights shall be mounted on towers unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Strobe lighting shall be avoided where possible. 
B.  Towers not requiring special FAA painting or marking may be galvanized, painted a non-contrasting blue, gray, or other neutral color, or other such color as needed to blend into its location. 
C.  Towers may not be used to exhibit any signage or advertising. 
D.  Towers shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for two additional users if the proposed antenna is over 100 feet in height; if over 50 feet in height, it shall be designed to accommodate one additional comparable antenna. 
E.  Towers shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to their height. The commission may waive this requirement when there is adequate documentation that the tower structure has been designed to collapse in a manner which will not impact adjacent properties. 
F.  Antennas or equipment buildings/boxes mounted to or on buildings or structures shall to the greatest degree possible blend with the color and/or design of such structure/building. 
G.  Roof top antennas shall not exceed a height of 15 feet above the highest part of a structure or building. Additionally, such antennas shall be set back from the roof edge a minimum of ten feet or ten percent of the roof depth, whichever is greater. 
H.  Antennas mounted on the facade of a building shall match the color of the building and shall project not more than three feet horizontally from the wall or facade of the building and project not more than five feet vertically above the cornice line of the building or wall to which attached. 
I.  Unless waived by the commission, dish antenna shall comply with the following: 
i.  Dish antennas shall not exceed two feet in diameter in residential zones. 
ii.  Dish antennas shall not exceed six feet in diameter in non-residential zones. 
The commission may waive the above requirements when there is satisfactory documentation that such antennas are screened from view from adjacent lots and from public streets. 
J.  Accessory buildings, to be used for housing only telecommunications equipment, are permitted. Such buildings shall not exceed 750 square feet in area and shall be architecturally designed to blend into the neighborhood. Such buildings shall not exceed a height of 12 feet. 
K.  A fence of appropriate design eight feet in height shall enclose the facility. This requirement may be waived when the design of the facility does not warrant a fence, e.g., a flag pole design or a similar stealth design. Landscape buffers shall be provided around the perimeter of the facility as provided for in section 10.20.B. 
L.  No proposed wireless communications facility shall be designed, located, or operated so as to interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications. 
M.  The design and operation of the wireless communication facility shall comply with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) standards regulating non-ionizing electromagnetic emissions. 
N.  All utilities to serve the facility shall be installed underground unless otherwise approved by the commission. 
O.  Generators, if utilized, shall comply with all state regulations and the town noise ordinance. 
    8.20.4. Permits. Wireless communication facilities shall be permitted in all zones subject to the following: 
A.  Site plan: Where the commission determines that an antenna proposed on an existing structure or building meets the following criteria (i, ii or iii below), such antenna and wireless communication facilities may be allowed subject to the submission and approval of a site plan in accord with the requirements of article IX. 
i.  An omni-directional or whip antenna with a length of 20 feet or less and seven inches or less in diameter, provided its material and or color blends with the exterior of the structure. 
ii.  A directional or panel antenna six feet or less in height and two feet or less in width provided its location and appearance blends with the exterior of the structure. 
iii.  A satellite and microwave dish antenna six feet or less in diameter provided the building or rooftop mount is located or screened so it is not visible from abutting public streets. 
B.  Special permits: Wireless communication facilities that do not qualify for site plan approval under section 8.20.4 above may be permitted only after the approval of a special permit as provided for in article IX and this section. 
    8.20.5. Application requirements. In addition to complying with other application requirements of section 8.20, an application for a wireless communication facility shall include the following: 
A.  A site plan application meeting the standards of section 9.10.1 and 9.10.2. 
B.  A map showing the extent of planned coverage within the town and adjacent communities, and the location and service area of the proposed facility. This map shall be accompanied by a report that documents the need for the wireless communications facility. At the minimum, this report will document that the facility is needed to provide acceptable coverage and/or capacity for wireless communications. 
C.  A statement containing a description of the siting criteria and the process by which other possible sites were considered. 
D.  Architectural renderings and/or photo simulations of views of the tower from nearby properties. 
E.  A report from a qualified radio frequency engineer that the proposed facility will meet the FCC requirements for radio frequency radiation at the time that the facility will be operating at maximum capacity. 
F.  A report from a qualified radio frequency engineer that the proposed facility will not interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications. 
G.  When a tower is proposed, a statement from the applicant indicating that, weather permitting, the applicant will raise a balloon, with a diameter of at least three feet, at the proposed ground mounted tower site and to the proposed tower height. Such balloon shall be raised at least three days prior to the date of the public hearing scheduled on the application. A legal notice of the scheduled balloon raising shall be published in a local newspaper. Proof of such publication shall be submitted at the public hearing. 
H.  In all cases in which the commission determines that an expert peer review of the applicant's service area, tower sharing, alternative location or other technical issues is reasonably warranted, the applicant shall be required to reimburse the town for the cost of performing such peer review. 
    8.20.6. Removal. A wireless communication facility not in use for 12 consecutive months shall be removed by the service facility owner. This removal shall occur within 90 days of the end of such 12 month period. Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its previous appearance and, where appropriate, re-vegetated to blend with the surrounding area. The commission may require that a bond in a form acceptable to the commission and the director of finance be submitted prior to the issuance of any building permits for the full costs of the removal of such wireless communications facilities and full site restoration as estimated by the town. 
Section 8.30. - Municipal and public utility uses. 
    8.30.1. Purposes. The purpose of this section is to permit necessary municipal and public utilities in a manner that minimizes conflict with adjacent uses and the surrounding area, and protects the health and safety of the public. 
    8.30.2. Special permit required. 
A.  Municipal and public utility uses, buildings, and structures, including governmental and emergency services communication towers and/or antennas, may be authorized by the commission as a special permit in any zone under the applicable criteria of article IX and provided that the following conditions are met: 
i.  The proposed use is compatible with existing development and the site development blends with the character of the area. 
ii.  All of the requirements of the zoning district are met. The commission may exempt uses from meeting floor area, lot area, and lot width requirements when the proposed use does not involve use by the general public. 
iii.  When the commission exempts a use from the minimum floor area, lot area, and/or lot width requirements, the commission must determine that the land is of sufficient area and width to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
iv.  Municipal Solar Energy systems are allowed in any district by special permit subject to meeting the applicable requirements of section 8.80. (Added 3/19/12) 
B.  These requirements shall not apply to standard utility distribution systems. 
Section 8.40. - Excavation operations. 
    8.40.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent conditions detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare, including, but not limited to, erosion, creation of dangerous open pits, stagnant water bodies, nuisances, or permanent damage to the landscape. These regulations are also directed at minimizing any deleterious effects on adjacent or nearby land uses. 
    8.40.2. General requirements. 
A.  Authorization: Excavation operations are authorized only after the owner of the premises has received a special permit in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, except in the case of the following operations: 
i.  Excavation operations within the actual rights-of-way of public streets or highways of either the town or the state or within streets or roads as shown on a subdivision map or a plan of conservation and development map approved by the commission; 
ii.  Excavation operations within a premise as a result of bona-fide construction operations, such as building erection, for which operation a building permit has been issued by the building official; 
iii.  Excavation operations completely within a premises as a result of bona-fide landscaping, agricultural, or construction operation for which operation no building permit is required, provided that no such excavation operation shall result in removal or filling in of more than 600 cubic yards of earth products for each individual premises; and 
iv.  The town shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
B.  Site plans: In addition to the requirements of article IX, site plans for excavation operations shall show the following: 
i.  The site plan shall provide for proper drainage of the area of the operation after completion; 
ii.  Slopes shall not exceed a vertical rise of one foot over two feet of horizontal distance; 
iii.  The site plan shall note and show that at the conclusion of the operation or of any substantial portion thereof, the whole area where removal takes place shall be covered with not less than four inches of top soil and seeded with suitable crop cover. 
iv.  Excavation shall not occur within 30 feet of any side or rear property line unless authorized by the Commission. Natural vegetation within this 30-foot area shall be preserved. 
C.  Hours of operation: Excavation and removal may occur only on weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. No excavation /removal shall take place on weekends or holidays. 
D.  On-site equipment: Except in an industrial district, no stone crusher or other machinery not required for actual removal of the material shall be used. 
E.  Bonding: Prior to the start of any excavation operation authorized as a special permit, the applicant shall post a bond in accordance with section 9.10.4 of these regulations. Any bond for excavation activities shall include funds adequate to guarantee restoration of the site. 
F.  Criteria for approval: When approving such applications, the commission shall consider the effect of such removal on the surrounding property and the future usefulness of the premises when the operation is completed. 
G.  Modification of site plans: The applicant may request modifications to the approved site plan provided that any bonding as required in section 8.40.2.E. shall not be reduced until all of the requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
H.  Duration of permit: Such permits shall be issued for a period not exceeding two years. Permits may be renewed providing there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
Section 8.50. - Connecticut River conservation overlay zone regulations. 
    8.50.1. Purposes. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the preservation and usage of land within the conservation zone along the Connecticut River. These standards are designed to promote development practices which will support the following goals: 
i.  Protecting and improving the water quality of the Connecticut River; 
ii.  Preserving the necessary flood storage capacity of floodplains; 
iii.  Preserving unique natural, historic and scenic areas and the natural topography of riverfront land; 
iv.  Preserving and encouraging the development of agricultural land uses which contribute to conservation of the area's soil and water resources and which increase a long-term food producing capacity; 
v.  Promoting the recreational potential of the river area and public access to the riverfront which is consistent with the ability of the land and the river to support such use; 
vi.  Influencing the visual impact of riverfront development; and 
vii.  Encouraging the preservation and rehabilitation of the Connecticut River greenbelt. 
    8.50.2. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Clearing plan: A plan showing the existing mix of forest tree species, their approximate height, age and density; a description of the cutting or removal activities to be undertaken. 
B.  Greenbelt: An area of natural vegetation bordering the Connecticut River that is either publicly or privately managed. 
    8.50.3. Location. The conservation zone is an overlay zone and is shown on the official zoning map of the town. The area of the conservation zone is as defined in Public Act 82-296 of the State of Connecticut, Title 25, Chapter 477c of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
    8.50.4. Standards for uses within the floodplain. 
A.  Purpose: Floodplain use is regulated so as to preserve the necessary flood storage capacity; to promote public health, safety and general welfare through minimizing flood losses in floodplain areas; and to promote floodplain uses which are compatible with beneficial floodplain functions. 
B.  Activities permitted as of right. 
i.  Agricultural or farming uses, excluding farm buildings and farm structures. 
ii.  Fences accessory to farm or agricultural uses. 
C.  Obstructions and encroachments within the floodplain: In acting upon any proposal for obstruction or encroachment in the floodplain, the Commission shall use the following guidelines: 
i.  The following activities are generally considered compatible with floodplain values: 
a.  Conservation activities which do not require significant physical alteration of watercourses and floodplains (e.g., wild life and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, etc.). 
b.  Parks and recreation areas provided that the placement of small piers, catwalks, floats, docks, piles and other similar structures including trails and pedestrian access routes providing such facilities: 
1.  do not include dredging or filling of the watercourses and do not require significant physical alterations of floodplains; 
2.  are elevated on low-impact pile foundations; 
3.  do not interfere with or obstruct navigation; and 
4.  do not restrict circulation or tidal flushing. 
c.  The repair, relocation and/or rearrangement of floating docks, open pile docks, and similar structures within an established marina or boat basin which involves no disturbance of the watercourse or floodplain other than removing or relocating anchors or pilings. 
d.  The construction of boat launching ramps where encroachment is to the minimum necessary to provide access to navigable waters. 
e.  Erection of water-dependent industrial and commercial facilities when: 
1.  Elevated pile-supported construction is utilized; 
2.  The facilities do not interfere with the circulation of navigable or tidal waters; 
3.  The facilities are designed to minimize the destruction of indigenous vegetation; 
4.  They do not significantly affect native wildlife; 
5.  Their encroachment is limited to that minimally necessary to provide structural stability; 
6.  There is no alternative for accomplishing the applicant's objective which is prudent and technically feasible, and which further minimizes adverse impacts; 
7.  The height, width and length of structures are limited to the minimum dimensions necessary to accomplish their intended function; and 
8.  The facilities are flood proofed. 
ii.  The following activities are incompatible with floodplain activities. 
a.  Activities which require incremental filling of the floodplain, where incremental shall mean fill, including any material or structure, which would have the effect of displacing water or the flood storage capacity of the property. (Shifting existing contours without the addition of new fill from off-site and which does not reduce the existing flood storage capacity of the subject property is not considered incremental filling.) 
b.  Construction of any structure whose lowest floor, including basement, is lower than the flood elevation. 
c.  Construction of any structure which is not anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
d.  Construction of waste disposal systems which are not flood proofed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
e.  Construction of industrial facilities using, producing or storing hazardous or toxic substances (nuclear power plants, chemical factories, oil storage tanks, etc.) which are not protected against a flood of rare occurrence. 
D.  Lot coverage: No residential building or an accessory building thereto shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered in such a manner as to exceed the maximum percentage of total lot coverage allowed for such buildings in the aggregate on any single lot as indicated in the following table. 
Table 8.50.3 - D 
Maximum Lot Coverage - Residential Zones 
Required Lot Size Maximum Lot Coverage Up to 25,000 s. f. 20% 25,001 to 44,000 s. f. 15% Above 44,000 s. f. 10%  
    8.50.4. Required plans. 
A.  The zoning enforcement officer shall not sign off on any building permit submitted in connection with any subdivision, multi-family project or permitted non-residential use in any district unless a site plan and an soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall have been submitted to and approved by the commission. (Subdivision plans need not show house locations, driveways or other lot specific improvements unless the subdivision is also a senior residential development or a special residential development.) (Amended 08/01/10) 
B.  A cutting plan shall be submitted as part of the supporting documentation filed with a required site plan or as one of the required exhibits to be submitted for land subdivision. 
Section 8.60. - King Street/Enfield Street design overlay district. 
A.  Purpose: These standards are intended to promote the use of design elements which respect traditional architectural styles common to the traditional New England town. The standards contained herein are directed at guiding new development and renovations such that their scale and character will harmonize with the surroundings and reflect and/or complement traditional New England architectural styles. These standards apply to the King Street/Upper Enfield Street design overlay district as shown on the zoning map. 
B.  Siting: All spaces and structures visible to the public from public roadways shall be designed to add to the visual amenities of the area. Building setbacks from the street, side setbacks from adjacent buildings, and orientation of the axis of buildings shall be consistent with and recognize the location, spacing, and orientation of other adjacent buildings. Visually important landscapes and vistas shall be preserved. Existing site features such as stone walls, large trees, and other features shall be incorporated into all new designs to the greatest extent possible. When feasible, new development proposals shall include creative reuse of existing buildings of significant historical and architectural interest. 
C.  Building design elements: Materials, texture, and color used on the exterior walls and roofs shall be those associated with traditional New England architecture. Preferred building materials shall be brick, stone, and wood including narrow width siding, clapboards, wood shingles, or reasonable equivalents. 
D.  Architectural details: Architectural details characteristic of the particular style and period proposed should be incorporated into the design for any new construction and should relate harmoniously to adjacent buildings. It is not intended that the architectural details of old buildings be duplicated precisely, but they should be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations. Desirable architectural features, where appropriate for a particular style, include gabled roofs, multi-pane windows, chimneys, porches, shutters, gothic arches, white columns and entablature, and fanlights. Examples of designed architectural style include Colonial, Georgian, Federal, Greek Revival, Romantic Revival and Victorian styles. Stonewalls, picket-type fences, wrought iron fences, and decorative wrought iron street-furniture are encouraged. 
E.  Signs: Design and placement of signs should complement the building's composition and architectural details. Signs shall consist of materials and colors which are appropriate to facade design and materials, use lettering styles, sizes, and composition that relate to architectural style within the district, and be illuminated externally. The commission may approve an internally lit sign that is deemed appropriate in design for its setting, its location, and its proximity to residential areas during the application review process for new or expanded businesses. An applicant for a sign permit may also request commission review and approval of an internally lit sign for an existing business that does not otherwise have a pending application before the commission. (Amended 9/25/07) 
F.  Waiver of yard requirements: The commission may waive up to 50 percent of any required yard/setback when, in its sole discretion, such waiver will accomplish one or more of the following: 
i.  Permit a more functional use of the site relative to building location, parking, or access; 
ii.  Provide for the preservation of existing site features to include specimen trees and other plantings; or 
iii.  Allow for a superior building site design meeting the purposes of the district. 
iv.  Waivers shall require a special permit application. 
G.  (Effective 5/23/05) Waiver of building height: The commission may waive the maximum height of the proposed building(s) when, in its sole discretion, such a waiver will accomplish one or more of the following: 
i.  Permit a more functional use of the site relative to overall site design meeting the purposes of the district; or 
ii.  Provide for the preservation of existing site features to include wetlands or watercourses, specimen trees and other plantings; or 
iii.  Allow for a superior building site design meeting the purposes of the District. 
iv.  No building shall contain more than three stories. 
v.  Waivers shall require a special permit application. 
Section 8.70. - Hazardville design districts. 
A.  Purpose: These use and design standards contained herein are intended to promote a variety of residential and commercial uses which will complement and enhance the existing historical character of the Hazardville section of Enfield. The standards contained herein shall apply to the Hazardville design district A as shown on the zoning map. The standards for the overlay design district shall be in addition to the requirements of the underlying zone. 
B.  Special standards for the HDDA overlay district: 
i.  All requirements of section 4.20 regarding home occupations, home professional offices shall apply to properties zoned R-33 except that within the HDDA, there shall be no limitation as to non-resident employees/employer. Additionally, any structure proposed for such use shall have such use limited to the ground floor of the structure and the second floor shall be devoted to residential use. 
ii.  Any property located within the HDDA shall also be designated as being in the limited office district under the provisions of section 5.70 of the zoning regulations. 
iii.  Any property located within the HDDA may apply for development approval under a planned design special permit. Such special permit may allow a use of land, buildings and other structures, and related site development, not permitted within the existing zoning district where the lot is located but which would be beneficial to and consistent with the orderly development of the town and the neighborhood, and consistent with the purposes of these regulations and the plan of conservation and development. In order to be approved for a PDSP, the proposed development must be shown to accomplish the following: 
a.  Successfully addresses a specific goal for Hazardville as contained in the plan of conservation and development. 
b.  Provides for a new or renovated building the design of which complements and improves the appearance of Hazardville. 
c.  Provides pedestrian amenities such as gathering areas, sidewalk cafes, new sidewalks or extensions thereof. 
d.  Provides a service or business to address the needs of the neighborhood. 
iv.  Planned design special permits shall require applications for site plan and special permit approval. Applications shall also include a narrative statement detailing the uses proposed, the lot, building, and yard requirements proposed for the property, and the manner, if any, in which such uses and standards differ from those of the underlying zone. 
v.  Minimum lot size required for a PDSP is one acre. 
vi.  Permitted sign areas for attached and free-standing signs may be increased by 20 percent when the commission determines that the design of the sign has incorporated appropriate historical details relevant to the Hazardville area. 
vii.  New or expanded residential structures may observe a 15-foot front yard setback providing that the new or expanded structure incorporates an open porch along the full frontage of the structure, and that the width of the width of the structure along the frontage is at least 85 percent of the width of the widest part of the structure parallel to Hazardville Avenue. 
C.  Building design elements: Materials, texture, and color used on the exterior walls and roofs shall be those associated with traditional New England architecture. Preferred building materials shall be brick, stone, and wood including narrow width siding, clapboards, wood shingles, or reasonable equivalents. 
D.  Architectural details: Architectural details characteristic of the particular style and period proposed should be incorporated into the design for any new construction and should relate harmoniously to adjacent buildings. It is not intended that the architectural details of old buildings be duplicated precisely, but they should be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations. Desirable architectural features, where appropriate for a particular style, include gabled roofs, multi-pane windows, chimneys, porches, shutters, gothic arches, white columns and entablature, and fanlights. Examples of designed architectural style include Colonial, Georgian, Federal, Greek Revival, Romantic Revival and Victorian styles. Stonewalls, picket-type fences, wrought iron fences, and decorative wrought iron street-furniture are encouraged. 
E.  In addition to the standards set forth above and in the evaluation criteria found in article IX of these regulations all applications for development within the Hazardville design district A as shown on the Enfield zoning map shall contain a review of the application's consideration of the guidelines contained in the Hazardville Study Design Review Guide which is found in the appendix of these regulations. (Amended 06/02/08) 
Section 8.75. - Scitico design overlay district. (added 09/08/17) 
A.  Purpose: These design standards contained herein are intended to encourage a variety of residential and commercial uses which will promote a village character for the Scitico section of Enfield. The standards contained herein shall apply to the Scitico design overlay district as shown on the zoning map. The standards for the overlay design district shall be in addition to the requirements of the underlying zone unless specifically modified. 
B.  Special standards. Special standards for the Scitico design overlay district include: 
i.  Any property located within the Scitico design overlay district may apply for development approval under a planned design special permit. (PDSP) All new or substantial rehabilitation construction must apply for a (PDSP). 
ii.  Such special permit may allow a use of land, buildings and other structures, and related site development, not permitted within the existing zoning district or zoning envelope where the lot is located but which would be beneficial to and consistent with the orderly development of the town and the neighborhood, and consistent with the purposes of these Regulations and the plan of conservation and development. In order to be approved for a PDSP, the planning and zoning commission must make a finding that the proposed development accomplishes the following: 
a.  Successfully addresses the village mixed use goal as contained in the plan of conservation and development. 
b.  Provides for a new or renovated building meets the design standards of the district. 
c.  Provides pedestrian amenities such as gathering areas, sidewalk cafes, new sidewalks or extensions of sidewalks. 
d.  Contributes to a village ambiance of the Scitico area. 
iii.  Planned design special permits shall require applications for site plan and special permit approval. Applications shall also include a narrative statement detailing the uses proposed and the lot, building, and yard requirements proposed for the property, and the manner, if any, in which such uses and standards differ from those of the underlying zone. 
C.  Building design elements: Materials, texture, and color used on the exterior walls and roofs shall be those associated with traditional New England architecture. Preferred building materials shall be brick, architectural stone and wood including narrow width siding, clapboards, wood shingles, or reasonable equivalents. 
D.  Architectural details: Architectural details exhibiting a New England Village character shall be incorporated into the design for any new construction or substantial rehabilitation. 
E.  Site design. The preferred site design is for buildings to be located near the street with parking either on the side or in the rear. Parking in front of the building is restricted. Pedestrian amenities are to be incorporated. 
Section 8.80. - Solar energy systems. (Effective 3/19/12) 
A.  Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the regulation of the construction and operation of solar energy facilities in the Town of Enfield, subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the environment, public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Definitions: 
    Solar energy system, large: A solar energy collection system, which is interconnected to the local utility electrical grid and generates electricity that can be sold directly into the wholesale electricity market through a regional transmission organization, and/or that can be used to serve all or part of the electric load at one of more properties and consumers. 
    Solar energy system, roof-mounted: A solar collection system that is installed upon or is part of the roof of a building or structure located on the subject property. Systems integrated as awnings or attached to the roofs of porches, sheds, carports and covered parking structures also fall under this distinction. 
    Solar energy system, small: An accessory solar energy collection system that is interconnected to the local utility electrical grid on the customer's side of the electric meter, generates electricity for direct consumption on the subject property to offset electricity purchased from the local electric distribution company, and performs in accordance with current state net-metering laws. 
    8.80.1. Small-scale solar energy systems. Small solar energy systems shall be a permitted as an accessory use by right in all zoning districts subject to the requirements set forth in this section: Solar energy systems include ground, pole and roof mounted systems. 
    8.80.1.1. Energy: The energy generated by the small solar energy system shall be used for direct consumption on the subject property and be interconnected to the electric utility power grid to off-set energy use on the subject property, in accordance with current state net-metering laws. 
    8.80.1.2. The construction of the small solar energy system shall be in accordance with an approved building permit application. If the small solar energy system is to be interconnected to the local utility power grid, a copy of the notification from the local electric distribution company (EDC) that the EDC has received a complete interconnection request ("application"). 
    8.80.1.3. Setback: 
a.  In residential districts ground- or pole-mounted small-scale solar energy systems shall be placed so that no individual component is closer than five feet from the rear lot line (except on through lots as defined in section 2.30 of these regulations) and five feet from side lot lines. Ground or pole-mounted solar energy system shall only be allowed in the rear or the side yard behind the front building line. 
b.  In business and industrial districts ground- or pole-mounted small-scale solar energy systems shall be placed so that no individual component of the solar system may extend into the front, side or rear setback for the district. Ground mounted small-scale solar systems shall be screened from adjoining residential districts by arborvitae or similar evergreen hedge planted six feet on center located on the outside of the perimeter fence. The commission may allow additional or alternative screening methods such as berms and opaque fencing when it is determined that such alternatives are more appropriate for the particular site. 
    8.80.1.4. Ground-mounted small solar energy systems: 
a.  The total height of the solar energy system, including any mounts shall not exceed 18 feet above the ground at maximum height. If the solar energy system is intended to provide power for outdoor lighting, the system shall not extend higher than the permitted height of the structure to which it is attached and/or inter-connected. 
b.  Panels shall be mounted onto a pole, rack or suitable foundation, in accordance with manufacturer specifications, in order to ensure the safe operation and stability of the system. The mounting structure (fixed or tracking capable) shall be comprised of materials approved by the manufacturer, which are able to fully support the system components and withstand adverse weather conditions. 
c.  Multiple mounting structures shall be spaced apart at the distance recommended by the manufacturer to ensure safety and maximum efficiency. 
d.  Any electrical wiring used in the system shall be underground (trenched) except where wiring is brought together for inter-connection to system components and/or the local utility power grid 
e.  No ground-mounted small solar energy systems shall be affixed to a fence. 
f.  Ground-mounted small-scale solar energy systems in business and industrial districts shall be subject to site plan review pursuant to the provisions of section 9.10 of these regulations. 
    8.80.1.5. Roof-mounted small solar energy systems: Roof-mounted small solar energy systems shall include integrated solar shingles, tiles, or panels as the surface layer of the roof structure with no additional apparent change in relief or projection (the preferred installation), or separate flush or rack-mounted solar panels mechanically fastened to and/or secured with ballast on the roof surface. 
a.  Separate flush or rack-mounted small solar energy systems installed on the roof of a building or structure shall not: 
i.  Project vertically more than four inches above the peak of the sloped roof to which it is attached; or 
ii.  Project vertically more than five feet above a flat roof installation. 
b.  It shall be demonstrated that the placement of the system shall not adversely affect safe access to the roof, pathways to specific areas of the roof, and safe egress from the roof. 
c.  Any glare generated by the system must be mitigated or directed away from an adjoining property or adjacent road when it creates a nuisance or safety hazard. 
d.  Roof top panels shall be configured in an overall square or rectangular pattern so as to present a uniform appearance. This may be one square or rectangular panel or two or more square or rectangular panels that form an overall uniform appearance. Examples are shown on diagrams below. (Amended 5/9/2016) 




    8.80.1.6. Appearance. 
a.  Appearance, color, and finish. The small solar energy system shall remain painted or finished the color or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer. 
b.  All signs, other than the manufacturer's, or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification on a small solar energy system shall be prohibited installer and/or developer are limited to one sign indicating their role in the system installation. 
    8.80.1.7. Code compliance: A small solar energy system shall comply with all applicable construction and electrical codes. 
    8.80.1.8. Removal: All obsolete or unused systems shall be removed within 12 months of cessation of operations without cost to the town. System components should be reused or recycled whenever possible. 
    8.80.1.9. Violations. Subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance, it is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small solar energy system that is not in compliance with this chapter or with any condition contained in a building permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    8.80.2. Large scale solar energy system. 
    8.80.2.1. Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction and operation of all large-scale solar energy system shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements 
    8.80.2.2. Building permit and building inspection. No large-scale solar energy system shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. 
    8.80.2.3 Site plan review. Ground-mounted large-scale solar energy system with 250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity are allowed in industrial districts subject to site plan review by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission prior to construction, installation or modification as provided in this section. 
a.  General. All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in Connecticut. 
b.  Required documents. Pursuant to the site plan review process, the project proponent shall provide the following documents in addition to the site plan submission requirements of section 9.10.2: 
i.  Blueprints or drawings of the solar energy system signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in Connecticut showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential shading from nearby structures. 
ii.  Manufacturer's data sheets or similar documentation of the major system components to be used, including the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter 
iii.  Full contact information, including name, address, phone number and e-mail address for proposed system installer 
iv.  Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as well as all co-proponents or property owners, if any 
v.  The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the project proponent; and 
vi.  Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site; 
vii.  An operation and maintenance plan 
viii.  Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the project site, 
ix.  Proof of liability insurance; 
The Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission may waive documentary requirements that it finds are unnecessary to determine compliance with these regulations, as it deems appropriate. 
    8.80.2.4. Site control. The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar energy system. 
    8.80.2.5. Operation and maintenance plan. The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the large- scale ground-mounted solar energy system, which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, storm water controls, as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the installation. 
    8.80.2.6. Utility notification. No large-scale ground -mounted solar energy system shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission that the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the solar energy system owner or operator's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned solar energy system. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
    8.80.2.7. Dimension and density requirements. 
a.  Setbacks. For large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, front, side and rear setbacks shall be as follows: 
i.  Front yard. The front yard depth shall be at least ten feet; provided, however, where the lot is across from a residential district, the front yard shall not be less than 50 feet. 
ii.  Side yard. Each side yard shall have a depth at least 25 feet; provided, however, where the lot abuts a residential district, the side yard shall not be less than 100 feet. 
iii.  Rear yard. The rear yard depth shall be at least 20 feet; provided, however, where the lot abuts a residential district, the rear yard shall not be less than 100 feet 
b.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for any large-scale solar energy system shall be seven acres. 
c.  Height. The total height of any large-scale solar energy system, including any mounts, shall not exceed nine feet above the ground. 
    8.80.2.8. Accessory structures. All accessory structures to large- scale ground-mounted solar energy system shall be subject to the underlying zoning requirements concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. All such accessory structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts. 
    8.80.2.9. Design standards. 
a.  Lighting. Lighting of large-scale solar energy system shall be consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as accessory structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Lighting of the solar energy system shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution. 
b.  Signage. Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system shall comply with the sign regulations. A sign consistent with the regulations shall be required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number. 
c.  Utility connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission, shall be made to place all wiring from the solar energy system underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers, inverters and switch gears for utility interconnections may be above ground. 
d.  Screening. A ground mounted large solar energy system shall be screened from adjoining residential districts by arborvitae or similar evergreen hedge planted six feet on center located on the outside of the perimeter fence. The commission may allow additional or alternative screening methods when it is determined that such alternatives are more appropriate for the particular site. The commission may also allow fencing up to eight feet in height where deemed appropriate. 
    8.80.2.10. Safety and environmental standards. 
a.  Emergency services. The large-scale solar energy system owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local fire marshal. Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the solar energy system shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the life of the installation. 
b.  Land clearing and soil erosion impacts. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws. 
    8.80.2.11. Monitoring and maintenance. 
a.  Solar energy system conditions. The large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the local fire marshal and emergency medical services. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar energy system and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way. 
b.  Modifications. All material modifications to a solar energy system made after issuance of the required building permit shall require approval by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    8.80.2.12. Abandonment or decommissioning. 
a.  Removal requirements. Any large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with section 8.80.2.12 b of this regulation shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of: 
i.  Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site. 
ii.  Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations. 
iii.  Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation. 
iv.  A stabilization/re-vegetation plan shall be submitted along with the Site Plan application. 
b.  Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances, the solar energy system shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent of the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission. If the owner or operator of the large- scale ground-mounted solar energy system fails to remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the town may enter the property and physically remove the installation. 
Section 8.90. - Special requirements for outdoor special events. (Added 5/1/13) 
    Outdoor special events as defined in sections 2.30 shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements: 
    8.90.1. Approvals. All outdoor special event applications shall be approved by the North Central District Health Department, the police department and the fire marshal's office, if applicable, prior to a the issuance of a zoning permit by planning department staff regardless of zoning district or duration. All outdoor special events shall require site plan approval by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission except as provided for in sections 8.90.6 and 8.90.7 below. 
    8.90.2. Parking requirements. Outdoor special events shall provide adequate off-street parking as determined by the commission after consultation with staff. An application for an outdoor special event shall include a parking needs analysis. Available parking for the event shall be clearly shown on a plot plan. 
    8.90.3. Setback requirements. No tents or temporary structures associated with outdoor special events shall be located within any front, side or rear yard setbacks of the applicable zoning district, with the exception of tents up to five feet in width which may be required by the health district for the delivery of food to the location where it will be served, but not to be used to serve food. 
    8.90.4. Hours of operation. 
A.  An application for approval of an outdoor special event shall include the proposed days and hours of operation. The commission may set limits on the hours of operation to protect nearby residential uses. 
    8.90.5. Lights and noise. Outdoor special events shall minimize the impact of lights and noise on surrounding residential properties. All events are subject to chapter 38, of the Enfield Town Code, article IV (commonly referred to as the Town of Enfield noise ordinance) and any other applicable local ordinances and/or regulations. 
    8.90.6. Exceptions. Outdoor special events located on town-owned property authorized by the town council and/or the town manager pursuant to established policies, including but not limited to chapter 54 of the Enfield Town Code, Town of Enfield regulations for the use of town green and gazebo, and the town's facilities use policy, shall be exempt from the need for a zoning permit. 
    8.90.7. Repeat or annual events. Repeat or annual events in which the director of planning has found that there are no material changes and there have been no substantive complaints in prior years, may be allowed to obtain an approval from planning staff without commission approval. The approval of North Central District Health Department, the police department and the fire marshal's office, if applicable shall be obtained prior to the granting of any staff approvals. 
Section 8.100. - Mobile food vendors. (Added 09/08/17) 
A.  Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide the permit standards for mobile food vendors on private property. 
B.  Exemptions to this section: 
a.  Family one-day gatherings at a residential property, not to exceed four times a year. 
b.  Special Events sponsored by the Town of Enfield and located on town property. 
c.  Mobile food vending on public streets as regulated by town council Ordinance 58-35 and its implementing rules and regulations as it may be amended from time to time. 
d.  Mobile food trucks serving private employers when restricted to employees of the building or industrial complex. 
e.  Mobile food trucks approved as part of a special events permit issued by the planning and zoning commission. 
C.  One Day vending from a specific location: With the written permission of a private property owner, a mobile food vendor can vend for one day provided the requirements and standards of the zoning regulations and Ordinance 58-35 are met. This is limited to four times a year without applying for a planning and zoning permit. 
D.  More than one day but one week or less vending from a specific location. Vending that is proposed for more than one day to less than one week may apply for a zoning permit. 
E.  More than one week vending from a specific location. Vending that is proposed for more than one week will require an approval from the planning and zoning commission consistent with the special events standards. 
F.  All mobile food vending is restricted to daylight hours beginning no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 8:00 p.m. 
G.  Mobile food vendors cannot be located within a half mile of a brick and mortar food establishment unless given written permission by the brick and mortar establishment. Such permission must be filed with the planning office. 
H.  All Mobile food vendors must be licensed by the North Central Health District. 
ARTICLE IX. - SITE PLAN AND SPECIAL PERMIT STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES 

Section 9.00. - Purposes. 
    This article provides general criteria for judging the appropriateness of special permit uses, as well as specific standards for the form and content of site plans. 
Section 9.10. - Site plan standards and procedures. 
    9.10.1. General requirements. 
A.  Site plan approval shall be required for the following: 
i.  Special permit uses; 
ii.  Home occupations and home professional offices; 
iii.  All business uses; 
iv.  All industrial uses; and 
v.  All type C signs. 
B.  Applications for site plan approval shall include the following: 
i.  A completed application form signed by the applicant and the owner of the property; 
ii.  A fee in the amount prescribed by the commission or by ordinance; and 
iii.  Fourteen copies of the maps and plans listed in section 9.10.2. 
C.  Filing fees may include additional costs incurred by the Town of Enfield, including but not limited to, the expense of retaining experts to analyze, review and report on areas requiring a detailed, technical review in order to assist the planning and zoning commission in its deliberations. Said costs will be estimated by the commission, based on preliminary estimates from such experts, and said estimate of costs times 150 percent will be paid over to the commission prior to proceeding on the application. Upon completion of the technical review and a determination of the costs incurred, any excess will be refunded to the applicant. Applicant shall not be responsible for costs incurred in excess of 150 percent of the commission's estimate. 
    9.10.2. Site plan requirements. 
A.  General: Site plans shall be prepared by appropriate design professionals; (surveyor, engineer, architect, and landscape architect) licensed to practice in the state and shall bear appropriate registration stamps. All drawings shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 60 feet and where practical, the scale shall be one inch equals 40 feet. All site plan drawings shall be in sufficient detail and accuracy, (generally A-2), to enable the construction of all site improvements shown and approved on the drawings. All site improvements shall be constructed to the standards of the town's technical subdivision regulations. 
B.  Site plan contents: Site plans shall include the following: 
i.  Title Block with name of developer, property owner, north arrow, scale of not more than 1":40' nor less than 1":60', seals and signatures of all appropriate design professionals; 
ii.  A location map at the scale of one inch to 1,000 feet showing the proposed project and the nearest street intersection; 
iii.  Boundary survey of site including distances with angles or bearings; 
iv.  Zoning classification of property; 
v.  Area of lot; 
vi.  Name of adjacent owners and zoning classification of their property; 
vii.  Existing and proposed contours or spot grades at no more than two-foot intervals; 
viii.  Locations of existing and proposed buildings with dimensions, area, elevations and number of stories and distances between all buildings and property lines; 
ix.  Existing and proposed sanitary and storm water drainage facilities with elevations, 
x.  Existing and proposed sidewalks, curbs and curb cuts, and adjacent streets; 
xi.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by section 7.20; 
xii.  Drainage design for roof area, parking lot and driveways consistent with section 7.10.10; 
xiii.  Locations and descriptions of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way; 
xiv.  Location of existing trees. Trees larger than 12 inches in diameter shall be so labeled. 
xv.  Proposed landscaping with specific location, size and common name. 
xvi.  Layout of all off street parking areas showing details of aisles, driveways, each parking space, all loading and unloading areas, pavement markings, location of directional signs, 
xvii.  Existing and proposed locations, height and size of all outdoor lighting and sign locations; 
xviii.  Fire lanes and traffic control signs as required by police and fire authorities; 
xix.  Outside storage areas with proposed screening; 
xx.  Location of outside recycling and refuse storage area and proposed screening; 
xxi.  Provisions for water supply; 
xxii.  Where development is proposed to be in phases, phase lines shall be shown; 
xxiii.  In tabular form show in one column the required standards contained in the bulk table or elsewhere in these regulations and in a second column in line with the standards in the first column the standards proposed for a specific facility; 
xxiv.  The applicant shall submit 14 copies of preliminary architectural plans which shall describe the appearance, size, use and occupancy of all proposed structures; said plans shall be at a scale not less than one foot equals 16 feet, and shall include the following: 
a.  Floor plans for each floor or level of each proposed structure, which plans shall indicate spatial arrangement, use, occupancy, seating arrangement, ingress and egress; 
b.  Exterior elevations (side views) of each side or elevation of each proposed structure; such elevations shall indicate proposed materials, roofscape, if any, and building height; 
c.  All exterior mechanical equipment shall be shown and fully screened from the public view in a manner compatible with the architectural style of the building and designed in a manner that is integral to the architectural design of the building; and 
d.  Where alterations and/or additions to existing buildings are proposed, description in both plan and elevation adequate to explain the proposal shall be provided; and 
xxv.  Copy of preliminary application for access to state highways and to state-owned storm drainage facilities where such state permit is necessary. 
C.  Waiver: The commission may waive the submission of all or part of the information required under this section if it finds that the information is not necessary in order to decide on the application's conformance with these regulations. 
    9.10.3. Site plan review procedure. Public hearings are not required for site plan applications. However, the commission may hold public hearings for such applications when they have determined it is in the public interest to do so. When a public hearing is held, the notice requirements of section 9.20 shall be followed. 
    9.10.4. Site plan approval criteria. In addition to determining that the site plan complies with all of the standards of the zoning regulation, the commission will be guided by the following: 
A.  Traffic access: That all proposed traffic access ways are: 
i.  Adequate but not excessive in number; 
ii.  Adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility; and 
iii.  Appropriately separated from street corners or other places of public assembly. 
B.  Circulation and parking: That adequate off-street parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent parking in public streets of vehicles of any persons connected with or visiting the use and that the interior circulation system is adequate to provide safe accessibility to all required off-street parking. 
C.  Landscaping and screening: That all playground, parking and service areas are reasonably screened at all seasons of the year from the view of adjacent residential lots and streets and that the general landscaping of the site is in character with that generally prevailing in the neighborhood. Existing trees over 12 inches in diameter shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
D.  Design standards: That the proposed improvements adhere to the standard details and cross sections depicting the town standards for construction and site improvements found in the technical subdivision regulations and, where standards are not stated, as promulgated by the director of public works. 
    9.10.5. Site plan bonding-Certificates of compliance. (Amended 11/01/06) 
A.  Prior to application for any building permit, a performance bond for 100 percent of the cost of landscaping and any required public improvements shall be posted with the town in a form approved by the director of finance. The directors of public works and planning, or their designees, shall determine the amount of the bond. 
B.  No certificate of occupancy or other final approval may be issued until the applicant has received a certificate of site plan compliance from the planning department. When minor site work cannot be completed because of weather or other pertinent reason, a conditional certificate of site plan compliance may be issued for a period not to exceed 180 days, providing satisfactory surety shall be posted with the Town of Enfield in an amount sufficient to complete the site work. Upon receipt of a request for certificate of site plan compliance by the planning department, members of the administrative review team (including but not limited to: Building official, North Central District Health, public works department, fire marshal, traffic safety officer and utilities) will 1) be notified of the request; 2) be given the opportunity to review those site development items which fall within their purview; and 3) make a report to the planning department of the site's acceptability and compliance. Improvements which have not been made will be noted and bond estimates made where appropriate. The planning department will notify the applicant of the results of these reviews. The planning department will notify the building official when a certificate of site plan compliance or a conditional certificate of site plan compliance is issued and its conditions. A request for certificate of site plan compliance from the planning department must be made at least ten days before a certificate of occupancy or other, final approval is requested from the building official. Upon written request of the applicant and satisfactory completion of the site work, the planning commission or its designee shall release any surety posted under this provision. 
C.  A separate bond shall be required for soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and site restoration prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
D.  The commission shall have the sole authority for release of such required performance bonds in whole or in part. All requests for the release of any bond or part of a bond shall be made in writing to the commission. 
E.  The applicant may request, and the commission may grant, a phasing of bond posting. All phasing of the bonding shall match the phasing on the approved site plan and the applicant shall supply written detail of all work to be completed in each phase, which shall match the phasing lines on the final plans. All work within a particular phase must be fully completed to the satisfaction of the directors of planning and public works prior to the start of any work associated with any subsequent phase or phases. 
F.  Bonds for landscaping shall not be released until one year after completion of site improvements. For any landscaping installed during the months of June, July, or August, the period shall be two years. 
    9.10.6. Submission of approved plans. The applicant shall submit to the director of planning final plans as approved by the commission. Such plans shall be submitted on paper and/or mylar in addition to a digital format prescribed by the director of planning. By a majority vote of the commission members present and voting on the application, the commission may waive the requirement for plans in a digital format. 
    9.10.7. Modifications to approved site plans. (Amended 1/06/2015) 
A.  All modifications to approved site plans shall require the filing of an application to modify a site plan with appropriate drawings and the payment of the appropriate fee. 
B.  Prior to administrative approval of any modifications the town planner, his or her equivalent, shall first obtain authorization from the planning and zoning commission which shall have voted on the modification. Any such administrative approval shall require consultation with all appropriate agencies. 
    9.10.8. Validity. A site plan application approved by the commission, as required by state statutes, shall be valid for a period of five years from the effective date of approval of such application. Extensions may be granted by the commission for up to five additional years for a total of ten years. 
    9.10.9. Site maintenance (Added 11/01/06). All improvements required on the approved site plan must be maintained in good order and repair and in proper appearance, on a continuing basis. All landscaped areas and plantings, including any planters or like receptacles, shall be maintained free of debris, sand, salt, litter, weeds and other unsightly or deleterious vegetation, growth or matter. Required plantings shall be replaced when the same have died. All parking areas, sidewalks, walkway areas, light standards, berms, curbs, bumpers, signs and all parts of storm drainage systems shall be maintained in good order and repair and in proper appearance on a continuous basis. The site shall be maintained free of debris, sand, salt, litter, weeds and other unsightly or deleterious matter. Where appropriate, the planning and zoning commission may require a written agreement between the town and the applicant/owner, to insure continued maintenance of site improvements. 
Section 9.20. - Special permit standards and procedures. 
    9.20.1. General. 
A.  Special Permits are required for all uses so identified in tables 4.20, 5.20, 5.40.2 and 6.20, and all proposed signs except type A and B signs. 
B.  Public hearings are required for all special permit applications. 
C.  Applications for a special permit shall include the following: 
i.  A completed application form signed by the applicant and the owner of the property; 
ii.  A fee in the amount prescribed by the commission or by ordinance; and 
iii.  A site plan application and the accompanying maps and data as required under section 9.10. 
D.  Filing fees may include additional costs incurred by the Town of Enfield, including but not limited to, the expense of retaining experts to analyze, review and report on areas requiring a detailed, technical review in order to assist the planning and zoning commission in its deliberations. Said costs will be estimated by the commission, based on preliminary estimates from such experts, and said estimate of costs times 150 percent will be paid over to the commission prior to proceeding on the application. Upon completion of the technical review and a determination of the costs incurred, any excess will be refunded to the applicant. Applicant shall not be responsible for costs incurred in excess of 150 percent of the commission's estimate. 
    9.20.2. Special permit criteria. 
A.  In authorizing a special permit use, the commission shall take into consideration the public health, the safety and general welfare, the comfort and convenience of the public in general, and of the residents of the immediate neighborhood in which the proposed development is located in particular, and may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards as a condition to its approval. The commission shall also consider the following objectives: 
i.  The extent to which the proposed use complies with specific criteria and standards assigned to a special permit use as stated in articles IV, V and VI of these regulations; 
ii.  That all proposed structures, equipment or material shall be readily accessible for fire and police protection; 
iii.  That the proposed use shall be of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is proposed to be situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties; and 
iv.  That, in addition to the above, in the case of any use located in, or directly adjacent to, a residential district: 
a.  The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its site layout and its relation to access streets shall be such that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use and the assembly of persons in connection therewith will not be hazardous or inconvenient to, or incongruous with, the said residential district or conflict with the normal traffic of the neighborhood; and 
b.  The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls and fences, and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings, or impair the value thereof. 
    9.20.3. Validity. Special permit approved by the commission shall be valid for a period of one year from the effective date of approval of such application. The commission may grant an extension of this period for an additional one year upon written request of the applicant. 
Section 9.30. - Public hearing requirements and procedures. 
A.  Whenever a public hearing is scheduled by the commission, or by the zoning board of appeals, the applicant shall place a sign on the affected property which can be seen from all abutting streets. The sign is to be placed at or near the street line or traveled way and shall be clearly visible to the general public. Such sign, to be provided by the office of the director of planning, shall be installed by the applicant no less than ten days before the hearing, and shall be removed by the applicant within five days after the close of such hearing. An affidavit will be executed by the applicant or his agent certifying that this sign will be installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Amended 9/8/03 and 03/03/11) 
B.  When a zone change is sponsored by the commission and affects multiple properties, in lieu of the requirement to post hearing signs, the commission shall place a public notice no less than two columns by four inches in size to be printed in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the community. 
ARTICLE X. - SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

Section 10.00. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of this article is to guide site development activities to assure that such activities are conducted in a manner that protects the health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens in Enfield. 
Section 10.10. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. (Amended 09/08/17) 
A.  The following regulations are designed to provide adequate off-street parking and loading facilities and safe vehicle movements while minimizing any detrimental effects to adjacent properties, neighborhoods and the environment. Accessory off street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of these regulations shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than required shall not be further reduced below, the requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of these regulations. 
B.  No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, modified, or its use changed to a use requiring additional off-street parking and/or loading spaces unless permanently maintained off-street parking and loading spaces are provided for the new use in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, except where such change of use, new building, alteration or increase in floor area requires no increase in parking over what presently exists. 
    10.10.1. General requirements. 
A.  Accessory off street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as required by these regulations for all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established in each district after the effective date of these regulations. 
B.  When the intensity of use of any building, structure or lot shall be increased through the addition of dwelling unit gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement in the amount specified herein requiring parking or loading facilities, such additional parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided. 
C.  Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to the effective date of these regulations, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of these regulations. 
D.  In situations where parking facilities are permitted on land other than the lot on which the building or use being served is located, such facilities shall be in the same possession as the lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. Such possession may be either by deed or long-term lease, the term of such lease to be determined by the commission. The owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be located shall be bound by covenants, filed on record in the office of the town clerk, requiring such owner, his or her heirs and assigns, to maintain the required number of parking facilities for the duration of the use served or of said lease, whichever shall terminate sooner. 
E.  Off street parking facilities required as an accessory use to all uses permitted by these regulations shall be solely for the parking of passenger vehicles of patrons, occupants, and employees of those uses. 
F.  When the application of these off-street parking regulations results in a requirement of not more than three spaces on a single lot in any business district, such parking spaces need not be provided. However, where two or more uses are located on a single lot only one of these uses shall be eligible for the above exemption. This exemption shall not apply to dwelling units. 
G.  Not more than one camping-type vehicle and/or boat may be parked on any lot in a HR-33, R-33, R-44 or R-88 zone. Such vehicle shall be parked or stored only in a garage or on a paved surface located no closer to the front property line than the front wall of the residence. Such paved area shall not be located within any required side yard or within five feet of the rear lot line. Commercial vehicles in residential districts may be parked only in accordance with section 3.30.13 of these regulations. (Amended 11/25/03). 
    10.10.2. Number of required parking and loading spaces. Parking and loading spaces shall be provided in all zones in sufficient number to accommodate the motor vehicles of all occupants, employees, customers and any others normally visiting the premises for each new, expanded or change in use in accordance with the following schedule: 
Table 10.10.2 Parking Standards 
Use Parking Required Accessory Apartments 1 Dwelling Unit Adult and Child Day Care Facilities 
(All Day Care Facilities) 1 Employee 1 6 Students Animal Hospitals 1 Staff Member on largest shift 3 Examining Room Assisted Living Facilities 1 2 Dwelling Units 1 2 Employees 1 Shuttle or Vehicle owned by facility Auditoriums, Theaters, Stadiums, Convention Halls or similar Places of Public Assembly 1 4 Seats Automotive Service Stations 1 Employee 3 Service Bay (BG District) 6 Service Bay (BR District) 1 Service Vehicle Bed and Breakfast Inns 1 Bedroom 1 Employee Bowling Alleys 3 Lane Building Material Stores 3 1,000 sq. ft. Gross Leasable Area Business or Trade Schools, Junior Colleges, Colleges or Universities 1 Faculty or Staff Member 1 Student Business Service 1 250 sq. ft. Gross Leasable Area Business/Professional Offices 1 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Leasable Area Car Washes 2 Vacuum Facility 
In addition to the above, each self-service bay shall have 4 stacking spaces, and each full-service bay 12 stacking spaces. Clubs, Non-profit 1 4 Seats in Main Meeting Room 1 Guest Room Commercial Recreation Facilities, Indoors 1 250 sq. ft of Gross Floor Area or; 8 Tennis Court Commercial Recreation Facilities, Outdoors 3 Court, Tee or Position 1 Employee Continuing Care Facilities 1 2 Employees 1 2 Beds 1 1 Doctor assigned to Facility Convalescent/Nursing Homes 1 3 Beds Conversion to Residential Use 2 Dwelling Unit Elementary or Middle Schools 1 Faculty Member or Employee 1 4 Seats in Auditorium Financial Institutions 3 Teller Window 1 Desk 1 Employee Funeral Homes/Undertaking Businesses 1 3 Seats in largest Room 1 Vehicle maintained on Lot 1 Employee Furniture Stores 1.25 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area Health Clubs 1 Employee 1 4 participants and/or members Hotel, Motel 1 Guest Room 1 Employee, plus spaces for accessory uses such as a restaurant. Housing for the Elderly .75 Dwelling Unit 1 Shuttle Vehicle maintained on lot Industrial (Non-warehouse) Uses 1 750 sq. ft. of Gross Leasable Area Medical Offices = 10,000 s.f. 6 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area Medical Offices > 10,000 s.f. 5 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Useable Floor Area Motor Vehicle Sales 1 500 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area, including Service Areas 1 3,000 sq. ft. of Outdoor Display Area Multiple Family Dwellings 2 Dwelling Unit Music or Dance Schools or Studios 1 Employee 4 1 Students Personal Service Businesses 1 150 square feet of sales/customer area Places of Worship 1 4 Seats 1 Employee Professional Office in a Residential Dwelling 2 Office 1 Non-resident employee Public Libraries, Galleries or Museums 1 200 sq. ft. of space accessible to public Radio and TV Stations or Towers 1 Employee 1 Studio Research Facilities 1 2 Employee 1 Vehicle maintained on lot Restaurants 15 1,000 sq. ft. of Patron Floor Area Restaurants, Drive-in or Fast Food 1 75 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area/3 Seats, whichever is greater 10 Stacking spaces each service window Retail Sales 1 150 square feet of sale/customer area Senior High Schools 4 Classroom 1 Faculty Member and Employee 1 4 Seats in auditorium Senior Residential Developments 2 Dwelling Unit Shopping Centers 4 1,00 sq. ft. of Gross Leasable Area Single Family Dwellings 2 Dwelling Unit, maximum of 6 spaces Veterinary Offices 1 Staff member 3 Examining Room Visitor Information Booths 1 Employee plus 2 stacking spaces Warehouse, Distribution, Storage, Wholesale, and Mail Order Establishments 1 1,250 sq. ft. of Gross Leasable Area Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 1 Office on site  
    10.10.3. Determination of required parking spaces. 
A.  The parking space requirements for a use not mentioned or variations of above uses shall be determined by the commission. Where a determination must be made, the decision shall be based upon: (1) standards set forth herein for uses with similar characteristics, (2) previous experience with similar uses and (3) studies or standards such as those promulgated by such professional organizations as the Institute of Traffic Engineers; the American Planning Association; The Urban Land Institute; and the Congress for the New Urbanism. 
B.  Multiple uses: Where two or more different uses occur on a single lot, the total amount of parking facilities to be provided shall be the sum of the requirements of the uses computed separately for each individual use on the lot. However, the commission may reduce this total where it can be demonstrated that the uses on a site have peak parking needs at different hours of the day. 
C.  Fractional measurements: Where fractional spaces result from calculation of parking space requirements equal or greater than one-half total parking spaces required shall be the next highest whole number. 
    10.10.4. Special requirements for regional shopping centers. 
A.  The number of parking spaces required shall be four for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area (GLA). 
The applicant may attain such parking ratio either: (i) by constructing spaces in a number sufficient to meet minimum standard or determined need (ii) by constructing not less than three and one-half spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area and showing on its site plan "reserved future parking areas" containing parking spaces in a number which, when combined with the constructed parking, shall result in a total number of spaces that meets the minimum standard or determined need. 
B.  If the applicant is approved for reserved future parking areas, then, one year following the granting of a certificate of occupancy for the building spaces, the applicant shall submit a parking analysis to the director of planning, which analysis shall demonstrate the adequacy of the number of on-site parking spaces during the non-holiday peak shopping hour and the peak shopping days. 
If the director of planning determines that the number of existing on-site parking spaces are insufficient, he/she shall notify the applicant and the commission of such finding and the applicant shall construct, in the reserved future parking area, such additional spaces as may be required to solve the parking deficiency. 
    10.10.5. Special requirements for the Thompsonville Village Center district. 
A.  The following standards shall apply to the Thompsonville Village Center district: 
Table 10.10.5 
Use Required Spaces Retail Sales 4 per 1,000 Gross Leasable Area Personal Services Businesses 4 per 1,000 G.S.F. Offices 3 per 1,000 G.S.F. Residential Uses 1 per unit Elderly Housing 0.5 per unit  
B.  Reduction: The commission may authorize a reduction in these standards where the applicant has provided a report which demonstrates that the nature of the particular use(s) does not require the normal amount of parking or where due to mass transit, carpooling, or other such features, less rigorous parking standard should apply. 
C.  Off-site parking: Legally permissible on street parking and parking within municipal parking lots, providing these are within 500 feet of the site in question, may be used to satisfy the parking requirements of this section. 
D.  Location of spaces: No parking spaces shall be allowed between the face of the building and the street. 
E.  Repair and service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with any parking or loading area. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any accessory parking facilities. 
    10.10.6. Parking design, layout, and location. The standards of this section shall apply to all parking areas that serve three or more vehicles or two or more uses. 
A.  General design requirements: 
i.  All off street parking areas and driveways shall be designed, to include drainage design, and constructed to the town standards. 
ii.  Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties so as not to create a nuisance. In a parking area containing three or more parking spaces, such lighting shall be extinguished one-half hour after the close of the business, except as may otherwise be permitted or required by the planning and zoning commission. 
iii.  All parking areas must be designed in a manner as to provide safety for vehicles, pedestrians, landscaping and signage. 
iv.  Up to 25 percent of the minimum number of required parking spaces may be allocated for compact cars and correspondingly reduced in size subject to the approval of a compact car parking layout plan. A compact car space shall not be less than eight feet wide and 16 feet long. All such spaces must be identified by signs indicating that the parking spaces are only for the use of compact cars. 
B.  Layout requirements: 
i.  All parking areas shall be designed to provide safe turning movements from streets into the parking areas and within the parking areas. 
ii.  Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement. 
iii.  Each required parking space, exclusive of driveways and aisles, shall be at least nine feet wide and 18 feet long. The dimensions for parking spaces and drive aisles shall conform to the following table: 
90° 60° 45° A. Double Parking Bay 60 ft. 58 ft. 53 ft. B. Depth of Bay 18 ft. 20 ft. 19 ft. C. Width of Aisle 24 ft. 18 ft.* 15 ft.* D. Width of Space 9 ft. 9 ft. 9 ft. E. Depth of Space 18 ft. 18 ft. 18 ft. Aisles for 90° parking are for two-way circulation and aisles for 60° and 45° parking are for one-way circulation. * Provided that if the aisle is a fire lane the width shall be 20 feet.  
In addition to the requirements set forth in the above table, the commission may require collector drive aisles to be 30 feet in width and may require major entry and exit drive aisles to be of such a width and to contain sufficient lanes as may be necessary to safely accommodate projected traffic volumes and turning movements. 
iv.  Every parking area shall be landscaped to the standards of sections 10.10.7 and 10.20. 
C.  Locational requirements: 
i.  Off street parking may be located in any yard and shall be located on the same lot as the building or use unless otherwise provided for in these regulations. 
ii.  Off street parking for buildings or uses existing on the on the effective date of these regulations that are altered so as to require additional parking spaces, or new uses established in any business district, may be served by parking areas located on lots other than those on which the building or use is located only if such offsite parking areas are within 500 feet of the main entrance to the use being served. Such offsite parking areas shall be located in a zoning district where off street parking is a permitted or special permit use. 
Figure 10.10.6 illustrates possible layouts and the dimensions for parking areas, aisles and driveways. 

This is an interpretive aid only and is not part of the regulations. 
  
  
iii.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the BR, BP, I-1, I-2 and I-P zones, the dimensions of a parking space may be decreased to eight and one-half feet wide by 18 feet long in a professional office building complex provided that the professional office building complex has at least 300,000 square feet of gross floor area and at least eighty percent of the gross floor area is occupied either by not more than three tenants or by the owner of the building and its affiliated entities and that the complex has at least 1,100 parking spaces. (Amended 04/01/04) 
iv.  Every parking area shall be landscaped to the standards of sections 10.10.7 and 10.20. 
D.  Locational requirements: 
i.  Off street parking may be located in any yard and shall be located on the same lot as the building or use unless otherwise provided for in these regulations. 
ii.  Off street parking for buildings or uses existing on the on the effective date of these regulations that are altered so as to require additional parking spaces, or new uses established in any business district, may be served by parking areas located on lots other than those on which the building or use is located only if such offsite parking areas are within 500 feet of the main entrance to the use being served. Such offsite parking areas shall be located in a zoning district where off street parking is a permitted or special permit use. 
    10.10.7. Parking area setbacks and landscaping standards. 
A.  Landscape setback requirements: Excluding driveway crossings, landscaped areas adjacent to streets shall be provided as follows: 
i.  Any parking area designed and intended for use by at least three but not more than 25 parking spaces shall have a minimum landscaped setback from the right-of-way of five feet. 
ii.  Any parking area designed or intended for use by more than 25 parking spaces shall have a minimum landscaped setback from the right-of-way of eight feet. 
iii.  Any parking area designed or intended for use by more than 100 parking spaces shall have a minimum landscaped setback from the right-of-way of ten feet. 
iv.  Landscaped areas shall be planted with ground cover and one canopy tree for each 50 feet of frontage. 
v.  A sidewalk not less than six feet wide shall be constructed and may be located in either the landscaped setback or street right-of-way. 
vi.  Any parking area designed or intended for use by at least three parking spaces shall have a minimum landscaped setback of all parking spaces and driveways/aisles from all side and rear property lines of ten feet; and, except for loading areas, shall have a minimum landscaped separation of all parking spaces and driveway/aisles from buildings of ten feet. However, in the Thompsonville Village Center zone, a three-foot landscaped setback shall be required. 
B.  Parking lot landscaping: 
i.  Any parking area designed or intended for use by at least three parking spaces shall have a minimum of 15 percent of the gross parking area in landscaped areas except in the Thompsonville Village Center zone where seven percent shall be required. These landscaped areas shall occur in interior or end parking lot islands all of which shall be at least ten feet wide. 
ii.  When existing facilities are expanded, the commission shall have the right to approve the location of the required landscaping in areas other than interior or end parking lot islands in the newly constructed areas, to approve a modification of the size of the required landscaped areas and to approve other modifications to the landscaping requirements so as to spread the new landscaping throughout the existing and newly constructed parking area. 
iii.  The minimum amount of landscaping materials required in landscape areas shall be suitable ground cover and one canopy tree for each five parking spaces except in the Thompsonville Village Center zone where the number of landscaping materials shall be as approved by the commission on an individual basis for each site plan. 
    10.10.8. Loading area requirements. 
A.  On any lot which is hereafter developed for a non-residential use, there shall be provided adequate space suitably located on the lot for the loading and unloading of goods and material. Loading areas shall meet the following standards: 
i.  Loading areas associated with loading docks shall be screened from the street in the BR, BP and IP zones. 
ii.  All loading spaces that abut a residential district or an intervening alley separating an industrial district from a residential district shall be screened by walls or fences uniform in color, at least eight feet high. 
iii.  Loading spaces shall not be located within 40 feet of an intersection. 
iv.  Loading spaces shall not be in a required front or side yard. 
v.  No motor vehicle repair work shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities. 
Section 10.20. - Landscaping standards. 
A.  Site plans for all construction, including new developments and changes to existing developments, shall meet the following landscaping standards. 
i.  Canopy trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in caliper. 
ii.  Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
iii.  Understory trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches in caliper. 
iv.  Deciduous shrubs shall be a minimum of two and one-half feet in spread. 
v.  Evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum of two and one-half feet in height with a mature height of at least six feet. 
B.  Buffer yards: Any lot developed or proposed to be developed with commercial or industrial uses which abuts or is located across the street from a residential district shall establish and maintain buffer yards as a minimum to the standards which follow. Additionally, the commission may require that a buffer yard be placed on any lot in a residential district when a special permit is being approved for such a lot abutting another lot in a residential district. Buffer yard examples are shown in figure 10.20. 
i.  "A" buffer yard - These standards shall be required where any business district is across the street from any residential district. Additionally, the commission may require this buffer yard be placed on any lot in a residential district when a special permit is being approved for such a lot abutting another lot in a residential district. An "A" buffer yard is 25 feet deep. 
ii.  "B" buffer yard - These standards shall be required where any industrial district is located across the street from any residential district. A "B" buffer yard is 50 feet deep. 
iii.  "C" buffer yard - These standards shall be required where any business district abuts a residential district. A "C" buffer yard is 35 feet deep. 
iv.  "D" buffer yard - These standards shall be required where any industrial district abuts a residential district. A "D" buffer yard is 100 feet deep. 
C.  The commission may modify the buffer yard standards when, in the opinion of the commission, the adjoining land users are sufficiently protected. 
D.  Additional requirements: The commission may, in addition to requiring buffer yards, require that a berm as shown in figure 10.20 be built and may require the substitution of evergreen trees for understory trees in those instances where it determines that it is necessary to screen a site from adjacent uses. 

Section 10.30. - Sign regulations. 
A.  The purpose of these regulations is to control the height, size, and location of signs in the community in order to ensure public safety, protect property values, encourage economic development, insure neighborhood compatibility and to further the general purpose of the zoning regulations. 
    10.30.1. General requirements. 
A.  Measurement of sign area: The area of a sign shall be considered that of the smallest rectangle or triangle which encompasses all lettering, wording design or symbols together with any background which is designed as an integral part of and obviously related to the sign. See figure 10.30.1. 

B.  Square feet limitations contained in this article refers to the area of each face of two-faced signs. 
C.  Sign location: No attached sign shall project more than 12 inches from the face of a structure. All freestanding signs must be at least ten feet back from the street line unless otherwise stated. Signs must be located so that only a single side is visible from any viewing point. 
D.  Height of signs: The height of a freestanding sign is to be measured from the ground to highest point of the sign. 
E.  No sign, or portion thereof, attached to a structure shall project above the exterior wall of the said structure. No sign shall be erected above those locations illustrated in figure 10.2. 

F.  Sign illumination/sign movement: A sign may be illuminated if illumination is confined to or directed toward the surface of the sign. 
i.  No flashing, rotating or intermittent illumination shall be permitted except signs indicating time and/or temperature by means of intermittent lighting, provided the longest dimension of such signs does not exceed five feet. 
ii.  The light sources of signs shall be so designed and shielded that they cannot be seen from beyond the property lines on which the said sign is located and to minimize night glare. 
iii.  Signs with exposed neon tubes shall be permitted in all business districts. The outlining of buildings or structures, ornamental features or architectural elements such as windows by use of exposed neon tubing, strings of lights, light emitting diodes or otherwise is allowed by special use permit only. (Amended 7/28/03) 
G.  No signs, or any parts of any signs, shall be permitted to be mechanically rotated or moved. 
    10.30.2. Sign review procedures. 
A.  Type A sign: All signs designated herein as type A signs are permitted as a matter of right and require no formal application. 
B.  Type B sign: All signs designated herein as type B signs shall be approved by the office of the director of planning in accordance with the following procedures: 
i.  The office of the director of planning shall review plans for compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. Upon completing the review, the office of the director of planning shall approve or deny such application within five working days. The following shall constitute an application: 
a.  Application form (available in the office of the director of planning); 
b.  Filing fee as determined by the commission or by ordinance; and 
c.  Drawing and/or photograph of the proposed signage, indicating its dimensions, height (as measured from the ground), location, color and content of the proposed sign. 
ii.  Should the office of the director of planning determine the application does not conform to these Regulations; the application must be altered to conform. An applicant may appeal a determination of the director of planning to the commission. 
iii.  Nothing in this Section shall prevent an applicant from seeking approval of a Type B Sign by the Commission in association with any use requiring a Site Plan approval or a Special Permit approval. An approval of signage by the Commission shall constitute a Type B Sign approval. 
C.  Type C sign: All signs designated as Type C Signs shall require the filing of an application for a Site Plan in accordance with Article IX of these Regulations. Application requirements for a Type C Sign permit shall be the same as that required for a Type B Sign. 
D.  Signs associated with multi-tenant buildings: During the review of a Site Plan or Special Permit of any building or development containing more than one tenant, the commission shall review and approve a sign theme for the building or development, showing uniform location and sizes of all wall signs for all tenant spaces. Future applications for individual signs shall be generally consistent with the approved theme. 
    10.30.3. Signs permitted in single family residence districts. 
A.  The following table describes all signs permitted in single family residence districts: 
Table 10.30.3 Signs Permitted in Single Family Residential Districts 
Type of Sign Max. Area Number Type Duration Sale, Lease, Rental of Property 8 s.f. 1 A Until sale, lease, rental occurs Subdivision Promotion 32 s.f. 1 B 18 Months, renewable Construction 16 s.f. 1 per frontage A 18 months or upon completion, whichever is earlier. Public Information and Political Campaign 32 s.f. No limit A 30 Days Occupant Name and Add. 2 s.f. 1 A Home Occupation and Professional Office 2 s.f. 1 B Municipal Buildings (including schools) 
Amended (6/3/03) 12 s.f. in HR33 / 32 s.f. per side in other Res. Zones 7 1 B Non-profit Organizations and Special Permit Uses 
Amended (6/3/03) 12 s.f. in HR33 / 12 s.f. per side in other Res. zones 1 B Farm Stands Freestanding (Content may change per available produce) 20 s.f. per side 2 per frontage B Freestanding signs identifying seasonal produce to be removed at end of growing season Farm Stands - Attached 2 s.f. per linear ft. of building; not to exceed 32 s.f. B Open or Welcome Flags 15 s.f. per flag 1 per tenant, maximum of 15 C  
Notes to table 10.30.3. 
1.  Only municipal, non-profit, and special permit uses signs may be illuminated. Lighting must be external, incorporated into the sign structure, and shine down from the top onto the sign face. Lighting must be completely shielded to prevent off-site glare. (Amended 6/03/03) 
2.  Open or welcome flags are permitted for non-conforming business uses or special permit uses only. The commission shall consider any possible negative impact on any abutting residences and on the overall character of the neighborhood. Flags may display only colors and/or the words "open" or "welcome". 
3.  Open or welcome flags shall be mounted on building wall and shall not project above wall. 
4.  All freestanding signs shall be at least ten feet from the street line; farm stand signs shall be 15 feet from the edge of street pavement. 
5.  Height of freestanding signs limited to 12 feet. 
6.  Home occupation and professional signs must be of a simple round, square, or rectangular design. (Amended 6/03/03) 
7.  Up to 32 square feet allowed by special use permit provided the property has a minimum of 150 feet of frontage; 12 square feet per side maximum otherwise. (Amended 6/03/03) 
    10.30.4. Signs in permitted in special residential developments. 
A.  The following table describes all signs permitted in special residential developments: 
Table 10.30.4 Signs Permitted in Special Residential Developments 
Type of Sign Max. Area Number Type Duration Sale, Lease, Rental of Development Project 32 s.f. 1 B 18 months, renewable Sale, Lease, Rental of Individual Units 8 s.f. 1 A Until sale, lease, rental occurs Construction 32 s.f. 1 per frontage A 18 months Public Information and Political Campaign 32 s.f. No limit A 30 Days Occupant Name and Add. 2 s.f. 1 A Development Identification 24 s.f. 1 B Home Occupation and Professional Office 2 s.f. 1 B Civic or Non-profit Organizations and Special Permit Uses 12 s.f. 1 B  
Notes to table 10.30.4. 
1.  Individual unit sale/lease signs shall be located within 25 feet of entrance to unit. 
2.  Home occupation and professional office signs may not be illuminated and must be of a simple round, square, or rectangular design. 
3.  All freestanding signs shall be at least ten feet from the street line. 
4.  Height of freestanding signs is limited to 12 feet. 
    10.30.5. Signs permitted in business districts. 
A.  The following table describes all signs permitted in business districts except that attached signs are generally covered under paragraph B. 
Table 10.30.5 Signs Permitted in Business Districts 
Row Type of Sign Max. Area Number Type Duration/Comments 1 Sale, Lease, Rental 8 s.f. up to 100 ft. frontage 
16 s.f. up to 500 ft. frontage 
32 s.f. over 500 ft. frontage 1 per frontage A Until sale, lease, rental occurs 2 Subdivision Promotion 32 s.f. 1 B 18 Months, renewable 3 Construction 8 s.f. up to 100 ft. frontage 
16 s.f. up to 500 ft. frontage 
32 s.f. over 500 ft. frontage 1 per frontage B 18 months or upon completion, whichever is earlier. 4 Public Information and Political Campaign 32 s.f. No limit A 30 Days 5 Window Signs: attached to inside of window. A 6 Balloon Signs C 7 Attached Banners/Flags B 15 Days with cumulative of no more than 60 in a calendar year. 8 Open or Welcome Flags 15 s.f. 1 per tenant, maximum of 15 B and C B for single tenant 
C for multi-tenant 9 Hiring/Employment A Must be attached to inside of window 10 Freestanding in LO District 12 s.f. per side, height limit of 5 feet. 1 B 11 Freestanding in Hazardville Center 12 s.f. per side if 5 to 8 ft. tall; 
24 s.f. per side if under 5 ft 1 B Lot must have min of 75 ft. of frontage 12 Freestanding, Other (Excludes Thompsonville) 32 s.f. per side if lot less than 3 acres and frontage at least 75 ft. 
50 s.f. per side if lot more than 3 acres and frontage at least 75 ft. 1 
1 per frontage if lot greater than 10 acres C Maximum height of 20 ft. See note 2 13 Message Sign See note 5 1 per lot C Below Freestanding Sign 14 Gasoline Station Canopy Sign (see note 9 below) 1 s.f. per linear foot of canopy to which the sign is attached (see note 9) 1 for each canopy side not to exceed 4 B  
Notes to Table 10.30.5. 
1.  Rows 1 through 9 apply to all business zones; Row 10 applies only to properties in the LO district; Row 11 applies only to properties in Hazardville; Rows 12 to 13 apply to all business zones, except those in Thompsonville. 
2.  The total sign area on any lot (sum of attached and freestanding signs) shall not exceed two square feet per linear foot of the front wall(s) of the building(s) on the site. No individual sign may exceed an area of 300 square feet unless approved by the commission as a type C sign. Front wall for the purposes of this section shall mean: 
i.  for a single-tenant building, that wall of the building which contains the main entrance; 
ii.  for a multi-tenant building, that wall or walls of the building (maximum of three) upon which wall signs may be attached, but shall not include the rear wall of the building which provides service entrances. 
3.  On lots zoned business regional which are three acres or greater in area, and within 1,000 feet of a limited access highway, the commission may grant a type C sign permit allowing a freestanding sign greater than 20 feet in height. The maximum height of such a sign shall not exceed 20 feet above the elevation of the traveled portion of the highway closest to the site on which the sign is located. 
4.  All freestanding signs shall be at least ten feet from the street line. 
5.  For those sites containing a multi-tenant building with tenants located more than 200 feet from the street, the commission may permit a permanently mounted sign attached to the freestanding sign, which may display a temporary message associated with any business on the site. 
i.  The maximum sign area not to exceed 1/3 the size of either the existing freestanding sign area or the maximum freestanding sign area allowed by these regulations, whichever is smaller; 
ii.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the number of lines of text and height of letters will be easily readable from the adjacent roadways; and 
iii.  The sign shall be located below the freestanding sign and shall not extend beyond the boundaries formed by the vertical extension of the existing freestanding sign. 
6.  Flags may display only colors and/or the words "open" or "welcome." Open or welcome flags shall be mounted on a building wall and shall not project above a wall. 
7.  Height of freestanding signs is limited to 20 feet. 
8.  (Amended 5/05/03) For the purpose of this section, "parcels" and "lot" shall include "out parcels" within which are sited freestanding satellite uses within business centers, regardless of whether satellite uses occupying such land areas have been actually subdivided from the business center or are exclusive use land lease areas within such centers, and where: 
a.  Such satellite uses front upon public highways with a minimum of 75 feet of frontage at the street or highway line 
b.  Such satellite uses use and occupy land areas which are accessible by motor vehicles only from within business centers 
    Freestanding signs identifying such uses within business districts shall be subject to special use permit approval by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission and shall: 
i.  Not create a visual obstruction to both traffic within the main traveled portion of any highway upon which such use fronts, or to traffic entering and exiting the highway within the vicinity of the sign, which vicinity shall include, at a minimum, the safe sight lines in both directions required by the posted speed limit within the highway. 
ii.  Be individually visible to approaching motor vehicle traffic within the main traveled portion of the highway which the sign addresses for a sufficient time to have directional value to the motoring public utilizing such sign for direction. 
iii.  Not exceed six feet in height and shall not exceed 64 square feet in total area including both sides and shall otherwise comply with the provisions of this section. 
iv.  Not be located closer than 125 feet to another free-standing sign. 
    The applicant shall reasonably demonstrate a need for the sign; the criterion for such need shall be that the sign will enhance public safety by having significant directional value. 
9.  (Amended 5/20/04) 
a.  No canopy sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area. 
b.  No canopy sign shall extend above, below, or project beyond, the canopy. 
B.  Attached signs in business districts, except for the TVCD, shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  Attached signs for each occupant in a building are allowed on any portion of a wall facing a public street. The total attached signage shall not exceed: 
a.  One square foot per linear foot of wall to which the sign is attached, if any part of the building is within 25 feet of the right-of-way; 
b.  One and one-half square foot per each linear foot of wall to which the sign is attached, if the closest portion of the building to the right-of-way is between 25 feet and 50 feet; 
c.  Two square feet per linear foot of wall to which the sign is attached, if the closest portion of the building to the right-of-way is greater than 50 feet; and 
d.  Signs measuring up to two square feet of sign per linear foot of wall are permitted for those uses which face a street, the traveled portion of which is 20 feet or more from the right-of-way line of the property upon which the sign is to be located. 
ii.  Attached signs for each occupant in a building are allowed on any portion of a wall visible from a public street. The total attached signage for such wall shall not exceed 75 percent of the signage area as calculated in a through d above. 
C.  Regulations for attached signs for the Thompsonville Village Center district are found in section 10.30.7. 
    10.30.6. Signs permitted in industrial districts. 
A.  The following table describes all signs permitted in industrial districts, except that attached signs are generally covered under paragraph B. 
Table 10.30.6 Signs Permitted in Industrial Districts 
Row Type of Sign Max. Area Number Type Duration/Comments 1 Sale, Lease, Rental 8 s.f. up to 100 ft. frontage 
16 s.f. up to 500 ft. frontage 
32 s.f. over 500 ft. frontage 1 per frontage A Until sale, lease, rental occurs 2 Subdivision Promotion 32 s.f.. 1 B 18 Months, renewable 3 Construction 8 s.f. up to 100 ft. frontage 
16 s.f. up to 500 ft. frontage 
32 s.f. over 500 ft. frontage 1 per project B 18 months or upon completion, whichever is earlier. 4 Public Information and Political Campaign 32 s.f. No limit A 30 days, height up to 12 ft. 5 Window Signs: attached to inside of window. A 6 Balloon Signs C 7 Attached Banners/Flags B 15 Days with cumulative of no more than 60 days in a calendar year. 8 Hiring/Employment 8 s.f. if attached to freestanding sign 
8 s.f. if not attached to freestanding sign 1 A and B See note 8 regarding Class B sign. 9 Freestanding 50 s.f. per side 1 (1 per frontage if lot greater than 10 acres) B Maximum height of 8 ft. See note 2 10 Open or Welcome Flags 15 s.f. per flag 1 per tenant, maximum of 15 B and C B for single tenant 
C for multi-tenant building or development 11 Industrial Park Identification 32 s.f. per side if lot of 25 to 50 acres. 
75 s.f. per side if more than 50 acres. 1 B 12 Directional 1 s.f. per tenant 1 per tenant B Tenant to be located within 1,500' of intersection 13 Directory 1 s.f. per tenant 1 at major entrance B See note 3. 14 Farm Stands - Freestanding (Content may change per available produce) 20 s.f. per side 2 per frontage B Freestanding signs identifying seasonal produce to be removed at end of growing season 15 Farm Stands - Attached 2 s.f. per linear ft. of building; not to exceed 32 s.f. B  
Notes to Table 10.30.6. 
1.  The total sign area on any lot (sum of attached and freestanding signs) shall not exceed two square feet per linear foot of the front wall(s) of the building(s) on the site. No individual sign may exceed an area of 300 square feet unless approved by the commission as a type C sign. Front wall for the purposes of this section shall mean: 
i.  For a single tenant building, that wall of the building which contains the main entrance; or 
ii.  For a multi-tenant building, that wall or walls of the building (maximum of three) upon which wall signs may be attached, but not to include the rear wall of the building which provides service entrances. 
2.  If a freestanding sign is to be located over 100 feet back from the right-of-way, and the parcel is ten acres or more in size, then it is to be considered a type C sign. In such a case, a permit may be granted allowing a maximum height of 20 feet, and a maximum area of 75 square feet per side. Such a sign should be consistent with the character of the building on the site. 
3.  Directory signs shall be designed and located so that it is intended to be reviewed from a pull-over lane. The sign shall be located at least 100 feet back from the street line of major thoroughfare (excluding industrial park internal road system). For the purposes of this section, an industrial park shall mean a multiple tenant office or industrial development under unified ownership or control at the time of application, the size of which is 25 acres or greater. 
4.  All freestanding signs shall be at least ten feet from the street line; farm stand signs shall be 15 feet from the edge of street pavement. 
5.  For those sites containing a multi-tenant building with tenants located more than 200 feet from the street, the commission may permit a permanently mounted sign attached to the freestanding sign, which may display a temporary message associated with any business on the site. 
i.  The maximum sign area not to exceed one-third the size of either the existing freestanding sign area or the maximum freestanding sign area allowed by these regulations, whichever is smaller; 
ii.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the number of lines of text and height of letters will be easily readable from the adjacent roadways; and 
iii.  The sign shall be located below the freestanding sign and shall not extend beyond the boundaries formed by the vertical extension of the existing freestanding sign; 
6.  Flags may display only colors and/or the words "open" or "welcome." Open or welcome flags shall be mounted on a building wall and shall not project above a wall. 
7.  Height of freestanding signs limited to eight feet unless otherwise noted. 
8.  Type B hiring signs shall not be internally illuminated, shall be located behind the street line, and shall be maintained for a maximum duration of six months. 
B.  Attached signs in industrial districts shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  Attached signs for each occupant in a building are allowed on any portion of a wall facing or visible from a public street. The total attached signage shall not exceed: 
a.  One square foot per linear foot of wall to which the sign is attached, if any part of the building is within 25 feet of the right-of-way; 
b.  One and one-half square feet per linear foot of wall to which the sign is attached if the closest portion of the building to the right-of-way is between 25 feet and 50 feet; 
c.  Two square feet per linear foot of wall to which the sign is attached, if the closest portion of the building to the right-of-way is over 50 feet; and 
d.  Signs measuring up to two square feet per linear foot of wall are permitted for those uses which front a street, the traveled portion of which is 20 feet or more from the right-of-way line of the property on which the sign is to be located. 
    10.30.7. Special sign requirements, Thompsonville Village Center district. 
A.  Within the Thompsonville Village Center district, all signs shall be Type B signs except for the following: 
i.  Any sign over 100 square feet shall only be approved by the commission as a type C sign; 
ii.  Flag signs for multi-tenant buildings shall be type C signs; 
iii.  A marquee sign may be allowed by the commission for a film theater or performing arts theater as a type C sign. The size, height and length of projection from the face of the building shall be determined and approved by the commission; and 
iv.  Decorative street pole or pedestrian oriented banners within the public right-of-way installed and maintained by the town identifying the Thompsonville Village Center or civic or seasonal holidays are permitted as type A signs. 
B.  No freestanding or pole signs or roof signs shall be allowed, except the commission may allow monument type freestanding signs for a building existing as of August 1, 1993 if the building is set back from the street line at least 20 feet, and if the sign does not exceed eight feet in height, nor exceed 32 square feet in area. 
C.  Attached sign shall be so located on the building in a manner compatible to the architecture of the building; 
D.  Projecting signs may be permitted by the commission where the sign is no larger than 12 square feet, extends no more than three feet from the face of the building, where the bottom of the sign is at least ten feet above the sidewalk and where the sign does not extend above the sills of the windows on the second floor. 
E.  Attached signs shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each one foot of building facade to which it is attached, which fronts on a street, and shall not extend above the sill of the windows of the second floor. 
F.  Awning signs may be placed on canvas or fabric awnings where the awnings are part of the overall building design approved by the commission in accordance with the design theme of the Thompsonville Revitalization Strategy. 
G.  Flags shall be permitted under this section provided they comply with the following criteria: 
i.  A maximum of one flag for each single tenant building; 
ii.  The number of flags per multi-tenant buildings as approved by the commission; 
iii.  A maximum size of 15 square feet for each flag; 
iv.  Flags mounted exclusively to wall of building; and 
v.  Flag shall not project beyond the top of the building wall for single story buildings, or extend above the sill of the windows of the second floor. 
H.  A sign theme shall be presented as part of a site plan application, for approval of the commission with any proposed multi-tenant building; and no sign shall be erected that is not in compliance with the approved sign theme. 
I.  Public informational and directional signs may be erected identifying destinations or uses to the public such as parking, parks, types of businesses, municipal or government uses, public restrooms, public telephones and similar uses. Such signs shall be only in locations and of a design approved by the commission as part of the site plan approval. 
J.  No internally illuminated signs shall be allowed, except where only the sign's letters are illuminated and the background is non-illuminated; each sign may be externally illuminated in a manner approved by the commission. 
K.  Temporary signs shall be allowed in the same manner as set forth in rows 1 through 8 of table 10.30.5, above. 
    10.30.8. Special sign requirements, Hazardville design district A (HDDA). (Amended 6/03/04) 
A.  Signs within the Hazardville design district overlay shall comply with the requirements for the underlying district except as specified in section 8.70 B.vi. and the following: 
i.  Decorative street pole or pedestrian oriented banners within the public right-of-way installed and maintained by the town, or an organization designated by the town council, identifying the Hazardville design district or containing a civic or seasonal theme are permitted as type A signs. Such signs may display sponsor's names in a traditional font but may not contain any corporate logos or advertising messages. 
    10.30.9. Freestanding tenant identification signs (pylon signs) in business, and industrial districts. (Added 09/08/17) 
A.  Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide free standing tenant identification signs for larger size multi-tenant buildings or multi-building sites. 
B.  The owner of a multi-tenant building or multi-building site may apply for one or more free standing signs adjacent to entrances/exits of the tenant site subject to the provisions of these sig regulations in business and industrial zones. 
C.  The commission shall use the criteria required for the review of a special permit in addition to the criteria of this section to consider signs provided for in this section. 
D.  Parcels shall be either one acre or greater in size or have at least 10,000 square feet of gross building size in order to apply under this section. 
E.  The commission must make a finding that the free standing multi-tenant identification sign is proportional to the size of the development and the streetscape where the property is located. In no event will a freestanding tenant identification sign exceed a height of 40 feet or an area per side of 240 square feet. 
F.  All signs under this section will be considered type C signs. 
G.  The commission shall consider the public safety and directional value of any proposed sign. 
ARTICLE XI. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Section 11.00. - Powers and duties. 
    The zoning board of appeals (ZBA) shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by Chapter 124, Section 8 and by Chapter 250, Section 14 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as revised from time to time, and by these regulations, which powers and duties are summarized and more particularly specified below: 
A.  Appeals: The ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide upon any appeal where it is alleged that there is an error in the order, requirements, decision or determination of the zoning enforcement officer (ZEO). No question of hardship shall be involved in such an appeal, and the action of the ZBA thereon shall be limited to the question of whether or not, and to what extent such order, requirement, decision, or determination was a correct interpretation of the subject provision of these regulations. 
B.  Variances: The ZBA shall have the authority to vary or adjust the strict application of these regulations in those cases where the unusual size, shape or topography of a lot or other unusual physical conditions pertaining to it or to any building situated thereon make it impossible to strictly apply a specific provision of these regulations to such lot without resulting in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, so that substantial justice shall be done and the public health, safety and welfare secured. 
C.  Location of motor vehicle uses: The ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide upon all requests for certificates of location approval for motor vehicle sales, services and repair uses in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Section 11.10. - Procedures. 
A.  All applications made to the ZBA shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the ZBA and each application shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case. Each application shall refer to the specific provision of these regulations involved, and shall exactly set forth as the case may be, the interpretation that is claimed or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the same should be granted. 
B.  All appeals and applications made to the ZBA shall be accompanied by a scaled descriptive drawing as is applicable to the case and the appropriate fee. 
C.  All appeals to the ZBA from an order, requirement, decision or determination of the ZEO shall be taken within fifteen (15) days of such action by the ZEO. (Amended 6/24/13) 
D.  Where, under the provisions of these regulations, the ZBA may grant a variance or variances to the requirements of these regulations with respect to any business or industrial use of property which may entail alterations to the site and or building(s) wherein such business or industrial use is to be or is proposed to be conducted, the commission shall review all site and building plans in a manner consistent with article IX of these regulations. 
Section 11.20. - Decision. 
A.  No variance shall be granted by the ZBA unless it finds: 
i.  That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings of the ZBA, applying to the lot or structure for which the variance is sought, which are peculiar to such lot or structure and do not apply generally to lots or structures in the neighborhood and which have not resulted from any willful act of the applicant subsequent to the date of adoption of the regulation from which the variance is sought, whether in violation of the provisions herein or not; 
ii.  That, for reasons fully set forth in the findings of the ZBA, the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the particular application of the provisions of these regulations would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the lot or structure, that the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the lot or structure, and that the variance as granted by the ZBA is the minimum adjustment necessary to accomplish this purpose; 
iii.  That the granting of the variance shall be in harmony with the general purposes, and intent of these regulations and the town's plan of conservation and development, and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare 
ARTICLE XII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 12.00. - Purposes. 
    Certain administrative procedures have been established to enable the commission to make changes to these regulations, to enforce these regulations and to oversee the administration of these regulations. 
Section 12.10. - Zoning district boundary changes. 
    The boundaries of any zoning district established hereunder may from time to time be amended, modified, changed or repealed by the commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 124 and 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, revision of 1958, as amended. 
    12.10.1. Applications. 
A.  Applications for amendments to these regulations, including the maps that are included as a part of these regulations, shall be made to the commission at the office of the director of planning. Such application shall be on forms provided by the commission and shall be accompanied by the following: 
i.  Fourteen copies of the completed application form; 
ii.  Fourteen copies of a map showing the property or properties to be rezoned and all abutting property within a 500-foot radius. Ownership and use of all such abutting properties shall be indicated; and 
iii.  The fee as determined by the commission or by ordinance. 
B.  The requirements of this section shall not apply to applications for comprehensive revisions of the regulations, including all maps included as a part of these regulations, made by the commission. Legal advertisements shall be required in accordance with Title 124, Section 8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. 
Section 12.20. - Enforcement and administration. (Amended 08/01/10) 
A.  The Commission shall designate the individual who shall serve as the zoning enforcement officer (ZEO), who shall be responsible to the commission. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued until the ZEO has signed off on the permit for such use or work certifying that a proposed use and/or structure is in conformance with these zoning regulations. 
C.  A zoning permit shall be required for signs. 
D.  Where a zoning permit is required by these regulations it shall be applied for in a form prescribed by the commission and be accompanied by fee as may be determined by the commission or by ordinance. 
E.  After a building or structure is completed, and prior to the occupancy of such building or structure, an applicant shall apply for a certificate of zoning compliance from the ZEO. This certificate shall state that such building, use or structure is in conformance with all zoning regulations or is a valid non-conforming use under such regulations. 
i.  For uses that do not require site plan approval, the ZEO may require that an applicant prepare and submit an as-built plan in order to determine compliance with the zoning regulations. 
ii.  For uses requiring site plan approval, and all new residential dwellings, an as-built plan, certified by a land surveyor who is licensed to practice in the state, shall be submitted as an aid for a determination of zoning compliance by the ZEO. The as-built plan shall show the actual installation of all site improvements, the exact location of buildings, and other required items at a level of detail at or exceeding that of the approved site plan. The as-built shall also show spot elevations in sufficient number and detail to ensure that the approved drainage scheme has been followed. (Amended 10/1/06) 
a.  In the event that seasonal weather conditions prevent completion of certain of the above improvements, a certificate of zoning compliance may be issued when it is determined that the applicant has provided acceptable temporary safeguards to ensure the public health and safety, and where the applicant has provided written assurance that those remaining improvements will be completed as soon as seasonal weather conditions permit. 
F.  (Added 10/1/06) Upon placement of the foundation or lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to backfilling or further vertical construction, the builder shall submit documentation prepared, signed and sealed by a Connecticut registered land surveyor showing the location of the foundation as well as the as-built elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, and the elevation of the top of the foundation wall. The as-built document shall also include the locations and elevations of any footing-drain outlets when footing drains are required by soil conditions or shown on the approved site plan. The elevations shall be not lower than those on the approved site plan and not more than six inches higher than those on said plan. Any deviations from these tolerances shall subject the site plan to further review. A signed and sealed recommendation and explanation from the Connecticut registered professional engineer who designed the approved site plan shall be submitted prior to approval of any changes. This section shall not apply to residential additions that are less than 50 percent of the original floor area of the building, excluding garages, porches, and breezeways. 
G.  No non-conforming use of land, buildings, or premises, the use of area or construction of which has been changed, extended, enlarged or altered after the adoption of these regulations shall be occupied or used in whole or in part until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued showing compliance with the provisions of these regulations. 
Section 12.30. - Separability. 
    If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of these regulations shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of these regulations shall be deemed to be and shall continue to be valid and in full force and effect. 
Section 12.40. - Adoption, effective date and repeal. 
    These regulations, adopted by the commission on December 20, 2001, shall become effective on January 31, 2002, and the existing zoning regulation is hereby repealed on the effective date of these regulations. The latest revision date is September 21, 2018. 
APPENDIX A. - HAZARDVILLE STUDY DESIGN REVIEW GUIDE 
    Data in the 1999 Plan of Conservation and Development show that the average daily traffic count along Hazard Avenue in the center of Hazardville was just under 19,000 vehicles. Balancing the "livability" of the Village with the magnitude of traffic is an on-going challenge. 
    Change and development in Hazardville should be undertaken in a manner that compliments the Village's heritage and charm. 
Introduction 
    The Village of Hazardville consists of a dense cluster of buildings erected in the mid- to late-nineteenth century. To a large degree, the impetus for the original village was the nearby development of Colonel Hazard's gunpowder factory. Since that time, this architecture has been preserved for the most part, and has resulted in a distinct visual "sense of place". However, the vibrancy of Hazardville as a "downtown" is a product of the human scale, the mix and density of uses, and the inherent "walkability" of the Village. It is these characteristics that make Hazardville a real working, living village. 
    The main vehicular corridor through Hazardville is Hazard Avenue, or CT Route 190. This State road carries thousands of cars per day and the traffic is especially heavy in the peak hours. Commuters traveling to and from the Hartford area make up the majority of the traffic. This heavy volume places a strain on the existing residents and small businesses that front on Hazard Ave. Safe ingress and egress, safe pedestrian crossings, and safe bicycle lanes are essential to the life of the Village. However, businesses may take advantage of this commuter traffic. This conflicting use of the road as a thoroughfare and as a commercial area presents a challenge. 
    The Design Review Guide is intended to support the vibrancy of Hazardville with its current businesses and residents, and to encourage complementary uses that may wish to locate in the Village, while maintaining the historic architectural consistency of the period The Design Review Guide was created to help identify, retain, and preserve the form and detailing of those architectural materials and features that are important in defining the historical character of the neighborhood. Its purpose is to help applicants in preparing projects in advance of a submission to the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    The Design Review Guide is divided into the following sections: 
 Site and Landscape Considerations 
 Architecture 
 Signage 
 Streetscape Amenities 
    Each of the above elements, when considered in the historical context of Hazardville Village, can be used to guide change and development within the Village in a manner that complements the Village's heritage and charm. 
Site and Landscape Considerations 
    Since Hazardville was founded in the days before the automobile, there was no need for paved parking lots at each business. Buildings were sited close to the travelway, often with a short setback of lawn as is shown in the photo below. This arrangement emphasizes the relationship of the building to the street and to the pedestrian. There is a consistent streetwall, an unbroken corridor of buildings, which creates a space that is in proportion to the surroundings and is in scale with the pedestrian. 

    However, since the advent of the automobile, modern suburban development has favored convenience for the motorist. Buildings were setback from the street with parking areas in front, interrupting the streetscape. 

Site Development Guidelines 
    Although there are some distracting gaps in Hazardville's streetscape, the majority of the historic village fabric remains. In order to preserve and repair this fabric, the following design guidelines are suggested: 
 New development or redevelopment of sites should bring building façades close to the street. The Zoning Regulations should be modified to allow this. 
 Provide wide sidewalks and generous entrances to buildings. 
 Allow minimal parking between the building and the street. Parking should be located to the side or rear of buildings. 
 For safety's sake as well as aesthetics, encourage minimizing the number of driveways and allow for the connection of parking lots behind buildings. 
 Accommodate public gatherings by providing locations that are convenient, safe, and when possible, visually engaging. 
 Integrate mature vegetation into the site design when possible. 
 Include benches and/or low walls as gathering/resting places for pedestrians. 
 Where possible, incorporate historic cultural landmarks into new development. Examples of such landmarks would include houses, commercial structures, stone walls, fences, and tree stands. 
 Identify exits, entrances, and internal barriers with appropriate lighting. 
Architecture 
    The current vibrancy of Hazardville is due in part to the variety of uses that exist in this compact area, from single family residential to retail, light industry, and institutional. Mixing uses within an area, and even within the same building, can be considered desirable, not a potential for nuisance. The current sidewalk system in Hazardville allows complete circulation along the Hazard Avenue corridor, thus making pedestrian travel a possibility. However, the design of a building can also add to the pedestrian experience. 
Building Design Guidelines 
 Include an increased attention to façade details that can be appreciated at the slow pace of a walker, especially bay windows for shop displays. 
 Create some "transitional spaces" that join the buildings to the streetscape. Examples of this technique include overhangs, porticos, and awnings. 
 Allow use of the sidewalk for outdoor café's and sidewalk sales. 
 For new construction, encourage a minimum two-story building allowing a mix of uses such as office or residential on the second floor. 
 Preserve and reinforce historic scale, massing, and proportion where applicable. 
 Establish building rhythms with adjacent building forms for visual continuity. 
 Consider rooflines of adjacent structures to avoid unpleasant contrasts in style and materials. 
 Reference adjacent building roof details such as dormers, fascias, and roof pitches when applicable. 
 Observe historic precedents wherever possible. 
Signage 
    The purpose of these guidelines is to promote consistency as well as creativity in sign design and placement. Signs within Hazardville Village should have a color scheme and design in keeping with the historic character of the Village, and should be placed in consistent and logical locations so as to create an orderly appearance throughout the Village. 
  General Design 
1.  The design of the sign should reflect the historic and architectural character of the building. 
2.  Signs should be of the type that would have been used within the original building period. 
3.  Creative and unique design is essential. 
4.  Signs should contribute to the visual character of the Village and increase the efficiency of communication. Simplicity of signage adds to its legibility and effectiveness. Redundant messages and unnecessary slogans should be omitted. 
  Color 
1.  The use of color should be restrained. Colors should be limited to one or two, with a neutral background. 
2.  Colors should relate to the building facade and/or to the site use. 
  Materials 
1.  Sign materials should be of the historic period of the building. 
2.  Stained or painted wood signs must be maintained regularly. 
  Hardware 
1.  Hardware for mounting signs, especially perpendicular signs, should be well constructed, decorative, and harmonious with the sign design. 
  Pedestrian Orientation 
1.  Pedestrian circulation is essential to the life of the Village. Signs should be compatible in scale with the pedestrian as well as with motorists. 
2.  Projecting or perpendicular signs are appropriate and encouraged as part of a signage scheme for a building or use. Projecting signs shall be double faced. 
  Lighting 
1.  Signs shall be indirectly lighted. The traditional "gooseneck" fixture is considered most appropriate for Hazardville. 
  Placement 
1.  Building mounted signs can be placed to coordinate with the building's façade almost as a decorative element. Signs can be centered over a shop window on the lintel or over doorway, for instance. 
Streetscape Amenities 
    The first phase of the Hazardville Village Plan, a streetscape design, was completed in October, 2000. The Hazardville Subcommittee of the Enfield Revitalization Strategy Committee was active in providing input to and review of the design. 
    The final schematic design consisted of the following elements: 
 Existing sidewalks were replaced with traditional brick-look concrete pavers. 
 Street lighting of two heights was proposed. An 18' pole with banner arms for seasonal decorations was recommended to be placed at the Village entrances and at the commercial core of the Village. In other locations along Hazard Avenue, 14 foot poles are to be used. 
 A suite of furnishings was recommended which included a bench with arms, trash receptacle, and planter all in black metal with Victorian styling. These were placed at the Village entrances and at some commercial and municipal buildings. Care was taken not to place these features in front of residences where they may become a maintenance burden for home-owners. 
 Shade trees were added where appropriate. A disease-resistant American Elm was recommended. 
 Flowering trees were recommended in areas where there were overhanging utility wires. These were 'Aristocrat' Flowering Pears with a mature height of approximately 20'. 
    An excerpt of the Streetscape Plan is presented below. 

  (Ord. No. PH 2639, § 2, 5-22-2008) 
APPENDIX B. - PRESERVING A COMMUNITY 
Historic Rehabilitation Standards and Guidelines 
for 
THE VILLAGE OF THOMPSONVILLE 
Enfield, Connecticut 
  

The Town of Enfield 
Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission in 
cooperation with the 
Enfield Revitalization Strategy Committee 
March 2009 
Contributing Staff: 
José Giner, AICP, Director of Planning 
Roger Alsbaugh, Assistant Planner 
Peter Bryanton, Community Development Director 
Contributing Consultant: 
Jan Cunningham, Historic Preservation Consultant 
Cunningham Preservation Associates, LLC 
Middletown, Connecticut 
CONTENTS 
Introduction 
Part I - History and Architecture 
The Thompsonville Story 
Architectural Style in Thompsonville 
Part II - Standards and Guidelines for Thompsonville 
Historic Rehabilitation Standards 
Historic Rehabilitation Guidelines 
Historic and Modern Sidings 
Wood Siding 
Historic Paint Colors 
Brick Masonry 
Artificial Siding 
Asbestos and Asphalt 
Aluminum and Vinyl 
Historic Porches 
Porch Enclosure 
Windows 
Shutters 
Doors 
Controlling Moisture Problems 
Water Infiltration 
Roofing 
Condensation 
Energy Conservation 
New Construction in Historic Contexts 
Additions and Exterior Alterations 
New Residential Buildings 
New Commercial Buildings 
Landscaping 
Appendix: 
Architectural Glossary 
INTRODUCTION 
Thompsonville contains one of the largest collections of historic buildings in Connecticut. More than 800 examples of 19 th and 20 th century architecture still stand along her streets. The historic carpet mills and nearby residential streets are already listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Plans are underway to nominate the rest of village for this honorary designation. 
The life experiences of many past generations are associated with these historic resources-in the houses where people lived and raised families, in the businesses they founded, and in the churches and schools they attended. Together they represent the collective cultural heritage of a village that played such an important role in Connecticut's industrial history. 
With the closing of the carpet mills, which began in the 1960s, the village went into decline. Like many communities created to serve one industry, when the mills went silent, the village lost its purpose and focus. Instead of a village where virtually everyone once worked at the mills, Thompsonville residents now commute to jobs in other towns and cites. Churches have relocated, schools have closed, and a number of stores were demolished. Some historic houses are gone, destroyed by neglect, fire, and most recently, even by a truck crash. Many more have lost much of their historic character because of insensitive renovations. 
There is an alternative-a comprehensive historic rehabilitation program that will preserve historic cultural resources and improve the quality of community life. Appropriate rehabilitation procedures can upgrade the housing stock and provide more livable homes; new uses can be found for obsolete schools and churches; new businesses can flourish in renovated storefronts. As you look around, you will see that this revitalization process has already begun. The conversion of the historic carpet mills to "Bigelow Commons," now an apartment complex, was a major step. 

Bigelow Commons 
Fresh Water Pond, which once provided waterpower to run the mills, has been reclaimed as the centerpiece of the historic village landscape. A public boat launch at a former historic ferry landing once again reconnects the village to the Connecticut River. 
Future plans include restoring passenger service on the historic railroad nearby. 

Train Station & Riverside Development from the 1992 Thompsonville Revitalization Plan 
A number of homeowners and landlords already take pride in their well-maintained properties, but much more can be done. The quality of the environment in your neighborhood, or on your street, may ultimately depend on what you, the property owner, can do to improve and maintain your historic building. Whether you are a homeowner, landlord, developer, architect, or contractor, this historic rehabilitation handbook will show you the way. 
In Part I you can renew your appreciation of Thompsonville's cultural heritage and learn more about its architecture. In Part II the Standards introduce you to the preservation principles that govern historic rehabilitation projects in Thompsonville. The Guidelines interpret and apply these Standards and provide appropriate solutions to most local historic building problems and. maintenance issues. While the majority of this instructive document focuses on residential properties, the largest group of historic resources in Thompsonville, the Guidelines is meant to be used with all types of historic structures, including existing and in-fill commercial and mixed-use projects. Wherever possible, several practical alternatives are presented so that you can choose what is best for your building and your pocketbook. Fixing up a historic building can be a major investment (constructing a new structure architecturally compatible to its surroundings, no less so). Although no direct grants are available, rehabilitations of qualified properties that are performed according to the Standards and Guidelines may be eligible for tax incentives from local, state, or federal agencies. Consult "Sources of Aid" in the appendix for information about these programs. 
PART I 
HISTORY AND ARCHITECTURE 
THE THOMPSONVILLE STORY 
Did you know that the Town of Enfield was once part of Massachusetts? Or that cattle and sheep once grazed where Thompsonville stands today? Or why we call the village Thompsonville? The answers to these questions and more are found in the story of Thompsonville, an industrial village where literally thousands of immigrant families lived and worked for more than a century. 
The story really began in the 1630s when a vast territory in the Connecticut River Valley was awarded to William Pynchon, the fur trader who founded Springfield, Massachusetts. Pynchon's land holdings, on both sides of the Connecticut in Massachusetts, ran all the way down the east side of the river through present-day Suffield and Enfield. Settlement at "Fresh Water Plantation," as Enfield was first called was delayed until 1680. At that time the first settlers were granted land for houses and farms along the Great Highway (now Enfield Street) and awarded grazing rights in the meadows along the Connecticut River-much, much later, these meadows were the site of the industrial community we know as Thompsonville. 
We must fast forward to 1800s, when industry first began in Thompsonville. The village is named for Orrin Thompson, who established a carpet factory on Fresh Water Brook in 1828. Thompson, one of the many ambitious Yankee industrial entrepreneurs in this period, had a good head for business. Born on a farm in Suffield in 1788, Thompson became a commission agent and partner in a wholesale carpet import business in New York City. At the time, all carpeting was imported from England and Scotland, the international center of the textile industry, and subject to high import tariffs. Recognizing that there was more money to be made in carpets manufactured right here in America, Thompson formed a stock company to finance his Thompsonville venture. In the next 30 years he laid the foundation for an industry that sustained the village of Thompsonville for more than a century. 
The textile firm in Scotland that supplied much of the original capital also sent skilled Scottish weavers to Thompsonville. When they arrived in December 1828, the mill was not ready and, except for temporary quarters in boatmen's taverns near the river, there was no place for them to live. Although these highly skilled workers were not pleased to learn that Thompson expected them to work as ordinary laborers, they soon set about building their own cottages and managed to complete the work on a 110-foot stone dam and a large wood-framed mill on Fresh Water Brook by the summer of 1829. 
The newly established Thompsonville Carpet Manufacturing Company was equipped with water-powered spinning and carding machinery but the carpeting was woven on handlooms. The company used the Connecticut River to ship goods to market until the 1840s, when the Hartford Springfield Railroad was laid out along the river bank. With direct access to this cheaper and more reliable transportation, Thompson increased production. In 1847, after purchasing the user rights to the newly invented Bigelow power loom, Thompson mortgaged his company to buy 230 of these new machines. They were installed in the original factory and a new brick spinning mill that was erected nearby. Power looms also were added at the Tariff Manufacturing Company, a failed carpet business in Simsbury that Thompson had purchased in 1841. Altogether, the new machinery cost $350,000 and a similar amount was spent on wool and other raw materials. Evidently such large capital investments reduced profits as well as shareholder earnings, for his partners in Scotland and New York and local stockholders pressured Thompson to buy their shares. Although costly, the buyout left him in sole control of the company. He also took over the New York sales agency, which was run by his son, Henry G. Thompson. 
By 1850, although Thompsonville Carpet Company employed 1650 workers and was producing 250,000 yards of carpet annually, Thompson was deeply in debt and on the verge of bankruptcy. Timely infusions of Hartford capital came to the rescue. Thompson was forced to give up control of the business, but was allowed to stay on as mill superintendent until 1861. The renamed Hartford Carpet Company continued and prospered under its new management with profits approaching one million dollars in 1875. By the 1890s 1800 men, women, and children worked at the mills. 
Largely due to a series of mergers with competitors, most notably with Bigelow Carpet in 1914, a Massachusetts company, and Sanford Carpet of New York in 1929, the Thompsonville firm became the largest carpet producer in the country. The village, then nationally renowned as "Carpet City," contained the largest carpet manufacturing plant in all of New England. Employing nearly 3000 workers, the modern brick facility contained ten major mill buildings, some exceeding 50,000 square feet, all equipped with the latest textile machinery. 
The architectural legacy of the carpet industry extended well beyond the confines of the mill yard. From the very beginning the company supplied housing for its workers and continued that custom into the 1920s. Among the first were the Greek Revival tenements at the north end of Church and Pleasant streets. More tenements were built to house workers transferred from Tariffville when the factory there burned down in 1867. When the carpet business was at its height in the early twentieth century, Bigelow and Hartford avenues were laid out on former farmland and lined with large, multi-family, Colonial Revival-style houses. Although all told, the company invested in nearly 150 multifamily rental properties, only a third of the workforce could be accommodated. 
The demand for more worker housing was met by the private sector. A new grid of streets was laid out to the south and west by 1875. An evolving "downtown" business district on Main Street (no longer extant) included a hotel at the corner of Pleasant Street and provided residents with most of the necessary goods ands services. By 1900 Thompsonville had taken on a decidedly urban architectural character. Entire blocks of multi-family rental properties were constructed by real estate developers. Many of the duplexes and double-deckers were owner-occupied. Most of the villagers were first- or second-generation immigrants who came here from Europe to find jobs in the mills. The churches they built, several on land donated by the carpet company, made major architectural contributions to the streetscapes. In addition to new public and parochial schools, other institutional growth included a Beaux-Arts style library erected at the corner of Pearl and Franklin streets in 1914, one of many public libraries funded by Andrew Carnegie. 

Pearl Street Library - ca. 1914 
Architectural Style in Thompsonville 
(Architectural terms are defined in the Architectural Glossary in the Appendix) 
The characteristic features of the principal styles and house types found in Thompsonville from about 1840 to 1950 are described below. Only a few historic houses in the village display all the architectural features associated with any particular style. These exceptions, particularly the larger single-family dwellings that stand today on Enfield and lower Pearl streets, may have served as models for local builders, who often constructed simplified vernacular versions of these principal styles. This was particularly true for the multi-family workers' houses of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, where stylistic detail is limited. You also may find that your house combines elements of several contemporary styles. It also was a common practice to update early nineteenth-century houses with new, more stylish porches, especially in the Colonial Revival period. 
Once you have discovered what kind of house you have from the styles described and illustrated below you can begin to plan the renovation of your home. You can consider repairing or replacing the architectural features that make your house unique. In the long run, choosing the right doorway or windows, or even the right colors to paint your house will make it more attractive and increase its value. 
Every historic building in Thompsonville is a product of its time. Changes in style and form and even the level of architectural detail were made possible by improvements in building technology. The simple timber-framed houses of the colonial period, held together by intricate joints and wooden pegs, often called post-and-beam construction, were fashioned with hand tools. Only shingles and clapboards were sawn in water-powered mills. Glass was expensive because it was imported from England, the main reason why early colonial windows have such small panes. In Thompsonville, although no colonial houses have survived, similar gabled-roofed forms with heavy timber frames persisted well into the nineteenth century. 
The more elaborate Victorian styles of the later nineteenth century were products of the Industrial Revolution. For the first time, standardized lumber was mass produced in steam-powered sawmills and a new type of construction called balloon framing was introduced. Similar to the standard stud-wall construction in use today, balloon framing allowed carpenters to build more complex house forms, featuring projecting bays, porches, and even towers. 
The Centennial Exposition held in Philadelphia in 1876 is credited with sparking the popularity of the ornate detailing so characteristic of late Victorian architecture. Machine-made architectural details allowed builders to elaborate even simple house forms with an amazing variety of applied detail. By the twentieth century, Americans began to reject the architectural excesses of the Victorian era and revived the relative simplicity of the colonial period. Even though the popular Colonial Revival styles utilized earlier colonial forms, houses in this period often displayed columns and other machine-made classical details. 
Greek Revival Style 

Exceptional vernacular Greek Revival with typical Enfield "el" wing - Enfield St. - c. 1850

22 Prospect St., 1st house of Henry Thompson
The Greek Revival has been called the first true American architectural style. Reflecting the admiration that our new country had for the democratic ideals of ancient Greece, churches and houses were based on the form of a Greek temple. The gable end of the house, representing the temple front, faces the street, usually highlighted by a pediment across the gable peak. Narrow attic windows may be found in the wide frieze board that often runs around the house under the eaves and the pediment. Corner pilasters or boards represented the columns of the temple. 
Small entrance porches are supported by round columns, detailed in one of the Greek orders (left). 
Two other typical Enfield Greek Revival designs, one in clapboard, one in brick - Both ca. 1850


Carpet Company Superintendent's House - 12 Pleasant Street - ca. 1840
  
One of the more high-style examples, the mill superintendent's house on Pleasant Street, displays a two-story, colonnaded façade porch. Clapboards were usually used for siding, although occasionally flush boards were selected to give the appearance of the smooth stone walls of a temple. Houses and churches of this style were always painted white or in a very light color to look like marble. 

Multi-family (or tenement) Greek Revival House-Pleasant Street - ca. 1860
A number of the multi-family workers' houses built by the carpet company along streets near the mills illustrate the more common local version of this style. These tenements, as rental properties were once known, were built of brick or wood and some have slate roofs. Plain boards trim the windows and outline the sills and corners of the wood-framed examples. 

114 North Street
Style is often expressed just by Greek Revival doorways, which display wide pilasters and high entablatures, as shown here in this Pleasant Street example. Double-hung windows associated with this style usually have six panes in each sash and narrow muntins. Greek Revival cottages often have narrow three-pane attic windows under the eaves. 
Gothic Revival Style 

A popular style for both houses and churches, the Gothic Revival is characterized by steeply pitched roofs and pointed-arch windows. 
In Thompsonville, St. Andrew's Episcopal Church on Prospect Street (above) 

and the former United Methodist church (above) on High Street exemplify this formal style. 

One of the Carpenter Gothic cottages on Cottage Green, ca. 1848 and possibly designed by Alexander Jackson Davis. 
As interpreted by local builders, the so-called Carpenter Gothic style, may include vertical board-and-batten siding and decorative bargeboards or trusses in the gable peaks. A small group of Carpenter Gothic cottages were built around Cottage Green for the employees of a hosiery factory. Henry Thompson, the factory owner, lived nearby on Prospect Street in the best preserved example of this type in the village ?. 
Henry Thompson's second house in Thompsonville at 34 Prospect Street, designed by Alexander Jackson Davis in 1848, constructed ca. 1850. His first house was the heavily modified Greek Revival at 22 Prospect Street.

Italianate Style 
The Italianate is often called the "bracketed" style for the carved or sawn wooden brackets used to support and decorate wide roof overhangs. Smaller brackets may support the sills or caps of windows, including the projecting bay windows that are typical of this style. 

33 Windsor Street - ca. 1880
A characteristic Italianate entrance porch with chamfered and bracketed posts highlights the brick, cube-form are found in one example Italianate on Windsor Street. Its segmental-arched windows are detailed with hood molds on the side elevations and brick diaper work on the façade. 
Two-story porches, as well as full-height bay windows are featured on two similar Italianates on Pearl Street. 

2-story porches and full height bay windows at 158 Pearl Street - ca. 1881
More modest local examples, which usually have an "L" plan with intersecting gabled roofs, have brackets at the eaves and/or at the top of chamfered or turned porch posts. One- or two-story bay windows are common features. 
A door hood supported by scrolled brackets with drops and an exceptional side porch with a pierced balustrade and curved brackets distinguish a circa 1880 Italianate on Russell Street 
Ca. 1880 Italianate - Russell Street


Round-arched gable windows, another style identifier, often paired on the façade, are found on the neighboring Vital Courmier house (ca. 1878), which also has two arched glass lights in the front door, as well as delicate eave brackets and a fully detailed front porch. 

A touch of Gothic Revival is found in the pointed gable windows that highlight the gable peaks of neighboring houses on New King Street. Two-over-two, double-hung sash is typical for this and other later nineteenth-century styles. 

A prime example of commercial Italianate design in Thompsonville, this is the last remaining representation of cast iron column façade work in Enfield. 
Ca. 1880 


Second Empire or Mansard Style 
Second Empire is a formal style, readily identified by a double-pitched mansard roof, usually covered with slate shingles. The steeper lower slope of the roof is tall enough to accommodate full-height, pedimented dormers. Roof brackets are common features. Although briefly popular in cities, only a few were ever built in Thompsonville. 

The David Brainerd House (ca. 1880) on Pearl Street (a.k.a. the Masonic Lodge) is one of only two examples of this style in the village. The 2nd is on Alden Avenue (below), also ca. 1880. 

Queen Anne Style 

Most of the late Victorian houses in Thompsonville were influenced to some degree by the Queen Anne style, which was derived from late 16 th century English architecture. In contrast to the box-like forms of earlier styles, larger more stylish Queen Annes are characterized by a variety of forms, towers or turrets, wings, and bays, often joined together by a wraparound veranda. Although the veranda has been enclosed, the Robert Hilditch house (now an apartment house) on Pearl Street exemplifies this newer asymmetrical massing. 

Queen Annes often display the Victorian penchant for embellished surfaces, as shown by the 1886 William Mulligan House next door (middle). 

Elaborated with decorative brickwork with white terra cotta insets, this exceptional Queen Anne is complemented by its fully detailed, matching carriage house (bottom). 
  

Wood-frame houses often display a variety of sidings and patterned shingles set off by trim boards. The Shingle style, a version of Queen Anne in which wood shingles cover the entire wall surface and trim boards are omitted, is not found in the village. In the related Stick style, however, trim boards not only outline the shape of the house, they mimic the underlying structural framework. This is exemplified by the Benjamin Lord House, another Queen Anne on Pearl Street, which also features decorative brickwork on the end chimneys. Windows and doors display the multicolored leaded glass transoms so characteristic of the style. 
  

Several period styles are combined in the Shubael Parsons house next door. In addition to Stick-style trim work, it also is embellished with bold Eastlake-style detailing on the entrance porches and in the gable peaks. 
Many Thompsonville expressions of this style, sometimes called Princess Anne's because of their smaller scale, usually have a gable-to-street orientation and a modified cross-gable plan. As originally constructed, these vernacular Queen Anne's were sheathed with clapboard siding and shingling delineated by trim boards. Some display rows of shaped shingles in the gables, and wide finish boards along the rakes. Open one- and two-story porches, which enhance many local multifamily examples including double-deckers, display all kinds millwork, such as turned posts and sawn brackets. 

The Guido Mazzini House on Prospect Street (above), one of the best preserved multifamily examples, has retained many original Stick-style features, including fish-scale shingling. It also has matching side porches with scrolled and pieced designs, decorative gable trusses, and exposed rafter tails. 

The bay windows of the Italianate style now display decorative brackets at the cut-away corners, as shown here on the Julius Smith house on Garden Street. 
Another common local style indicator is a small window bordered by small panes of colored glass, often used to light a stair well. Double-hung windows may have either two-over-two or one-over-one sash. 
Colonial Revival Style 
Like the Queen Anne, the Colonial Revival is an umbrella style, encompassing a range of types, all loosely based on colonial precedents. Among them are the Cape, a one-and-one-half story house, and the larger two-story "Colonial," which may have a gable or gambrel roof with cornice returns on the façade. Colonial Revival porches, which usually have single or double columns, may feature a roof pediment over the entrance. On double-deckers built in this period, the second story porches are set into the porch roofs below and typically feature a skirt instead of an open balustrade. 
Other stylistic influences include the Queen Anne and the more formal Neo-Classical Revival (see below), which in combination with the Colonial Revival, is often called the Free Classic style. Often derived from Georgian architecture, they have a symmetrically balanced façade and a hip or gable roof with dormers. Architectural details found on these more formal designs may include a doorway framed by pilasters and a second-story Palladian (three-part) window. Others have wooden or stone quoins instead of corner boards. On some of the brick buildings, limestone is used for the quoin blocks, the water table, and other architectural details. 
A simplified version of this basic design is found in the multi-family Colonial Revivals on Hartford Avenue and Bigelow Avenue. Built by the carpet company just prior to World War I, they have alternating gambrel and gable roofs to add variety to the streetscapes. On side elevations, pedimented wall dormers incorporate first-floor bay windows with Queen Anne cut-away corners. 

Colonial Revival 
Hartford Ave. (left) and Bigelow Ave. (right) 
Four-Square 
The Four-Square, one of the more popular Colonial Revival sub-types in Thompsonville, is nearly square in plan, and always has a hipped roof. 
Franklin Street


A high style example on Enfield Street might typically incorporate Colonial Revival elements, such as the portico with freestanding and engaged columns and diamond pane windows. The sun porch is also typical of the Colonial Revival period. An exceptional collection of Four-Squares on Franklin Street all display the gabled roof dormers associated with this style. 
An unusual double-decker variant of the Four Square, which has docked facade gables, was introduced on upper Windsor Street in the 1920s. 
Neo-Classical Revival Style 
Higgins School 
In Thompsonville the Neo-Classical Revival style is generally reserved for schools, apartment buildings, and large commercial blocks, all built of brick in the early 20th century. Like the architecture of the early 1800s, the first classical revival period, this style relies on the detailing and massing of ancient Greek and Roman architecture. Simple expressions of this style are found in the wood and brick cornices on the Thompson Court apartment buildings, 

4 Thompson Ct.     10 Thompson Ct.         
  

  
- in the cornice modillions of the Higgins School on North Main Street, (left) 
  
  
  
  

  
- and in the projecting, three-part pavilion of the Alcorn School on Enfield Street (right) 
  

In commercial buildings, roof and storefront cornices are elaborated with a modillions and the façade is framed by quoining. One of the most fully detailed and well preserved examples of this commercial style is the George Lehman Block on Pearl Street shown below. The round arch of the pediment in the roof cornice is repeated in the entranceway, which is flanked by Doric order columns. 
Bungalow 
The Bungalow style, which was derived from the East Indian "bangla," features broad facade dormers and wide roof overhangs. Characteristically, the main roof sweeps down over an integral façade porch, which may be supported by heavy battered (slanted) posts, or Colonial Revival-style columns. Also influenced by the Arts and Crafts movement of this period, bungalows may feature the use of natural materials, such as wood shingles or cobblestones, and/or exposed rafter tails and eave brackets. 

One of the more stylish examples (above) was built by William J. Hines on Enfield Street, in which shed dormer windows are set down into the slope of the façade porch roof, which is supported by short, massive columns. 

In some Thompsonville bungalows (above), the porch has a separate shed roof. 
PART II 
STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR THOMPSONVILLE 
These Standards and Guidelines were developed to establish a preservation policy for Thompsonville. Adapted from the National Park Service Standards for Historic Rehabilitation, they are designed to restore and preserve the historic architectural character of the community. They address all types of exterior historic rehabilitation projects, including renovations and new additions to existing historic structures, and new construction in historic neighborhoods. 
The Thompsonville Standards on the following pages incorporate the basic preservation principles that frame the preservation policy. The Guidelines apply these principles to the typical preservation problems identified during a comprehensive year-long survey of Thompsonville. While they focus on common local building conditions and maintenance issues and provide appropriate solutions, the Guidelines also address the long-term impact of modern artificial siding and other preservation-related concerns, such as how to deal with energy conservation and water damage in historic buildings. 
More detailed information on all these topics is readily available online from the National Park Service (NPS) and the Association for Preservation Technology (APT). See internet addresses in the bibliography. Copies of the NPS preservation briefs and other useful information, including the hiring of contractors, or safety procedures for lead and asbestos removal, are available at the Enfield Planning Department in the Town Hall, the Main Library on Middle Road, and the Pearl Street Library in Thompsonville, courtesy of the Enfield Historic District Commission. In addition, Historic District Commission staff provide free consultations on individual projects. 
Historic Rehabilitation Standards 

1.   Historic architectural character will be preserved by retaining, repairing, and/or refinishing all distinctive features, materials, and finishes, including. but not limited to siding, architectural details, porches, windows, and doors. 
2.   Replace only severely deteriorated historic fabric. New architectural elements will match the original design and materials, or if missing, be based upon appropriate examples from a similar style or period or be documented by historic photographs. 
Wooden ornamental trim such as this can be duplicated with a jigsaw or purchased from reproduction catalogs. 
3.   The use of artificial replacement siding is not recommended because of its potential negative impact upon structural and architectural integrity. To mitigate the loss of architectural integrity, only installation methods that protect and preserve existing historic features and architectural details will be permitted. If there is no alternative but to use synthetic siding, the original details should be retained. 

4.   The use of pressure-treated, construction grade lumber for exterior finish work on historic porches and other visible exterior features is not permitted. 
5.   The use of physical treatments or chemical products that damage historic materials is not permitted. 
6.   Rehabilitation plans will include the repair of historic materials and features damaged by water infiltration and moisture condensation. 
7.   Retrofitting for energy conservation will be limited to procedures and products that minimize damage to historic fabric. 
8.   New additions and exterior alterations will be compatible with the scale and proportions of the existing building and generally confined to less visible rear elevations. 

APPROPRIATE & COMPATIBLE ADDITION: 
? Similar Roof Shapes 
? Same Materials 
? Addition Subordinate to Original 

INCOMPATIBLE ADDITION: 
? Different Roof Shapes 
? Different Windows 
? Different Materials 
? Enclosed Front Porch 
9.   New infill construction on vacant lots will conform to the typical scale, proportion, massing, and materials of the historic streetscape and reflect the functional character (residential or commercial) of the historic neighborhood. 

An appropriate infill house (center) on a traditional street 

An inappropriate "tuck under" infill house (center) on a traditional street 
  

10.   Landscape features, including fencing, will conform to the prevailing residential and/or commercial character of the historic neighborhood. 
Historic Rehabilitation Guidelines 
HISTORIC AND MODERN SIDINGS 
Guidelines: Every effort should be made to repair, refinish, and maintain wood sidings and brick masonry, important historic materials that are the basis of most architectural styles in Thompsonville. The application of artificial siding is strongly discouraged. A major factor in the loss of historic character in Thompsonville, artificial siding also accelerates moisture and decay problems that lead to structural damage. 
WOOD SIDING 
Most wood-framed homes in Thompsonville were originally sheathed with wood clapboards or shingles. These durable and readily available materials were preferred throughout the historic period. Tests have shown that unless decay factors are present, the strength and stiffness of wood remains substantially unchanged for at least 100 years. You have only to look around Thompsonville to find houses at least this old that are still standing, even if they were not well maintained. 
COMMON PROBLEMS: Missing or damaged siding, deteriorated paint surfaces, or walls already covered with asphalt or asbestos shingles. Dirt or discoloration from mildew or air- and waterborne pollutants. Moss, algae, and other organic growth and/or excessive flaking or peeling paint, especially on the lower half of the wall. 
SOLUTIONS: If only a small number of shingles or clapboards are cracked or damaged, repair or replace them. If most of the wood is still in good shape, replace just the damaged areas. Rarely does all the siding need to be replaced. 
Mildly deteriorated paint surfaces and repaired sections will need painting. New paint bonds better to clean, dry, and dull surfaces, so good surface preparation is a must. It includes scraping and sanding of the deteriorated areas, and a complete light sanding to dull the surrounding paint surface, followed by a thorough cleaning. Since old paint may contain lead, safety precautions should include wet sanding, the use of goggles and masks, and the correct disposal methods. For more information on the safe handling of lead-based paint see Sources in the Appendix. 
Peeling, the most common type of paint failure, is usually a sign that earlier coatings did not adhere or bond, which may be due to moisture in the walls. Mildew and organic growth are also signs of wet walls and/or poor air circulation. Look for ways to deal with these problems before you paint in the Guidelines for Controlling Moisture Problems (page 43) and Historic Landscaping (page 48). 
Sandblasting to remove paint is a big mistake. Highly destructive, this method grinds away the softer wood fibers and leaves behind striated, porous surfaces.  
If the paint surface is generally deteriorated, with extensive "alligatoring" (cracking), a sure sign of too many layers of paint, the entire building may need repainting. All the old paint should be removed down to bare wood. Chemical paint removers can do the job, but heat guns and heat plates, followed by hand-scraping, are the recommended methods. Because of potential fire danger, blow torches are no longer used. Since lead or other hazardous materials may be present, complete paint removal is not a project for the homeowner. Testing for lead is always recommended prior to removal of old paint and is required for projects that utilize public funds. Please see enclosed guide booklet for proper handling of Lead Based Paint. 

Some of the ways to remove paint are highly destructive and should never be used. Sandblasting, the worst method, grinds away softer wood fibers and leaves behind striated, porous surfaces. Power washing, the method often preferred by painting contractors, can cause similar damage if the pressure is too high and/or the proper distance is not maintained between the nozzle tip and the building. Excessive pressure is particularly hard on architectural details, often destroying the original shape and form. The safest approach is to use the lowest possible pressure that will do the job. And always have your contractor demonstrate power washing or other paint removal methods on a small test area before proceeding. Since the building must dry out before any paint is applied, be sure that your contractor is equipped with meters to measure moisture levels (<14%). 
An experienced contractor that has been in business for a long time is your best bet. In addition to checking references, take a look at paint jobs the company did five or more years ago and see how well they have held up. If he can't or won't provide addresses of former jobs, choose someone else. 
Maintenance = Preservation: Annual touch-up painting and cleaning are good maintenance practices that can extend the effective life of a new paint job.  
A maintenance program is a useful tool; inspect your building's exterior, including any significant architectural detailing for condition and potential failure. This will identify any repairs needed immediately and also help plan a future schedule for those that can have maintenance postponed. (See appendix for sample inspection and maintenance schedule formats). 
Historic Paint Colors 
Choosing the right colors to paint a historic house is a personal decision. There are no hard and fast guidelines, only recommendations. Consider historic color schemes, which are always appropriate. As a general rule, white and lighter colors were popular between 1800 and 1850. In the early Victorian period, roughly 1850-1870, houses were painted with natural earth tones, such as light tan, gold and green, with a darker color for the trim. In the later Victorian period, deeper intense colors were used on the body of the house and several contrasting colors were used to accent architectural details. White again became popular after 1900 in the Colonial Revival period. For more information, consult historic color charts put out by paint companies. 
MASONRY 
Brick is the best maintenance bargain. It will have an attractive, "good as new" appearance that will last for decades with fewer and less expensive repairs. Although there are fewer brick buildings in Thompsonville, many wood-frame houses have brick foundations, which have similar problems. 
COMMON PROBLEMS: Crumbling mortar, broken brick, and settling cracks in the masonry. As was the case with wood framed buildings, there may be dirt build-up and/or staining from air- and waterborne pollutants, or organic material growing near the base of walls. 
SOLUTIONS: Cracks can be filled, brick replaced, and crumbling mortar re-pointed. Note: Unless the building appears watertight, complete all masonry repairs and re-pointing before cleaning. 
New mortar should match the color and composition of the original. Always match the width, shape, texture, and depth of the original joints. Old mortar should be raked out to at least 3/4".before proceeding. The color of many 19 th -century mortars came from the sand in the mix, but powdered dyes are used today. Avoid re-pointing with standard bagged mortar mix, which is usually too light in color. Not only will the re-pointed area stand out like a sore thumb, modern mortar is often too hard and may cause the softer historic brick to break off, or spall at the edges. 
Match replacement brick as closely as possible to the original; reset with new mortar and re-point as described above. If several bricks are broken in one area, or if a large section of wall section has disintegrated, often the case in brick foundations or steps, consider replacing the entire section. Remove all deteriorated brick and mortar back to sound masonry. Clean historic brick for reuse. Lay up new masonry courses (adding new brick as needed) in the original bond pattern, and re-point as described. 
Standard cement mortar mix should never be used for re-pointing because it damages historic brick and brownstone. 
If your brick house is already painted, a relatively common historic treatment, consider repainting. Do not attempt to remove old paint from brick or brownstone walls. Cleaning methods strong enough to remove paint damage these materials. Sandblasting is particularly destructive as it removes the hard outer surface and exposes the more porous layers underneath, which then deteriorate rapidly. When paint is removed from brownstone, even by hand scraping, special consolidants must be applied to seal the surface and prevent water penetration. 
Repoint and repair masonry before power-washing to avoid water penetration inside the walls. 

These two examples show the importance of re-pointing using mortar that matches the original in material, color and joint profile. In the example on the left, the historic appearance of the masonry has been maintained. The example on the right shows poor re-pointing that has altered the historic appearance of the building and will accelerate the deterioration of the brick. 
Experienced contractors will use low pressure water or steam to clean masonry. Stubborn stains, graffiti, or organic material can be safely removed with new chemical products designed for use on brick or other masonry surfaces. Note: Green, mossy walls may indicate poor air circulation caused by overgrown foundation planting. See Guidelines for Landscaping (page 48). 
Never cover brick walls with artificial siding. This is not only a needless expense, overtime any moisture trapped in the walls can rot out interior framing. In extreme cases, it can lead to the collapse of the entire structure. 
ARTIFICIAL SIDING 
Artificial siding has been used on historic buildings since the late 1920s. According to the 2004 survey of Thompsonville's building stock, asphalt (roll) siding and asbestos shingles, the earliest types, are found on about 15% of the historic buildings in Thompsonville. More potentially destructive products appeared after World War II. Aluminum was introduced in the 1950s and its popularity was soon surpassed by vinyl. Today more than half of the historic buildings in the village are sheathed in aluminum (25%) or vinyl (36%). 
ASBESTOS AND ASPHALT 
Is your house already covered with asbestos shingles or asphalt siding? These earlier 20 th -century materials did not trap moisture, so the original siding may be dry and free from decay. Consider removing these materials to expose the original wood siding underneath. Patch nail holes and if necessary, follow the repair and refinishing steps for wood siding above. Renew the surface with a good paint job. Not only will your house look better with the original siding but you may find original window and door casings and other interesting architectural details underneath. Uncovering and repairing these features will do a great deal towards restoring the historic character and value of your house. 
Asbestos shingles need to remain intact so that asbestos fibers can not get airborne. Removal should only be performed by a licensed asbestos abatement contractor. 
ALUMINUM AND VINYL SIDINGS 
Before you decide on these modern artificial sidings, you should be aware of some of the problems. They are decisions to make about cost, appearance, utility, as well as safety. Are they cost effective? Do they improve the market value of your house? Read on to get answers to these questions and concerns. 
PROBLEMS: Aluminum and vinyl siding manufacturers have always claimed their products were maintenance free; today vinyl is also touted as a good way to save energy. Tests carried out by preservation technologists have demonstrated that these claims are not valid. 
Despite industry claims, the insulation value of vinyl siding is minimal. Even when backed with a thin layer of insulating foam, or applied over rigid board insulation, the thermal envelope created has about the same "R" value as two to four inches of air space. See Guidelines for Energy Conservation for better ways to save on your heating bill (page 45). 
There are maintenance issues to consider. Like any surface exposed to the elements, artificial siding eventually needs repainting or replacement. Heat or even strong sunlight can warp and twist vinyl, which cannot be repaired. Finding replacement material of the same type and color is almost impossible. Like aluminum, it also can be dented and scratched and has very little insulation value. 
There's a lot more that the siding industry doesn't want you to know-especially the truth about the potentially destructive long-term impact on historic structures. Unlike asphalt and asbestos, which are relatively harmless, vinyl and aluminum act like vapor barriers, trapping moisture in the walls and contributing to structural decay. Weep holes in the siding don't do much to offset this fundamental problem. More importantly, once the siding is in place, wet walls and any evidence of structural damage are hidden from view. For more on this topic, see Guidelines for Controlling Moisture Problems (page 43). 
Artificial sidings have safety problems as well. Aluminum siding seems to "heat up" a fire. With higher temperatures, fires burn faster, causing extensive damage before they can be extinguished. Burning vinyl produces toxic fumes, a hazard for occupants as well as firefighters. 
And finally, the financial considerations. Vinyl and some the newer untested composites are expensive. Since most real estate professionals agree that any type of artificial siding actually lowers the appraisal and resale value of historic properties, you may never recover your initial investment. There is an even greater loss of value and historic character when siding is not applied correctly. 
If you still think that artificial siding is the answer, compare the two houses of the same age and style shown here that illustrate the effects of improperly applied siding on architectural integrity. The one that has retained all of its original architectural features and wood siding is not only a well-preserved historic building, but a livable and valuable home. On the other, careless application of the siding has reduced what once was a 150-year-old Greek Revival house to a bland featureless box, worth thousands of dollars less. 
Composite sidings and trim boards are a reality of life in present day building and remodeling. They protect wood frame structures from harsh elements and reduce the cost of maintenance for homeowners. However, the use of composite building materials should not result in the removal or obliteration of important architectural elements, designs and features on the structure. 

Building with exterior siding and ornamental trim intact 

Building with original siding and ornamental trim covered or removed 
GUIDELINES: The correct application of artificial siding can substantially reduce the impact on historic architectural character. All siding applications will comply with the rules set forth below. 
 Remove all visibly decayed wood siding down to the frame before applying any new material and repair or replace rotten sheathing and timbers. 
 Retain and protect during installation all the special architectural features and details, including but not limited to brackets, roof cornices and returns, window and door surrounds, and all corner, sill, and frieze boards. 
 Retain and protect during installation all architectural elements at historic entranceways, including, but not limited to door hoods, columns, posts, pilasters, sidelights, transoms, and entablatures. 
 Retain all historic porches and associated architectural features, including, but not limited to columns, posts, spindle courses, scrollwork, brackets, and balustrades. 
 Block out window trim boards to maintain the original profile depth (projection out from the original siding). 
 Match the exposure (width) of original siding as closely as possible and maintain the horizontal direction. 
 Do not install new siding over wall surfaces with shaped shingles or any other special sheathing, such as vertical board-and-batten. 
 Do not jump (cover) window and door casings. 
 Never cover roof cornices, soffits, and frieze boards with vinyl or metal, as this practice can trap water. 
HISTORIC PORCHES 
Guidelines: Every effort should be made to retain and preserve historic porches, one of the most important architectural features in Thompsonville. Repair or replace broken and missing elements and refinish. Total replacement is rarely necessary. 
Porches, introduced in the 19 th century, were popular in both urban and rural areas throughout the historic period. Practically every Victorian house had a porch elaborated with turned posts, balusters, spindles, and brackets. The entryways of the Italianate style were often not a true porch, but a door hood, a small roof supported by elaborate brackets. Classical details and columns characterized the porches and enclosed sun rooms of later Colonial Revival period. 
For many simple vernacular houses in Thompsonville, porches often are the only style feature. Among the several kinds of porches are verandas, which usually extend across the façade and may wraparound the corner to a wing. Porticos, are small, roofed porches that shelter just the doorway. Many multi- family houses in Thompsonville have matching entry porches on the facade or side elevations. So-called "double-deckers" have open porches on two levels. 
COMMON PROBLEMS: Broken or missing architectural elements, including brackets; rotted steps or flooring; lattice work damaged, or replaced with artificial material; balustrades enclosed, and railing heights not to code. Porch or balustrade was already replaced with construction grade lumber. 
SOLUTIONS: Repair or replace only the broken or damaged parts. If only one or two balusters or spindles are missing, new ones can be fabricated from stock finish grade materials to reproduce the size, weight, and form of the original. Lumberyards or building suppliers may have similar or matching turned posts, balusters, and railings in stock. Avoid using two by fours for railings; they have an unfinished appearance and are only suitable for frame construction. 
In some architectural styles, porches have half walls instead of balustrades, but covering an existing open balustrade with siding is not appropriate. Remove the siding and repair the balustrade. Total replacement may be necessary if most of the original balustrade has deteriorated and rot is present. 
Historic railing heights are usually lower that ones required by modern building codes. Instead of installing an entire new balustrade to meet code, consider a second railing at code height above the original. Pipe railing extensions painted to match the balustrade are an effective and unobtrusive solution to this problem. 
Replacement brackets, an architectural detail commonly found at the top of posts or under the eaves of the roof can be fabricated from finish boards of the same thickness. Use one of the original brackets as a template. The same method can be used to make replacements for flat, shaped balusters. 
Door hoods and eave brackets can be fashioned from thicker wood stock to generally match the appearance of the original. Plain triangular wood blocks or two by four braces are not acceptable substitutes. 
The base of porch posts and columns are the most likely decay sites. Repair or replace damaged sections with new wood. Round or square bases that rest on concrete or masonry, or directly on the porch flooring, can be made from pressure-treated wood, one of the few appropriate uses of this material. Matching replacements for the actual columns and turned posts may also be found at the lumberyard. Posts that are square in section can be replaced by four by fours, usually cased with finish boards. For uncased posts, use top grade material, sawn to size. Reproduce details like chamfered (angled ) corners, often used on Italianate-style posts. 
Repair of the skirting, the lattice or similar material that conceals the underside of the porch floor, is rarely possible. Replace with matching material or one of the types of historic lattice work shown here. The diagonal cross-type of lattice commonly sold today is not appropriate Retain and repair the finish boards that conceal the structural framing. Ventilation of this area is important, so avoid enclosing this area with solid panels. Metal or vinyl panels in this location are not appropriate, especially the type with multiple ventilating holes intended for use on roof soffits. 
If the porch floor or steps are in poor condition and need replacement, consider one of the new composite decking materials made of recycled wood and synthetic binders A good choice for floors exposed to the weather, these long lasting products require little maintenance. 
PORCHES 
PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE 
Use original materials and 3-dimensional balusters and/or new parts duplicating originals. SECOND BEST OPTION 
Use stock lumber & moldings to approximate the original railings. 2-dimensional cutout balusters are easier to make than the turned originals. THIRD ALTERNATIVE 
Uses plain lumber in the same proportions and with the same spacing as the original railing the turned originals.  
HISTORIC WINDOWS 

GUIDELINES: Historic window sash and window surrounds and should be retained and repaired. Replacement of severely deteriorated sash and casework should match the design, material, and size of the original features. Blocking-down windows or siding over historic window trim is not appropriate. Reserve modern windows (picture, awning or casements) for rear elevations. 
Double-hung, wood sash windows were the most common type of historic window in Thompsonville. Their designs changed over time. Greek Revivals and other early 19 th -century houses usually display 6-over-6 sashes (six panes on top and bottom). After 1850, in the Victorian period, 2-over-2 or 1-over-1 sashes were typical configurations and they may have an arch in the top sash. Windows with 12-pane sashes were a common Colonial Revival pattern in early 1900s. 12-over-1 or 8-over-12 sash windows were also used then. The surrounds of many of these windows have decorative treatments associated with architectural styles of the various periods. 
COMMON PROBLEMS: Windows with broken or missing parts; decay, usually confined to the bottom sash; and dried-out or missing putty. Windows sealed shut with paint or failed sash-weight systems. Wrong size and/or type of replacement sash; and window openings blocked-in or covered. Window trim boards and moldings or other architectural details missing and/or covered with artificial siding. 
SOLUTIONS: If the existing historic wood sash is in fair condition, repair or replace broken or decayed parts, re-glaze and putty as needed, and refinish. For ease of operation, do not paint sash parts that slide against the jambs. Broken sash cords can be replaced, but retrofitting historic windows with a new type of metal track designed for this purpose is a better, long-term solution. 
If window sashes are so deteriorated that repairs are no longer feasible, they should be replaced. Replacement is also a good idea for windows that have been removed or where modern sash was installed in blocked down openings. Custom-made windows may not be necessary. Many sizes of suitable replacement wood windows are manufactured today. Select the type and size that best matches the design of the existing historic sash. Painted wood sash is more authentic, but vinyl clad wood sash is also acceptable. The so-called "true divided light" is the better choice, but a less expensive type of window has a similar historic appearance. Instead of multiple lights, the sash has partial wood muntins on both sides of full size, double-pane or thermal glass. Avoid windows with "snap-in" muntins. 
When window casings are jumped (covered) or removed to install artificial siding, a house looks bare and unfinished. Cut back the siding to see the condition of the original casework, and repair as needed. Fabricate new casework from plain boards and stock moldings. Cornices and sills that were sawn off will need total replacement. 
Shutters 
Should you use shutters on your house? The style of your house will help you determine the answer to this question. Colonial houses had solid wood shutters on the inside of the window. Exterior shutters first appeared in the early 19 th century. Then known as "blinds" and fitted with moveable louvers, they were very popular for Greek Revival-style buildings, and continued to be used on some of the later Victorian styles. Since many historic homes built after 1900 were designed to resemble earlier colonial houses, shutters also may be appropriate for these "revivals." 
Historic shutters were hinged so they could fold inward and cover the window sash. Although no longer used for this purpose, shutters should appear to work by being the right size for the window. Each shutter should measure the full length of the window and half its width. 
Wood is always the best material for shutters and the louvered type is the most appropriate. If vinyl or metal shutters are used, they should resemble the louvered type. Avoid shutters with inappropriate cutout designs. 

Preservation of the pattern and rhythm of historic windows is important to the harmony and texture of the building facade and the streetscape. Replacement of six-over-six sashes with one-over-one sashes destroys the scale of the windows (top right). Combining two windows into a single "picture window" or band of windows destroys the rhythm of the facade (bottom left and right). Modifying the alignment of windows and doors in each bay weakens the order of the facade. 
HISTORIC DOORS 
Historic door styles also changed over time. Although wood paneled doors are the basic type, by the late 1800s, many displayed beveled glass panels. They were set in double or single, round arched openings in the Italianate style. By the early 1900s, a single large pane at the top of the door was a common feature. If your door needs replacement, it may be possible to get an appropriate period door from an architectural salvage business. Some modern stock doors are suitable for older homes. The paneled type is usually the better choice, but a plain solid door is acceptable. Avoid contemporary styles with small square windows. 
If you are lucky enough to have an original door in good condition, you may not need storm doors at all. Since older doors were solid and very heavy, they are good insulators and only need weather stripping. If storm or screen doors are absolutely necessary, they should match or complement the design of the panels and rails of the main door and be painted to match. When in doubt, the simplest design will be the best choice. 
CONTROLLING MOISTURE PROBLEMS 
Guideline: Every effort should be made to maintain a sound weatherproof building, and to take appropriate action to eliminate sources of water infiltration and condensation and to repair any damage to historic material and features. 
Water can cause major problems for historic buildings. If not controlled, it can lead to serious structural damage. Making a building weatherproof is relatively straightforward but it is more difficult to identify and correct damage caused by the condensation of water vapor inside the walls. 
WATER INFILTRATION 
Water can get into all parts of a building. In addition to a wet basement, a perennial problem in old houses, there may be leaks in the roof or from household plumbing. Non-functional gutters and downspouts may allow water to penetrate walls. Water can also infiltrate through cracks or poorly fitted joints. Rising damp from high water tables or poor soil drainage is another area of concern, particularly in houses with low foundations. 
WHAT TO LOOK FOR: Wall stains and dirt steaks on the walls from blocked, disconnected, or deteriorated gutters and downspouts; openings in siding, trim boards, and cornices, especially at corners of soffit covers; water stains on the inside of roof boards; and peeling paint near the base of the wall. Cracks or crumbling mortar in masonry buildings or any building with a masonry foundation. Water stains and/or mold on inside walls and ceilings, which also may be signs of plumbing leaks. 
If not corrected, long-term leaks can lead to new mold strains that are actually dangerous to your health. 
So far, these new mycotoxins seem to be confined to recent construction. They thrive on newer materials such as sheet rock; historic houses with plastered walls appear to be less vulnerable. 
SOLUTIONS: Weatherproofing begins with the roof (discussed in some detail below), but every homeowner also should take additional steps to prevent water damage. Install and maintain functioning gutters and downspouts and divert runoff away from the building. Remove all metal covers on cornices and soffits and frieze boards to keep water from collecting, and repair existing damage. Repair and caulk open joints and replace cracked boards. Caulk around window and doors casings, especially above cornices. The ground around the foundation should be graded to slope away from the house. Severe reoccurring problems, like flooded cellars, may indicate the need for a complete perimeter drain system with perforated pipe laid over gravel. 
Roofing: 
A good sound roof protects your house from the elements. Some historic houses in Thompsonville still display original slate or metal shingles, the most common roofing materials in the 19 th century. Most roofs today, however, are sheathed with asphalt shingles, an industry standard ever since about 1910. The first asphalt shingles were made of tar-coated felt or wood fibers and had a relatively limited effective life. Modern asphalt shingles are much improved, but they don't last forever. At some point almost every homeowner with an asphalt shingled roof is faced with re-shingling. 
COMMON PROBLEMS: Cracked, broken, or missing slates; dark patches on asphalt shingles (surface granules are worn away); and missing, curled, or lifted shingles; and staining on the underside of roof boards, a sure sign of water penetration. 
SOLUTIONS: You don't have to wait for a rainstorm to locate leaks. They are easily spotted on a sunny day from inside a dark attic. Light will stream everywhere there is an opening. If you can see daylight around your chimney or waste vent pipe, then you know the flashing needs to be replaced 
Slate, the most durable type of roofing material, is the best maintenance bargain. With repairs and the replacement of missing or broken slates, your roof can last another 100 years. Replacing a slate roof with asphalt shingles is an unnecessary expense. In fact, the price of repairs is only one-third the cost of installing asphalt shingles. 
Total replacement is the only solution for a severely deteriorated asphalt shingled roof. Since this is a major long-term capital investment, choose the best quality shingles you can afford. The least expensive asphalt shingles, actually tar-coated cellulose or fiberglass, are guaranteed from 15 to 30 years. So-called architectural grades cost a lot more (up to 5 times as much) but they may last as much as 40 years. Usually composed of several layers and backed with fiberglass webbing, these quality shingles are more wind resistant as well as less flammable, and often surface-treated to resist mold or ultraviolet damage. Keep in mind, that although manufacturers give long term guarantees on their best grades, extended warranties are prorated over the stated life of the product. 
You can add a new layer of shingles over the existing sheathing, but more than two layers may exceed the structural capacity of the building. If you already have several shingle layers in place, have them stripped completely off, right down to the roof boards. Replace any rotten or damaged boards and install new shingles over standard roofing paper. 
Multiple layers of roof shingles can exceed structural load-bearing limits. 
Now is also the time to repair the soffits, eave brackets, and fascia. Metal or vinyl covers, which often collect water, should be removed completely. If several brackets are missing or badly deteriorated, fabricate replacements (see pages 38-41). 
Hiring a roofing contractor is recommended. Repairing a slate roof or installing asphalt shingles is not a do-it-yourself project. In fact, improper installation of asphalt shingles can void the manufacturer's warranty. When you hire a contractor for this job or any other any home improvement work, make sure the company is fully insured and state-licensed. Get several bids, and always check references. 
CONDENSATION 
Condensation, the process of water vapor returning to a liquid state, is a relatively new problem for historic buildings. In the old days before indoor plumbing, the only sources of moisture in the air were from cooking or heating with wood or coal fires (the latter a byproduct of combustion). Climate control was primitive: houses were cold and drafty in winter and in the summer people just opened their windows for ventilation. As a result, the relatively small amount of water vapor generated escaped through the walls without condensing. 
Living conditions today are quite different. Because modern households generate gallons of water vapor every day and have better climate control systems, more water condenses and collects at the bottom of wall cavities. If left unchecked, siding and even framing timbers can decay. By the time warning signs appear, there may already be extensive structural damage 
WARNING SIGNS: Exterior walls feel wet to the touch, especially near the sills, the presence of mildew and/or blistering, peeling or flaking of the paint film in the same areas. Note: These conditions may also be signs of water infiltration as discussed above. Remove the siding to open up the walls to inspect the timbers underneath for rot ands insect infestation. Repair or replace damaged wood. 
PREVENTION: To control the moisture content inside your house, install fans in bathrooms, laundries, and kitchens and vent them to the outside. Consider special vapor barrier paint in the rooms where moisture accumulates. Dehumidifiers are recommended in the summertime, especially in damp basements. Be sure the attic has louvered vents in the gable peaks, and install additional exterior air vents at intervals along the top of outside walls. 
For the most recent publication on diagnosing and solving moisture problems, see Preservation Brief 39: Holding the Line: Controlling Unwanted Moisture in Historic Buildings, cited under Recommended Reading. 
ENERGY CONSERVATION 
Guideline: Appropriate methods and materials that save energy in historic buildings limit the damage to historic fabric. 
Saving energy is a major concern for many homeowners today and should be part of any rehabilitation plan. Since 75 percent of your heat loss is through the roof, begin by insulating the attic. Install at least six inches of insulation under the roof or between floor joists. Inexpensive simple measures such as re-caulking around doors and windows can provide additional savings. Add weather stripping to all outside doors. More information on weather stripping in historic buildings is available at the Enfield Planning Department. 
Consider installing new storm doors and windows. Your selection should be based on color and design. Factory applied colors may be right for your house, or you can buy an unfinished aluminum door or window, prime it with zinc chromate and paint it yourself. Choose a simple door design that matches the placement of horizontal elements in the original door. 
What about the walls? There's really no completely effective way to properly insulate the walls in a historic building. To do the job right you need a vapor barrier on the warm side of the wall. Standard batt insulation with vapor barriers cannot be installed in walls without gutting the interior, which destroys plaster, woodwork, and other original historic fabric. 
Some types of insulation that can be introduced into wall cavities from the outside have their own problems; for example, blown-in cellulose often settles to the base of the wall. The chemicals in the foam types can be destructive of wood fibers. In fact, in the absence of vapor barriers, both these types of insulation can contribute to condensation problems in the wall. 
A better choice is spun fiberglass. This newer product, which can "breathe," is less likely to trap moisture or settle in wall cavities. Installation by a contractor is expensive, but you can save money by renting the equipment to do the job. Typically a contractor will bore a series of holes (one for each stud cavity) right through the existing siding. Although these holes are plugged when the job is done, it takes a lot of work to restore the original surface of the siding. There is a better way. Remove one or two rows of siding along the top and middle of the wall, so entry holes can be cut through just the sheathing underneath. Complete the job by replacing the original siding. 
The technology of alternative building materials is constantly changing in response to modern day concerns over energy conservation and environmental stewardship. While traditional building materials and methods are usually preferred for Historic Preservation purposes, there are modern materials and products that do provide legitimate alternatives which are cost and energy efficient, while still meeting the objectives of maintaining historical designs and attributes. The utilization of modern building materials and methods should be embraced where practical, and rejected where it is not. 
The full story of energy conservation in historic buildings is complex and beyond the scope of this guide. For more information, please see Preservation Brief 3: Conserving Energy in Historic Buildings. The Enfield Planning Department is also available to answer questions. 
NEW CONSTRUCTION IN HISTORIC CONTEXTS 
Respect for the architectural character and rhythms of the historic streetscape are the foundation of the guidelines for new construction in Thompsonville. They establish general architectural design parameters for all types of new construction in historic contexts. Primarily developed to provide direction to architects and builders, they also may benefit individual historic property owners. 
ADDITIONS AND EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS 
Guidelines: Compatible new additions and exterior alterations to historic buildings may reflect but not duplicate the design of the original structure or convey a false historic appearance. Appropriate additions should clearly read as new construction and conform to the following design criteria: 
 Be restricted to less visible rear or side elevations. 
 Scaled in proportion to existing height and massing, but not exceed 30 percent of the existing building footprint. 
 Employ similar materials and/or simplified versions of existing historic architectural elements. 
NEW INFILL CONSTRUCTION 
Guideline: New residential construction should reflect the patterns and rhythms of the historic streetscape. Contemporary designs or simplified versions of historic domestic styles are appropriate when they meet the following criteria: 
 Maintain the historic setback from the street. 
 Conform to the prevailing scale, form, height, and massing of the streetscape. 
 May include architectural elements common to the streetscape, such as roof and window types, and employ similar materials. 
An addition to a historic building should be a secondary form that preserves the form of the historic building. A proposed addition should be no larger than two-thirds the street frontage of an existing building. 
Guideline: New commercial construction should conform to the prevailing height and scale of the existing historic streetscape and meet the following criteria: 
 Maintain existing cornice (roof and storefront) lines. 
 Employ appropriate materials that are compatible with adjacent buildings. 
 Avoid materials and features that convey a residential appearance. 
 Facade design may incorporate simplified versions of historic architectural elements from adjoining historic buildings, including but not limited to cornice design, storefront configuration, and window and door types. 
LANDSCAPING 
Now that you finished restoring the outside of your home, it is the time to turn your attention to the yard. Appropriate landscaping can do much to improve the appearance of your property. Strictly speaking, foundation planting was unheard of before about 1850. Later in the century shrubs and other plants were used to hide the higher, exposed foundation of Victorian house styles. Today, simple low foundation plantings seem to enhance houses of any style. Hedges set along property lines and simple fences also are appropriate. 
COMMON PROBLEMS: One of the more common landscape problems for older homes is overgrown shrubs that hide or brush against the house. Nearby house walls may be damp and/or have a greenish color from algae, moss or other organic material. Existing fences may be too tall and/or the wrong type for residential use. Cars may be parked on front lawns and other unpaved areas. 
SOLUTIONS: Large shrubs (or trees) too close to a house often interfere with air circulation. The options are pruning them back to size or complete removal. Pruning is not the answer unless mature shrubs have been trimmed on a regular basis. Now is the time to consider some new foundation planting; local nurseries will be glad to advise you. 
Many people have fenced-in yards for privacy and protection. Many historically appropriate residential kinds are available. Picket fences are always appropriate with earlier nineteenth-century styles and also go well with Colonial Revival-style houses. Modern versions of "wrought iron" are suitable for the Victorian styles. Prefabricated panels of all these types are available at your home improvement or building supply store. 
Modern stockade, rail and industrial chain-link fencing are not appropriate in a historic residential setting. Reserve them for the side or rear yards where they will be less visible from the street. If your property already has a chain-link fence along the street side, consider planting hedges to conceal it. 
Parking is a major issue in Thompsonville, especially for multifamily residences. Parking cars on the grass or graveled areas contributes to the pollution of the watershed, a particular environmental concern in a riverside community. If your property does not have enough paved parking space, off-site parking should be arranged. Town-owned parking lots are available in most neighborhoods. 
Groundcovers and Window Boxes 
Grass has always been a popular groundcover. However, it needs to be mowed and fertilized regularly. In the small front yards of Thompsonville, low plantings of myrtle, pachysandra, and ivy may be a better choice. Once started, they need little care and seem to thrive on neglect. Where yard space is limited, a window box is a simple effective way to add color or greenery to your house. 
Architectural Glossary 
Baluster ...A closely spaced vertical element for a porch or stair railing. 
Bay ...External divisions of a building based on the location of windows and doors. 
Bay Window ...A projecting window extending from the foundation up one or more levels, forming an extension to the interior floor spaces. Curved bay windows are called bow fronts. 
Bargeboard ... Decorative finish board along the rake edge of a roof, often elaborated with moldings, panels, and/or scroll-sawn details. 
Bond ... The pattern for setting bricks, for example: common bond has staggered rows of bricks, all laid lengthwise. Variations include alternating rows of header bricks, a pattern called English bond. 
Bracket ...A small wood projection, usually sawn or carved. Supports, or appears to support projecting features, such as cornices or eaves. Often used to elaborate the top of porch posts. 
Clapboards ...Narrow, horizontal, overlapping wooden boards, generally 4" - 6" wide, used for siding wood-frame buildings. 
Classical Orders ...In classical architecture an order consists of a Column or shaft (with or without a base), its Capital or head, and an Entablature, The most common orders ones established by the ancient Greeks - the Doric, Ionic and Corinthian, were modified by the Romans. 
Column ...A vertical round or tapered shaft, commonly used to support a porch roof (See classical orders). 
Corner Board ...A vertical trim board at the corner of a wood-frame building. 
Cornice ...Any projecting ornamental molding used to define or cap an architectural feature. 
Dentil ...Small square blocks generally used in a row to ornament a cornice. 
Dormer ...A roofed window that projects from a sloped roof. 
Eave ... The projecting overhang of a roof. 
Entablature ...The horizontal area above columns or pilasters, which includes the architrave, frieze, and cornice (see Classical Orders) 
Façade ...The front face or elevation of a building 
Fanlight ...A semi-circular or elliptical window used in gable peaks and as a transom over doors. Also see Palladian window. 
Fascia ...A flat board covering underside of a soffit at the eaves of a roof. 
Fenestration ...The arrangement of openings for windows and doors. 
Finial ...A decorative wood or metal ornament applied to the top of a pointed roof or other architectural feature. 
Frieze ...A flat trim board usually found under the eaves or over a door. May be part of a full Entablature. 
Hood ...A small roof over a door or window, usually supported by brackets. 
Gable ...The triangular portion of a wall defined by the sloping edges of a roof. 
Gambrel Roof ...A ridged roof having two slopes on each side where the lower is steeper than the upper. 
Lights ...Glass panes, usually in a window (see Window Sash). 
Lintel ...A horizontal beam or other supporting member over wall openings for windows and doors. 
Mansard Roof ...A roof having two slopes on all four sides associated with the Second Empire style. The nearly vertical lower slope may be curved. 
Molding ...A decorative band or strip of wood with a curved profile. Generally used on cornices and as trim around window and door openings. 
Muntin ...The cross pieces between the panes of a window sash. 
Newel ... A post supporting one end of a handrail, usually at the top and bottom of a flight of stairs. 
Palladian Window ... A three-part window with a taller center section usually topped with a fanlight and flanked by standard double-hung sash. 
Pediment ... The triangular space formed by the two slopes of a gable roof, framed by projecting cornices. Also, the triangular cap used as decoration over a door or a window. 
Pilaster ...A flat-faced or half-round column which projects slightly from the surrounding wall. 
Portico ... A roofed entrance, usually with columns or posts. 
Quoin or Quoining ... Dressed stones at the corner of a masonry building; or wood blocks on wood or stucco buildings. 
Sash ... The operable part of a window. Glazing may consist of one large pane or it may be divided into smaller lights by Muntins. 
Sill ...The lower horizontal part of a door or window frame or the horizontal beam that rests on the foundation wall. 
Spindles ...Short turned pieces of wood used in decorative sections (spindle course) under the eaves of porch roofs. 
Transom ...A fixed or moveable horizontal window over a door or window. 
Watertable ... Projecting section at the base of wood or stone walls designed to deflect water from the foundation. 
APPENDIX C - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
TOWN OF ENFIELD 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
SCHEDULE OF AMENDMENTS 
Section Public Hearing # Effective Date 2-c-1 1475 5-20-1987 3-g 1591 3-16-1989 4-f 1643 3-21-1990 4-c, 4-g, 4-h 1663 5-24-1990 3-c 1762 6-1-1992 3-e 1764 6-1-1992 5-g 1797 1-15-1993 5-b, 5-f 1798 1-15-1993 4-e 1884 9-23-1994 4-c 1885 9-23-1994 6 1999 8-1-1997 3-n, 3-r, 3-s (deleted) 2291 2-12-2002 4-c-1 2291 2-12-2002 5-b-2, 5-b-3, 5-b-9, 5-c-7, 5-d-1, 5-e-1, 5-e-4, 5-e-5, 5-f, 6-b, 6-c-6, 6-c-10, 6-c-11 2291 2-12-2002 Appendix A 2291 2-12-2002  
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
    Pursuant to the Charter of the Town of Enfield and G.S. ch. 126 as amended, the Town of Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission adopts the following regulations: 
Declaration of Policy 
    It is declared to be the policy of the Town of Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission to consider land subdivisions as a living part of the community and as part of a plan for the aggregation of lots. In order that land subdivisions may be made in the best interests of the town and in accordance with this policy, and in order that adequate provisions may be made for the proper arrangement and development of streets, for open spaces, for recreation, light and air, for the avoidance of undue density of population, for access of fire fighting apparatus to property, and for proper drainage and sewerage facilities, these regulations are hereby adopted. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision regulations, as adopted by the planning and zoning commission on March 21, 1968, and effective on March 28, 1968, as amended through February 12, 2002. Amendments to the ordinance subsequent to February 12, 2002, are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance, as amended through February 12, 2002. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Planning and zoning commission, G.S. §§ 8-4a, 8-18 et seq.; subdivision of land, G.S. § 8-25 et seq. 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
    As used in these regulations, the following shall mean: 
a.  Acre. As used in these regulations, shall mean 43,560 square feet. 
b.  Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the Town of Enfield. 
c.  Comprehensive plans. The plan of conservation and development officially adopted by the commission covering all sections of the town as a guide to future land use. 
d.  Cul-de-sac. A dead-end street with turnaround, the center of such turnaround being not more than 600 feet from the nearest street intersection. 
e.  Developer. Same as record owner or subdivider. 
f.  Grade. The amount of rise, in vertical feet, in 100 feet of horizontal distance (expressed as percent). 
g.  Lot frontage. The linear distance measured along points of intersection of a lot with a public street right-of-way. For a lot located on a public cul-de-sac turnaround, the lot frontage shall be the entire length of an imaginary straight line (1) whose end points touch the side lot lines; and (2) which is also tangent to, but not in front of, the minimum front yard setback line for such lot. 
h.  Minor subdivision. The subdivision of three or more lots but not to exceed ten lots on an existing accepted street where no new streets are proposed or needed to serve said accepted minor subdivision. A public hearing is not required for a minor subdivision application; however, a full staff review is necessary prior to final action by the commission. 
i.  Record owner or subdivider. The owner of record at the time application for subdivision is made in accordance with these regulations. 
j.  Resubdivision. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision, if such change: (1) affects any street lay-out shown on such maps; or (2) affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or (3) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereof, and creates an additional building lot if any of the lots have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map. 
k.  Street. Any vehicular travel way, exclusive of driveways. An approved street is any street whose location has been approved by official action of the commission. An accepted street is any street which has become public by virtue of official acceptance by the town council. 
l.  Street, arterial. A street which is used primarily as a route for traffic between communities or large areas. 
m.  Street, collector. A street which collects or will collect traffic from local streets and which will carry through traffic from surrounding areas. 
n.  Street, local. A street which serves, or will serve primarily, only those properties having frontage on it, and which does not or will not carry through traffic from surrounding areas. 
o.  Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the commission, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes and includes resubdivision. It shall relate to the process and subdividing any land in Enfield including nonresidential as well as residential areas. 
p.  Zoning ordinance. Those zoning regulations of the Town of Enfield which are in effect at the time when application is made to and officially received by the commission for plan approval of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision. 
Section 2. - Approval required. 
    No subdivision or resubdivision of land as defined in section 1 shall be sold or offered for sale or lease, nor shall any building permit be granted within such subdivision or resubdivision until the subdivision or resubdivision plan shall have been granted final approval by the commission and recorded by the town clerk. A public hearing shall be held for any subdivision application, except for a minor subdivision. 
a.  De facto subdivision. Should a developer have built upon the same tract or parcel of land two or more houses, or have divided such tract or parcel of land into three or more lots, and it seems otherwise evident to the commission that he is in fact developing a subdivision even though no application for such subdivision has been made, the commission may declare the tract or parcel a subdivision and require the developer to make application as required in these regulations, unless the developer can reasonably prove to the commission that his actions do not constitute a subdivision. Failure to follow the action of the commission shall make the developer liable to appropriate penalties as indicated in this section and no further building permits will be granted on such until the developer has compiled. 
b.  Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation making any subdivision of land without the approval of the commission shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each lot sold or offered for sale or so subdivided. 
c.  [ Moratorium. ] A moratorium on subdivision within any residential or historic residential district shall be in effect commencing 15 days after date of approval of this section by the planning and zoning commission, and running continuously thereafter for a period of nine months. During this moratorium period, no application for subdivision within any residential or historic residential district shall be received by the planning and zoning commission (expired). 
1.  A moratorium on subdivision within any residential or historic residential district shall be in effect commencing immediately upon the termination of the moratorium described in section 2c. of these regulations, and running continuously thereafter for a period of six months. During this moratorium period, no application for subdivision within any residential or historic residential district shall be received by the planning and zoning commission (expired). 
Section 3. - General requirements for subdivision of land. 
a.  Character of land. All land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health or public safety. Land subject to flooding or with inadequate means of sanitary sewage disposal shall not be subdivided. 
b.  Compliance with zoning ordinance. All subdivision plans must conform to the Enfield Zoning Ordinance and to the Enfield Subdivision Regulations herewith prescribed, and they shall be guided in their layout by any comprehensive plans the commission may have adopted covering the area involved, before receiving final approval. 
c.  Waiver procedure and vote on subdivision plan. In accordance with Section B-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended, the commission may waive certain requirements under the regulations by a three-quarters vote of all the members of the commission in cases where conditions exist which affect the subject land and are not generally applicable to other land in the area. 
    In granting any waiver, the commission shall find that: it would not have a significant adverse effect on adjacent property; it would not have a significant adverse effect on public health and safety; it is not in conflict with the plan of development; it is consistent with the development pattern of other land in the area; it is compatible to the site's natural features. 
    The commission shall take a separate vote on each waiver request, separate vote on each waiver request, separate from and prior to the main motion on the subdivision application. The commission shall state upon its records the reason for which a waiver is granted in each case. 
    The subdivision application shall be approved by a majority vote of those members present and voting. 
d.  Approval of plan, bond. No improvements shall be made by a developer until the final plan has been approved by the commission and a bond or escrow agreement, acceptable under these regulations, has been received, securing to the town the actual construction, installation and associated costs of all facilities and utilities. Reference is made to section 4c. of these regulations. 
e.  Open space. 
1.  Dedication. As part of any subdivision, the commission shall require such open space as it may deem proper, conveniently accessible to all lots from public ways, with a minimum frontage of 40 feet, consistent with the following: 
A.  The total amount of area to be reserved for open space purposes shall be a minimum of ten percent of the gross area of the subdivision, unless otherwise specified by the commission. 
B.  The commission shall determine the manner in which the open space is to be conveyed or preserved including the following mechanisms: 
I.  Fee dedication to the Town of Enfield; 
II.  Conservation easements to the Town of Enfield, both passive (no public access required) or active (public access granted); 
III.  Other easements to access open space, watercourses etc., for maintenance purposes; 
IV.  Private covenants; 
V.  Fee dedication to the State of Connecticut; 
VI.  Fee dedication to the local land trust; or 
VII.  Combination or an extension of the above described techniques. 
C.  Each area reserved for such purpose shall be of suitable area, dimensions, topography and natural character for the intended conservation and/or recreation purposes. Each such area shall be located and laid out so as to be used in conjunction with similar areas of adjoining subdivisions or of probable future subdivisions or as part of additions to areas as shown in the plan of development for open space or recreation uses. 
At least 33 percent of the area for open space shall not be encumbered by wetlands, waterbodies, any existing or proposed storm water detention facilities, the 100-year flood plain as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or slopes in excess of 25 percent. 
D.  The commission may require that open space may be developed or reserved for parks or playgrounds, or passive recreation purposes; such requirements, if any, shall be bonded as a public improvement pursuant to section 4.C of the Enfield Subdivision Regulations; however, in all instances, the approved subdivision plan shall clearly state the intended use and purpose of all open space parcels. 
E.  In making its determination on the methods of open space preservation, the location and configuration of open space parcels, and the size and type of recreation improvements, the commission shall be guided by the plan of development, the state plan of conservation and development, and any relevant policy jointly adopted by the town council, planning commission and conservation commission. 
F.  In considering open space parcels under this section, the commission may request the input of the superintendent of parks and recreation concerning the need for and appropriateness of any proposed recreational facilities as well as the ability of the town to maintain the property; and, the commission may request the input of the conservation commission for an advisory report concerning the appropriateness of the proposed open spaces. 
G.  Where open space is required under this section, the applicant shall provide a warranty deed or appropriate easement to the town or other designated agency prior to the filing of the subdivision maps with the town clerk. 
The open space requirement of the section shall not apply: if the transfer of all land in a subdivision of less than five parcels is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle or first cousin for no consideration; or, if the subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in G.S. § 8-39a, equal to twenty percent or more of the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision; or, if the subdivision contains already developed lots within the Thompsonville or Hazardville neighborhoods. 
Except as provided above, the commission shall require open space in all subdivisions, and no waivers shall be granted, unless the commission authorizes the payment of a fee in lieu of open space as set forth below. 
2.  Fees in lieu of open space dedication. As set forth in G.S. § 8-25, the commission may authorize the applicant to pay a fee to the Town of Enfield, or a combination of paying a fee to the Town of Enfield and transferring land to the Town of Enfield, in lieu of the full requirement to provide open spaces. In considering any land to be transferred under this section, the commission shall follow the procedures outlined in sections 3e.1 B-G. The procedure is set forth below: 
A.  The applicant shall provide a narrative as part of his subdivision application to the commission setting forth the proposal to pay a fee, or pay a fee and transfer land, in lieu of the full open space dedication as set forth above. 
B.  The commission shall determine whether to accept the proposal of the applicant, to recommend a different combination and fee, or to require a dedication only. 
C.  If fees in lieu of open space is to be allowed, the commission and applicant shall first jointly select an appraiser to determine the fair market value of land proposed to be dedicated along with a fee in lieu of open space. The applicant shall be responsible for all of the appraisal fees and expenses. 
Steps A, B and C may, at the discretion of the commission, be accomplished during the application acceptance portion of the process. 
D.  The payment, or combination of payment and the fair market value of land transferred, shall be equal to not more than ten percent of the fair market value of them land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision. 
E.  The method of payment of any fees under this section shall be one of the following two options: 
i.  The applicant, at his option, may submit the entire fee in one lump sum prior to filing of subdivision mylars with the town clerk; or 
ii.  The applicant may elect to submit a fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is the number of approved building lots in the subdivision, no later than the time of the sale of each approved building lot; and a notation describing this requirement shall be placed on the final subdivision map filed in the town clerk's office. If this option is chosen, the applicant shall submit a bond or other security acceptable to the director of finance, equal to the full amount of fee required, prior to the filing of the subdivision maps in the town clerk's office. 
F.  Fees submitted under this section shall be deposited by the town in a fund which shall be used for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational, agricultural purposes. The disbursement of such fees must be approved by the commission and must be consistent with the plan of development. Any required fees shall be paid to the town prior to release of any subdivision performance bond. 
f.  Privately-owned reserve strips. No privately-owned reserve strips shall be permitted which control access to any part of the subdivision from any street or other open space dedicated to public used, or which may be so dedicated, nor will reserve strips of land be permitted which may prove to be untaxable for improvements. 
g.  Preservation of natural beauty; grading and top soil. The subdivider shall give due regard to the preservation and potential enhancement of existing natural features, large trees, scenic points and similar assets of a community nature. No land shall be graded except as shown on the final plan approved by the commission. No soil shall be removed from any portion of the subdivision, except where required for the construction of streets, driveways, or structures or for the grading of land, all in accordance with the final plan, approved by the commission. Where top soil has been removed for the above purpose, or where less than seven inches of top soil exists, the commission shall require the replacement of an amount which it deems adequate for proper landscape development, not exceeding a total depth of seven inches. 
    When grading, the subdivider shall take special measure to prevent undue erosion. Excess top soil must remain within the limits of the Town of Enfield, except as may otherwise be provided pursuant to section 8.40 of the town zoning ordinance. 
h.  Site improvement generally. If, in the judgment of the commission, overall site improvement is necessary, the subdivider shall submit which show methods of stabilizing slopes against erosion and storm water drainage, in accordance with the Connecticut Guidelines for soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, January, 1985 and any later revisions thereto. Such plans shall be reviewed by the director of public works and a written report of his findings shall be submitted to the commission. 
i.  Trees. In open areas, the commission shall require, as part of the final plan for a new residential subdivision, the planting of trees, of a deciduous species approved by the commission and of not less than 11/2 to two inches caliper, not more than 50 feet apart on both sides of all streets, and at least four feet behind the front lot line on private property, or as otherwise approved by the commission. For a particular lot, such trees required for that lot shall be planted within 12 months of issuance of a building permit for such lot. In wooded areas existing specimen shade trees shall be left in place where practicable and lots in such areas shall not cleared except as approved by the commission. 
j.  Approval of town engineer. No subdivision plan shall receive final approval from the commission until it has received a written report from the office of the town engineer. Such office shall review each subdivision plan with regard to sanitary sewage disposal, storm drainage, water supply, road, curb and sidewalk construction, and other engineering aspects as required by these regulations. The report of the office of the town engineer shall specifically state as to the plan's conformity with these regulations. 
k.  [ Lot sizes for private sewer or water systems. ] Larger lot sizes than the minimum required under the zoning ordinance may be required by the commission in areas to be served by private sewage disposal systems or private water supply where adverse soil or topographic conditions make such necessary, in accordance with standards established by the North Central Health District. 
l.  [ Dedication of streets. ] Approval of a final subdivision plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the town of any street, as defined in Section 1, included in the plan. However, the filing of an approved final subdivision plan in the office of the town clerk shall constitute an irrevocable offer of dedication to the town for acceptance as a street of any land shown as a street on such plan. Such offer of dedication shall be binding upon the owner of such land, his heirs, successors and assigns. The same shall hold true for dedication of land for easements or other public uses. 
m.  Ingress and egress. No plan of subdivision containing a road whose length is more than 1,200 feet shall be approved which does not two means of vehicular ingress and egress from an accepted town street. As used in here, vehicular ingress and egress will be by streets in accordance with these regulations. 
n.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider so that all lots within the proposed subdivision shall be located within 500 feet of a hydrant, if such subdivision is to be serviced by public water supply. Such measurements shall be taken along public ways only. Fire hydrants shall be located so the outside flange of any hydrant will be set three feet off the face of curb. 
o.  Developer's responsibility for public utilities. In the case of subdivisions where water, gas, sewers and electric street lighting are to be connected to a public source, all necessary mains, branch offsets or laterals to each lot, fire hydrants, fire alarm boxes, poles, and street equipment shall be installed at the subdivider's expense as approved by the corporation or municipal department having jurisdiction. If a subdivision is proposed in an area of an existing street where no street illumination presently exists, the developer shall install such illumination as required by Northeast Utilities. 
p.  [ High pressure pipe lines. ] If subdivision of land is proposed upon which there exists high pressure pipe lines, the easements for such lines shall show on the subdivision plan. The exact location of the lines as actually located by the surveyor shall be shown on all supplementary maps. Such supplementary maps shall also show, along the center line of the pipe, vertical profiles of the pipe and the existing terrain. 
The following are considered as minimum requirements to lessen hazards of such pipe lines: 
1.  Minimum building setback lines of 40 feet distance from the centerline of pipe shall be established on both sides of such pipe lines. 
2.  Where septic tanks are to be utilized, such septic tanks and all appurtenances and connections shall be on the same side of the pipe line as is the building they will serve. 
3.  Proposed street shall cross such pipe lines at right angles or nearly so. In such street crossings, the pipe shall be enclosed in a casing which at least meets the requirement of the specifications in A.P.I. Code No. 1102 issued by the American Petroleum Institute entitled "Recommended Practice on form of agreement and Specifications for Pipe Crossings Under Railroad Tracks", except that the minimum distance from the top of the casing to the proposed road surface be four feet six inches and its casing shall extend the full width of the right-of-way. 
q.  [ Sanitary sewers. ] Active or capped sanitary sewers shall be installed in all proposed streets by the developer at his expense. All sanitary sewer construction will be under the direct supervision of the Town of Enfield Sewer Authority as to their design, installation, and operation. They will be designed in accordance with the specifications of the director of public works as outlined in the Code of the Town of Enfield. 
r.  Utility distribution lines. All utility lines or conduits including those for power or communications shall be installed underground, regardless of location of existing utility lines or conduits. All lines shall be buried with magnetic identifying marker tape 12 inches above the centerline of the conduit. All utility lines shall be designed and installed so that the outside of the conduits are located a minimum of three feet horizontally from the outside face of any storm drainage or sanitary sewer structure. The utility lines shall also be designed and installed so that there is a minimum one foot vertical clearance from the outside face of any storm drainage or sanitary sewer pipe that they may cross. The same horizontal and vertical clearance criteria shall be complied with in the design and installation of sanitary sewer systems as they relate to the location of existing or proposed storm drainage systems. 
Section 4. - Outline of procedure. 
a.  Application for subdivision approval. Application for any type of subdivision approval shall be made as follows: 
1.  Step one: Pre-application conference. Prior to making formal application for any subdivision approval, the developer shall meet with the town planner and town engineer for the purpose of preliminary staff review. 
2.  Step two: Formal application. Upon completion of Step One as cited above, the record owner or developer may submit a formal application for subdivision approval. A complete application submittal shall consist of all the following: 
a)  Completed application form, as supplied by the commission available through the planning office; 
b)  Fee, in accordance with G.S. § 8-26, as may be amended; 
c)  Written evidence of a sufficient interest by the applicant in the property for which application is made; 
d)  Eight full sets of plans, meeting all of the requirements of sections 3, 5 and 6 of these regulations; 
e)  A complete written report from North Central Connecticut Health District regarding feasibility of each proposed lot for private sewage disposal and private water supply, if such are proposed. 
No application shall be received by the commission unless all of the above items have been submitted. 
A complete application must be submitted not less than seven days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the commission. The town planner shall submit each formal application to the commission, accompanied by all plans and other documents, as required under these regulations, no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the commission, after he has received same. 
b.  Time limits. The commission shall act upon any subdivision or resubdivision application within the time limits as specified in G.S. § 8-26d, as may be amended. 
c.  Performance bond. 
1.  Bond estimates. No subdivision plan be approved until the necessary performance guarantee amounts have been calculated by the director of public works and the town planner in the amount sufficient to cover the full cost of all the following: 
a)  Street grading and base. 
b)  Final pavement including all pavement markings as required by the Enfield Traffic Safety Officer. 
c)  Curbs and gutters. 
d)  Sidewalks when required. 
e)  Street and traffic signs. 
f)  Concrete monuments and all lot corner markers. 
g)  Sanitary sewers. 
h)  Storm sewers, culverts and other drainage installations. 
i)  Fire hydrants. 
j)  Tree plantings (when required). 
k)  Street illumination. 
l)  Erosion and sediment control items. 
2.  Submission of performance bonds. The portion of the guarantee which covers the cost of erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be submitted to the town in the form of a cashier's check or a passbook prior to the filing of the subdivision plan in the office of the town clerk. 
The portion of the guarantee, which covers the cost of items a) through l), as listed above shall be posted in full by the developer prior to the filing of the subdivision plan in the office of the town clerk. 
3.  Conditional approval. In lieu of either the completion of the work or the furnishing of a bond as provided in this section, the commission may authorize the filing of a plan in the town clerk's office with a conditional approval endorsed thereon; however, prior to the filing of the map containing the conditional approval, the guarantee for erosion and sediment control items shall be submitted in full. Such approval shall be conditioned on (1) the actual construction, maintenance and installation of any improvements or utilities prescribed by the commission or (2) the provision of a bond as provided in this section. Upon the occurrence of either of such events, the commission shall authorize the filing of a plan in the town clerk's office with a final approval endorsed thereon. 
Prior to a final approval being endorsed on any map, no building permits may be issued and no lots may be sold within the subdivision. 
Prior to a final approval being endorsed on any map, the applicant shall submit a bond equal in amount to the incomplete improvements but in no instance less than 15 percent of the original estimate of improvement costs as determined by the town. 
Any such conditional approval shall lapse two years from the date it is granted, provided the applicant may apply for and the commission may in its discretion, grant a renewal of such conditional approval for an additional period of two years at the end of any two-year period. Any person, firm or corporation who, prior to such final approval, sells or offers for sale any lot subdivided pursuant to a conditional approval shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each lot sold or offered for sale. 
4.  Standard requirements. All performance guarantees required under this section shall be approved as to form by the director of finance and shall be filed with that office. 
Such performance bond shall be held until actual construction or installation by the developer is completed, approval of work is given by the director of public works, in accordance with the approved plans (a detailed and accurate estimate of the cost of completion of said improvements shall be submitted by the director of public works), and the performance bond is released by the commission. Such release shall take place only upon the filing by the developer with the director of public works, and his approval thereof, of a detailed set of "as-built" plans signed by a land surveyor, licensed in the State of Connecticut, verifying the location, size and type of improvements actually constructed within the subdivision as proposed in the approved plans. Final acceptance of improvements shall be made by the town council. Release of bonds shall be performed by the commission. 
d.  Maintenance bond. A maintenance bond approved as to form and sureties by the director of finance in an amount equal to 15 percent of improvements costs, shall be supplied by the developer prior to the commission's recommending acceptance of any streets or improvements by the town. Such bond shall be held for one year from the date of acceptance of a new town street and shall be released by the commission only after final inspection and recommendations by the director of public works. 
e.  [ Filing. ] Any plan for subdivision shall, upon approval, or when taken as approved by reason of the failure of the commission to act, be filed or recorded by the applicant, at his expense, in the office of the town clerk, and any plan not so filed within 90 days of the expiration of the appeal period under G.S. § 8-8, or in the case of an appeal, within 90 days of the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the applicant, and any plan not so filed or recorded within the prescribed time shall become null and void, except that the commission may extend the time for such filing for two additional periods of 90 days and the plan shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time. No such plan shall be recorded and filed by the town clerk until its approval has been endorsed thereon by the chairman or secretary of the commission, and the filing or recording of a subdivision plan without such approval shall be void. 
f.  [ Sign. ] Whenever a public hearing is scheduled by the town planning and zoning commission, the applicant shall place a sign on the affected property which can be seen from all abutting streets. The sign to be placed at or near street line or traveled way or in such other location, shall be clearly visible to the general public. Such sign, to be provided by the planning office, shall be installed by the applicant no less than ten days before the hearing and shall be removed by the applicant within five days after close of such hearing and returned to the planning office. An affidavit will be executed by the applicant or his agent certifying that this sign will be installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. A refundable deposit will be required from the applicant at the time the sign is picked up from the planning office. 
g.  Pre-construction conference. The commission may require that prior to the beginning of any site work (including the clearing of vegetation, demolition, site grading, etc.), a pre-construction conference be held between the developer, site contractor(s), town engineer, town planner, and others as deemed necessary. The purpose of such meeting shall be to review the approved plans and conditions of approval; enhance project coordination; and identify the project's contact person for erosion and sedimentation control concerns. Such conference shall be mandatory for any development which include either on-site or off-site public improvements. 
h.  Developer's agreement. A developer's agreement shall be required for any development which includes on-site or off site public improvements, which agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the town attorney, and which shall be executed, and may be recorded in the town clerk's office, prior to the filing of mylars. 
Section 5. - Requirements for improvements, construction plans and design standards. 
a.  Monuments. Monuments shall be set at the PC and PT and PRC of street lines, and at other locations required by the director of public works. Approved concrete monuments shall be used to mark the boundaries of the subdivision. Locations of all monuments shall be indicated on the subdivision plan. Iron pins shall be installed at each corner, property line angle point and at any other point to sufficiently define each lot, as determined by the director of public works and in accordance with accepted land surveying practices. 
b.  Street design standards. 
1.  Harmony with other streets. Streets in any subdivision shall be in harmony with existing or proposed thoroughfares as shown on any plan of development adopted by the commission, especially with regard to safe intersections with such thoroughfares, and shall follow the general contours of the land with a location and grade the preserves to the greatest extent possible the natural, terrain, trees and other significant natural, manmade, and scenic features. All streets in any subdivision shall have free access to or shall be continuations of one or more accepted town streets or state highways. Consideration shall be given to providing street right-of-way extensions to abutting undeveloped properties, and where necessary, temporary cul-de-sacs, so that a safe, convenient circulation system is provided in the opinion of the commission. 
2.  Classifications. The commission shall classify or reclassify all the streets within or abutting the subdivision with the following classifications, and all streets shall be laid out, designed and constructed in accordance with the following classifications: 
Arterial street: Existing or proposed as shown on the comprehensive plan of development adopted by the commission or intended to accommodate presently or at any future time traffic other than that of the immediate neighborhood, as determined by the commission, and where projected daily traffic is expected to be greater than 3,000 ADT. 
Collector street: Any street other than an arterial street which is intended now or in the future to conduct traffic between local streets or between a local street and arterial street as determined by the commission. Minor collector streets are where projected daily traffic is expected to be between 250-1,000 ADT. Major collector streets are where projected daily traffic is expected to be between 1,000-3,000 ADT. 
Local street: Any street whose primary function is to give access to properties only and which is not and will not in the future be likely to be used by traffic other than that having origin and destination upon such streets, as determined by the commission. Local streets include culs-de-sac and loop streets. A local street, which is or may be longer than 2,000 feet, shall be considered a collector street. Local streets are expected to have projected daily traffic of up to 250 ADT. 
Residential Districts Road Classification Right-of-Way 
Width Pavement 
Width Arterial 50 feet 30 feet Collector 50 feet 28 feet Minor 50 feet 24 feet  
Business or Industrial Districts Road Classification Right-of-Way 
Width Pavement 
Width Arterial 60 feet 36 feet Collector 60 feet 34 feet Minor 60 feet 30 feet  
3.  Culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac, dead-end streets with turnarounds, will be allowed under the following conditions: 
a)  To provide access to undeveloped rear land surrounded by subdivided land, or to solve a topographic problem. 
b)  As a temporary measure pending future development of adjoining land in which case provision shall be made in the turnaround for continuing the street later, and for reversion of any resulting excess right-of-way to abutting property owners. 
The turnaround diameter shall be at least 110 feet and it shall have a minimum pavement radius of 50 feet to the outside curb. 
Culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 600 feet measured from the center of the turnaround to the nearest street intersection. 
The transition curve entering into the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum pavement radius of 100 feet, to create a "tear drop" shape as shown in the details. 
There shall be no driveway curb cuts within the transition curves and no more than three driveways on the circle. 
4.  [ Gradient. ] Minimum gradient for streets shall be not less than 1.0 percent. Maximum gradient shall not be more than 8.0 percent. 
5.  Angle of intersections. Intersections between streets shall be at an angle of not less than 80 degrees for a distance of not less than 175 feet, unless specifically approved by the commission. Intersecting right-of-way lines at intersection shall be connected by a curve of at least 20 foot radius. 
6.  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall be prohibited. 
7.  Street names. Proposed street names are subject to approval by the commission. No street name phonetically similar to any street in use in the town shall be used. 
8.  Boundaries of rights-of-way of existing streets. Boundaries of rights-of-way of all existing streets lying within or adjacent to any subdivision shall be relocated and laid out to meet the above standards to the extent which the commission in its discretion deems practicable and in the public interest. The intersections of existing streets shall be joined by curves as required above for new streets. 
9.  Street construction standards. All streets and other facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standard specifications prepared by the department of public works and filed with the town clerk, which standards are included in graphic form within these regulations and are identified as "Technical Subdivision Regulations." Particular attention is directed to the street curbing standards, which are graphically defined in said "Technical Subdivision Regulations" and which are as follows: 
All streets in any district shall have bituminous lip curbing with a six-inch reveal throughout, except where reinforced portland cement concrete pedestrian sidewalk ramps are required. On an existing public street, where no curbing presently exists, bituminous lip curbing shall be installed along the frontage of all proposed lots. 
10.  Gridiron layouts. Gridiron layouts shall be avoided whenever possible. Local street patterns shall incorporate curves by following as closely as possible the natural features of land to be subdivided. Proposed straight local streets of 1,000 feet or more shall be subject to revision at the discretion of the commission. 
c.  Lot and block standards. 
1.  Block widths and lengths. Block widths shall not be less than 240 feet and block lengths shall generally not be longer than 1,200 feet nor less than 600 feet. In blocks longer than 1,000 feet, pedestrian crosswalks may be required to serve community facilities such as schools or shopping centers. Such walkways shall not be less than ten feet wide and shall be straight from street to street. 
2.  Lots to front on streets. Each subdivision must front on a proposed public street having a right-of-way width of at least 50 feet, or on an existing public street. 
3.  Lot arrangement. Lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties for reason of topography or other natural conditions, in complying with zoning requirements in order to build on each lot. Lots shall not be of unreasonable depth, encouraging the later creation of a second building lot at the rear. 
4.  Location of lot side lines. All side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to street lines unless a variance from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. 
5.  Dimensions of corner lots. Corner lots shall be of sufficient dimensions so that any structure placed thereon shall conform to the building setback line of each street. 
6.  Access of driveways to local streets. Where possible, lots shall be so laid out that the driveways serving the lots have access to a local street and not to a major road carrying general traffic. 
7.  Septic systems. All proposed lots whose property lines are within 200 feet of an existing sanitary sewer line shall connect to such line. Otherwise, lots to be served by septic tank systems shall contain sufficient land of proper character to permit satisfactory performance of septic tank disposal fields. Where both private sewerage disposal and a well are to be located on the same lot, such lot should have an area of at least one acre. These areas may be reduced, but may not be less than the minimum requirement for the zone, where the subdivider submits a letter from the North Central Connecticut Health District, at the time of application to the commission, stating that the facilities as planned can be safely accommodated on each lot. 
8.  Unavailability of public water/public sewer. If a town sewer and/or a public water supply are not available, such subdivision shall be submitted to the North Central Health District for a written report indicating the acceptability of each lot for a private water supply. Such report must be received at the time of application. 
d.  Drainage improvements. 
1.  Disposal of spring water and storm water system in general. The developer shall be required by the commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch, based on recommendations by the director of public works, any spring water that may exist on the proposed development. The developer shall have designed by a professional engineer, licensed in the State of Connecticut, a storm water drainage system that shall contain, where necessary, culverts, catchbasin, headwalls, storm sewers, detention and retention basins and other structures or facilities suitable to give the streets and adjacent lots proper drainage. This design shall be computed in accordance with the practices and procedures a set forth in the latest State of Connecticut Department of Transportation "Drainage Manual" and the soil conservation "Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" unless otherwise directed herein. It will be the responsibility of the developer to install an adequate stormwater drainage system, which will handle the run-off from a 25-year storm. The system shall be designed by the developer's professional engineer and submitted for approval by the director of public works. Three types of storm sewer pipes shall be acceptable. Reinforced concrete pipe, coated corrugated steel pipe and corrugated polyethylene pipe (smooth interior) are all acceptable pipe type options which must be specified appropriately based on soils, depth of cover and load capacities. The minimum size storm drainage pipe is 15-inch inside diameter. The minimum grade shall be not less than one-half of one percent and the cover over top of the pipes shall be not less than two feet. Standard State of Connecticut manholes, catchbasin and drain collectors, located with piping runs at intervals of not more than 300 feet, shall be used. 
2.  Culverts. A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside of the subdivision. An analysis of downstream impact will be required in accordance with "Downstream Drainage", below. The developer's professional engineer shall determine the necessary size of facility based on anticipated runoff from a 50-year storm under conditions of total potential development permitted in the watershed. The culvert or drainage facility from the subdivision shall continue to a natural watercourse. 
3.  Downstream drainage. The developer's professional engineer may be required by the director of public works to determine the effect of each proposed subdivision on the existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility during a 50-year storm, the commission shall not approve the subdivision until the subdivider has made such provision for the improvement of such potential condition as the commission deems reasonable to require of the subdivider. 
4.  [ Existing town streets. ] Where a subdivider of land proposes building lots on an existing approved town road, or where the tract of land to be subdivided presently receives storm water drainage from an existing town road or watercourse, it will be the responsibility of the developer to provide an approved storm water drainage system suitable to give the existing town street and adjacent lots of the proposed subdivision proper drainage. 
5.  [ Drainage easement and flowage rights. ] Drainage easement and flowage rights shall be furnished by the developer in the name of the Town of Enfield in a form acceptable to the town attorney, where they are deemed necessary by the department of public works to install or maintain drainage installations or utility installations outside roadway limits, including ditches where necessary. Subject to utility design standards, the following easements shall apply: 
a)  Twenty-foot minimum for sanitary lines. 
b)  Twenty-five-foot minimum for storm water lines. 
c)  As approved for all other purposes. 
e.  Requirements for construction of facilities. 
1.  All storm sewer pipe shall be reinforced concrete pipe, Class IV or the equivalent gauge (depending on size) coated corrugated steel pipe or corrugated polyethylene pipe (smooth interior). The minimum depth of cover shall be two feet over the top of the outside diameter of pipe, or as approved by the director of public works. 
2.  Catch basins and drainage manholes should be spaced at a distance of not more than 300 feet on a roadway. In a parking area, one catch basin should cover not more than 9,000 square feet of paved area. 
3.  On all commercial and industrial parking areas, the minimum thickness of blacktop shall be three inches; that is a 11/2-inch compacted binder course with a 11/2-inch compacted top course. The base underneath a parking area shall consist of good, firm, porous drainage material down to the frost line (subject to approval by the town engineer). On top of this material, a minimum of six inches of bank run gravel and two inches of processed stone above the gravel is required underneath the blacktop. 
4.  Sanitary sewers. The minimum size for a house, commercial establishment, or industrial building is a six-inch diameter line from the building to the street lateral. This would consist of PVC pipe (SDR-35) with a minimum cover of five feet, required for traveled ways, parking lots or driveways. 
Amount of Cover Material Class of Pipe 5' PVC (SDR-35) 4'-5' PVC (SDR-18) 3'-4' Cast Iron Pipe (Extra Heavy) 
PVC (SDR-35), and C-900 PVC Minimum cover = 3?  
(See Appendix A - Technical Specifications, pages 7-12 [Figs. 7-12] for further requirements.) 
5.  Sidewalks shall be constructed with seven percent air-entrained concrete (4,000 psi), which shall conform to the latest specifications set by the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation. Slump shall be in the range of two to four inches. For sidewalk ramps, the wire mesh reinforcing shall be six inches by six inches, ten-gauge welded wire fabric complying with ASTM-185. Wire will be laid in a continuous roll being cut only for expansion joints. It shall pulled up to the center of the slab while pouring. A two-day curing period is required on all concrete sidewalk work. 
All concrete will be sprayed with a wax-resin base compound that complies with ASTM C-309, Type II and ASHTO M-148, Type II, or equal, to prevent spalling. 
The expansion joints shall be an asphalt type material, waterproof and conforming to ASTM-D994-53 and AASHTO-M-33-70. Thickness shall be three-eighths inches, and the distance between joints shall be no more than 20 feet with one dummy joint every five feet between expansion joints. 
f.  Sidewalks. Portland cement concrete sidewalks, at least five feet in width, shall be placed six inches off the front property line across proposed lots in residentially-zoned areas and shall be constructed in accordance with standard specifications of the department of public works. A seeded grass strip shall separate the sidewalk from the roadway and shall slope to the curb of the traveled portion of the street. See technical specifications for roadway cross sections. 
1.  Loop street and permanent cul-de-sac serving ten lots or less - no sidewalks; 
2.  Loop street and permanent cul-de-sac serving 11 lots or more - sidewalks on one side, the location to be determined by the commission; 
3.  Local street other than loop street and permanent cul-de-sac, sidewalk on one side, the location to be determined by the commission; 
4.  Minor collector street - sidewalk on one side of the street, and at the discretion of the commission two sides of the street may be required; 
5.  Major collector street - sidewalks on both sides of the street; 
6.  Arterial street - sidewalks on both sides of the street. 
Variations from sidewalk standards. The commission may require additional walks or may permit variations from the established sidewalk standards as set forth above upon a three-quarters vote of all the members. 
In determining the appropriateness of such variation, the commission shall consider: 
a)  Proximity to existing sidewalks and present and projected sites for schools, public facilities, open space, and shopping facilities; 
b)  Present and projected dwelling unit density, the rural or suburban character of the neighborhood, and the present and potential pedestrian traffic in the area; 
c)  The extent of environmental disturbance to be caused by the sidewalk construction such as removal of trees or other valuable natural or manmade features; or grading within or near areas of steep slopes, wetlands or watercourses. 
g.  Public improvements associated with subdivisions of merged lots of record. As set forth in section 3.20.2 of the Enfield [Zoning] Ordinance, an applicant may apply for a special use permit to allow a division of merged lots of record. A companion subdivision application is also required. For subdivisions filed under this section, all subdivision regulation standards and requirements shall apply except as specifically set forth below: 
1.  Street pavement width shall be constructed to a width consistent with the width of the pavement of the abutting street system but in no case less than 24 feet. 
2.  Curbing shall be constructed to the standards existing in the abutting street system. If no curbing exists in the abutting street system, a street gutter shall be established to adequately carry stormwater. 
The details of such improvements shall be approved by the commission upon receipt of a recommendation from the director of public works and town planner. 
Section 6. - Final plan. 
a.  Submission. Final plans, accompanied by a completed and signed application form, proper fee, and statement of interest in the subject property, shall be submitted in accordance with these regulations. 
b.  Form. All final plans must be drawn in black waterproof ink on drafting mylar film (thickness .004") at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet. In addition, a lot layout at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and a location map at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet shall be similarly drawn and supplied by the applicant. Sheet sizes shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches and where more than one sheet is necessary and index sheet corresponding in size shall also be submitted. If subdivision approval is granted by the commission, the applicant shall submit for the use of the public works department, an exact duplicate of the subdivision and lot layout plans, as well as as-built plans of the plan and profile, all on drafting mylar film, one set at full scale (24 inches by 36 inches) and one set at one-half scale (12 inches by 18 inches) and one set in a digital format which is compatible with hardware/software utilized by the Enfield Engineering Division. 
Final plans reflecting the approval of the commission shall also be submitted in a digital format prescribed by the town planner; the commission may waive this requirement by a vote of three fourths of the full commission when the applicant's plans are not prepared digitally. 
c.  General conditions. All plans submitted shall contain: 
1.  Name of owner - name of record owner of land or subdivision if different; names of abutting property owners, and name of subdivision. 
2.  North arrow, scale, title, key or location plan (scale not less than one inch equals 800 feet), total area affected, zoning district, date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any. 
3.  Certification - certification by the professional engineer and land surveyor, both licensed by the State of Connecticut. 
4.  Boundary survey - Class A-2 standards as by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors. 
5.  Layout of streets - accurate layout of existing and proposed streets, proposed street names, easements or right-of-way, including those for utilities, sewers, drainage, either on or off-site, with accurate dimensions including arc length, radii and central angle of all curves. All pavement markings, traffic signs, street name signs and street illumination for the proper and safe direction of traffic shall be shown and shall be provided by the subdivider. 
6.  Layout of lots - accurate location of lots, showing also any open spaces reserved for parks, playgrounds or other common public uses, with dimensions, angles, bearings and curve data, lots numbered and areas given. 
7.  Monuments - accurate location and description of monuments shall be provided in accordance with section 5. Iron pins with accurate reference to an established governmental marker or to the Connecticut Coordinate System and approved by the director of public works. 
8.  Certificate of approval - block for certificate of approval with the following stated within: 
Approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission 
Town of Enfield, Connecticut, dated _____
_____
Signature of Secretary   Date 
9.  Date of expiration 
The following shall be noted: 
"In accordance with G.S. § 8-26c, the approval of this (subdivision, resubdivision) plan by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission shall automatically expire on _______ if all work in connection with this plan is not completed by _______." 
c.[d.]  Construction plans. In addition to the above, construction plans shall also include: 
1.  Percolation test locations. Percolation test locations where individual sanitary waste disposal systems are to be installed. Test locations are to be shown with reference to proposed leach field layouts. 
2.  Servicing subdivision. All details of proposed servicing of the subdivision, including but not limited to proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers, catch basins, manholes, bridges, culverts, sidewalks, water supply, fire hydrants, curbs, retention basins, and erosion controls are to be accurately shown. Invert elevations shall be given. 
3.  Road profile. Road profile and plans showing existing and finished grades, cross-sections and other detailed road construction plans including all utilities at a vertical scale of one inch equal four feet, and at a horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet shall be provided. Materials specifications shall conform to the latest specifications of the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation, unless otherwise required by the director of public works. 
4.  Open space. Proposed open space and/or recreational areas, including fencing along rights-of-way which access such areas and which abut private property. The height and type of fencing shall be at the discretion of the commission. 
5.  Methods of dedication. Methods of dedication of proposed easements, rights-of-way and open spaces required by these regulations, shall be indicated. 
6.  Contours. Contours having a two-foot contour interval (five-foot interval may be used for steep slopes, wooded areas and swamps) in sufficient detail to show the general topography, watercourses and drains as the commission may require. The existing topography plans must be certified to T-2 accuracy, as defined by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors. Existing and finished contours shall be shown in sufficient detail to show the property both as existing before development and the final grading of each lot as amended within the subdivision. If for reason of some necessary field change during development the final contours shall be altered from those shown on the final plan, the developer shall supply revised "as-built" plans showing such revisions to the commission, so that the Town of Enfield shall have on file a precise record of the subdivision as built or developed. 
7.  Perimeter traverse. A perimeter traverse shall be submitted. Traverse of blocks and separate lots shall be submitted as the commission may require. The error of closure shall be one in 5,000. 
8.  Erosion and sediment control plan. Erosion and sediment control plan or plans, meeting all applicable requirements as stated in section 7.20 of the Enfield Zoning Ordinance. 
9.  Master development plan. Where all land proposed for development or land under ownership of applicant is not included in the preliminary proposal, a master development sketch shall accompany the original submission. This sketch, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, shall show proposed rights-of-way and lot layout. 
10.  Street numbering and index plan. A plan to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet shall be submitted indicating lot subdivision dimensions, sheet match marks and a street numbering system, acceptable to the town engineer's office and the town's E-911 coordinator. 
11.  Video record of storm sewer and sanitary sewer. The developer shall submit videos of the inside of the completed sanitary and storm sewers. The videos shall have audio narration to identify the structures and stations along the pipe which will match the approved subdivision plans. 
Section 7. - Rescinding of previous regulations and status of subdivision plans approved prior to effective date of these regulations. 
a.  All prior subdivision regulations are hereby rescinded on the effective date of these regulations, except that uncompleted subdivisions, plans of which were legally filed and recorded in the town clerk's office, prior to the effective date of these regulations, shall be required to conform only to those regulations in effect at the time of plan approval, in accordance with G.S. § 8-26. 
b.  A single lot or parcel of land having an area or frontage of lesser amounts than required by existing zoning ordinance shall be deemed to comply with the area and frontage requirements of said Ordinance, provided said lot or parcel of land was shown on a duly approved plan or described in a deed, duly recorded on the date of these regulations. However, where private sewage disposal facilities and/or private water supply are utilized, any lot shall be subject to inspection and approval of the North Central Connecticut Health District. 
Section 8. - Separability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in these regulations, shall for any reason be held invalid or unconstitutional by a decree or decision, of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decree or decision shall not effect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining portion of these regulations. 
Section 9. - Effective date. 
    These subdivision regulations were adopted by the Enfield Planning and Zoning Commission on March 21, 1968 and are effective on March 28, 1968. (See sheet preceding first page for effective dates of amendments) 
APPENDIX A. - TECHNICAL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Revised: 2-20-1968, 10-1977, 1-13-1987, 5-24-1990, 2-12-2002   

[Fig. 1. Residential Street Section] 


[Fig. 2. Industrial or Business Street Section] 


[Fig. 3. Typical Intersection] 


[Fig. 4. Catch Basin Oil Trap Detail] 


[Fig. 5. Standard Sanitary Sewer Trench Detail] 


[Fig. 6. Standard Drop Inlet] 


[Fig. 7. Under Basement Sewer Connection Detail] 


[Fig. 8. Wall Hung Sewer Connection Detail] 


[Fig. 9. Backyard Sewer Connection Detail] 


[Fig. 10. Street Signs] 


[Fig. 11. Monuments] 


[Fig. 12. Checklist for Acceptance of Streets] 


[Fig. 13. Thirty-Foot Paved Tear Drop Cul de Sac Detail] 


[Fig. 14. Twenty-Four-Foot Paved Tear Drop Cul de Sac Detail] 


[Fig. 15. Checklist for Site Inspection Calls] 


[Fig. 16. Application for Excavation Permit] 


[Fig. 17. Temporary Patch Treatment Detail and Notes] 


[Fig. 18. Schedule for Permanent Patching] 


[Fig. 19. Permanent Patch Treatment Detail and Notes] 


[Fig. 20. Building Permit, Plot Plan and Permit Compliance Checklist] 


[Fig. 21. Type "C" Catch Basin] 


[Fig. 22. Type "CL" Catch Basin] 


[Fig. 23. Wing Type Endwall; Fig. 24. Endwall] 


[Fig. 25. Brick or Concrete Masonry Manhole; Fig. 26. Typical Precast Manhole] 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1967 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1967 Code, as updated through September 8, 1998, which are included herein. Sections of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1967 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-4 1-1-1-4 1-5, 1-6 1-7, 1-8 1-7 1-10 1-8 1-13 2-1 78-35 2-2.1-2-2.3 78-81-78-83 2-2.4-2-2.7 78-31-78-34 2-2.8 78-1 2-3 62-1 2-4 62-4 2-5 62-3 2-6.2 62-2 2-6.3 30-3 2-7, 2-8 2-122, 2-123 2-8.1-2-8.4 2-124-2-127 2-9(a)-(e) 2-121 2-9(c) 2-128 2-9(g) 2-121 2-9(k) 2-121 2-9(i) 2-121 2-10 2-129 2-15-2-18 62-61-62-64 2-19-2-23 26-71-26-75 2-24-2-27 66-61-66-64 2-28-2-30 2-101-2-103 2-31-2-35 62-31-62-35 2-36-2-42 2-151-2-157 2-43-2-46 2-181-2-184 2-47 2-81 2-71 22-31 2-72-2-77 22-33-22-38 2-81 66-31 2-91-2-93 2-201-2-203 2-101-2-107 38-62-38-68 2-121-2-128 26-32-26-39 3-1 6-1 4-1 14-31 4-2 14-33 4-2.1 14-34 4-3 14-1 4-15-4-25 42-31-42-41 4-26-4-28 42-61-42-63 4-29-4-31 42-81-42-83 4-32 42-42 4-42, 4-43 14-211, 14-212 4-44(a) 14-214 4-44(b) 14-213 4A-1 30-1 4A-3 30-2 4B-1, 4B-2 46-32, 46-33 4B-3 46-31 4B-3-4B-7 46-61-46-65 4B-8 46-31 4B-8-4B-11 46-81-46-84 4B-12-4B-14 46-34-46-36 5-1-5-4 58-31-58-34 5A-1 14-61 5A-2 1-2 14-62 5A-3(a), (b) 14-63 5A-3(d) 14-63 5A-4-5A-7 14-64-14-67 5A-8-5A-13 14-91-14-96 5A-14, 5A-15 14-121, 14-122 5A-16 14-141 5C-2, 5C-3 18-31, 18-32 5C-4-5C-11 18-61-18-68 5C-12-5C-15 18-91-18-94 5C-17 18-33 5C-19 18-34 5C-21-5C-23 18-35-18-37 5D-2-5D-6 18-121-18-125 6-1 82-2 6-2, 6-3 82-4, 82-5 6-4(a)-(e) 82-31 6-4(g) 82-6 
82-31 6-4(h)-(j) 82-31 6-5-6-9 82-32-82-36 6-10 82-31 6-10-6-12 82-37-82-39 6-13, 6-14 82-7, 82-8 6-16 82-40 6-17 82-3 6-18 82-41 6-19 82-1 6-20 82-42 6-51-6-56 82-61-82-66 6-60, 6-61 82-131, 82-132 6-62(a)-(e) 82-133 6-62(g)-(k) 82-133 7-1 18-1 7-4-7-10 82-91-82-97 7-11 6-2 7-12 50-1 7-13.1 10-31 7A-1-7A-5 54-1-54-5 8-16 86-31 8-16.1- 
8-16.7 86-51-86-57 8-17-8-22 86-81-86-86 8-23-8-26 86-111-86-114 8-26.1 86-87 8-27-8-33 86-131-86-137 8-33.1 86-88 8-34, 8-35 86-89, 86-90 8-36-8-39 86-201-86-204 8-40-8-43 86-181-86-184 8A-1 78-61 8A-16-8A-18 78-62-78-64 8B-9, 8B-10 70-33, 70-34 8B-21 70-31 8B-22(a)-(d) 70-32 8B-22(e)-(k) 70-35 8B-23 70-36 8B-24 70-11 8B-24(a), (b) 70-37 8B-25 70-38 9-1 14-2 9-2-9-8 74-61-74-67 9-8A 74-68 9-9 74-69 9-10-9-13 74-101-74-104  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1967 Code, as updated through September 8, 1998, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1967 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since September 8, 1998, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 11-13-1967(Ord.) 1-9 99-1  1-19-1999 50-1 99-2  6- 7-1999 14-32 99-3  6- 7-1999 26-35 00-1  4- 3-2000 78-36 00-3 12-18-2000 0-3 74-31-74-34 01-1  4-16-2001 8B-1-8B-6 70-1-70-6 8B-7 70-12 8B-8-8B-11 70-7-70-10 01-4  4-16-2001 38-31-38-34 01-5  5- 7-2001 6A-1-6A-10 38-101-38-110 PH 2329  7-25-2002 App. B, § 5.20 02-1  8-26-2002 2-36-2-42 2-151-2-157 02-2  9- 3-2002 8-24 86-112 8-27 86-131 8-32 86-136 02-3  9-12-2002 A-F 10-51-10-56 02-4 11-18-2002 7-14-7-19 34-31-34-36 02-5 12- 2-2002 5B-11-5B-19 38-141-38-149 03-1  2-18-2003 30-2 PH 2368  4-17-2003 10.30.3 App. B, § 10.30 03-2  5- 5-2003 70-12 03-3  5- 5-2003 42-36 PH 2395  7-24-2003 10.30.1(F) App. B, § 10.30 03-4  8-18-2003 78-131-78-138 PH 2396  9- 4-2003 1.30 App. B, § 1.30 5.10 App. B, § 5.10 5.10.1 App. B, § 5.10 5.20 App. B, § 5.20 5.20.1 App. B, § 5.20 8.50 App. B, § 8.70 PH 2397  9- 4-2003 9.30 App. B, § 9.30 03-5  9-15-2003 66-91-66-97 03-6 10-20-2003 1-13 14-171-14-183 PH 2412 11-20-2003 2.30(21) App. B, § 2.30 3.30.13 App. B, § 3.30 4.20 App. B, § 4.20 4.20.1 App. B, § 4.20 6.10.2 App. B, § 6.10 10.10.1 App. B, § 10.10 04-1  1-20-2004 6-18 82-41 6-20 82-42 04-2  1-20-2004 App. A, § 2-49 PH 2435  4- 1-2004 10.10.6(B) App. B, § 10.10 PH 2436  4- 1-2004 5.20 App. B, § 5.20 5.20.1 App. B, § 5.20 04-3  4-19-2004 2-43-2-46 2-181-2-184 PH 2443  4-22-2004 4.30.20 App. B, § 4.30 PH 2445  5-20-2004 10.30.5 App. B, § 10.30 PH 2451  6- 3-2004 10.30.8 App. B, § 10.30 PH 2452  6- 3-2004 4.40.5 App. B, § 4.40 04-4  6-21-2004 38-1 05-1  2-22-2005 7-14-7-18 34-31-34-35 7-19 34-37 7-20 34-36 05-2 10-17-2005 78-30 06-1  2-21-2006 Adopting ord., 
pg. xi PH 2544  3-16-2006 App. B, § 3.30.1 PH 2545  3-16-2006 App. B, §§ 3.30.7, 3.30.10       Added App. B, § 3.30.14 PH 2550  9- 7-2006 App. B, § 12.20 PH 2555  5-18-2006       Added App. B, § 3.10.1       Added App. B, § 3.10.2 PH 2575 10-19-2006 App. B, § 9.10.5       Added App. B, § 9.10.9 07-1  1-16-2007 § 74-69 PH 2605  7-12-2007 App. B, § 3.30.7 PH 2618  9- 6-2007 App. B, § 8.60 E. PH 2632 12-20-2007 App. B, § 4.30.10 I.       Added App. B, § 4.30.10 J. PH 2633 12-20-2007 App. B, § 2.30 08-1  3- 3-2008 70-1-70-12 70-31-70-38 08-2  4- 7-2008       Added 66-131 08-3  4- 7-2008       Added 66-132 PH 2639  5-22-2008 1       Added App. B, § 8.70 E. 2       Added App. B, App. A 08-4  6- 2-2008 14-32 08-5  6- 2-2008 66-97 08-6  9-15-2008 42-31-42-42 42-61-42-63 42-81-42-83 PH 2644 10-23-2008 App. B, § 2.30       Added App. B, § 4.30.11 H., I. PH 2658 12- 4-2008 App. B, § 10.10.2 08-7 12-15-2008 82-65, 82-66 PH 2665  2- 5-2009 App. B, § 5.40.1-5.40.3 09-1  6- 1-2009 Ch. 14, Art. IV, §§ 14-17-14-184 XZA 09-03  6- 4-2009       Added App. B, § 3.30.8 XZA 09-04  6- 4-2009 App. B, § 5.10 09-2  7- 6-2009 30-2 XZA 09-07 11- 5-2009 App. B, § 1.30 App. B, § 3.30.7 XZA 09-09 11-19-2009 App. B, § 2.30 09-3 12-21-2009 Ch. 74, Art. IV, §§ 74-101-74-104 10-1  3- 1-2010 Ch. 34, Art. II, §§ 34-31-34-37 10-2  5-17-2010 1-11       Added 70-13 XZA 10-02  4- 1-2010 App. B, § 3.30.14 C. 10-3  5-17-2010       Added Ch. 62, Art. IV, §§ 62-65-62-67 10-5  6-21-2010 14-32 10-6 11- 8-2010 14-32 XZA 10-06  4- 1-2010 App. B, §§ 3.20.2 A.,4.10, 4.10.1, 5.10.1 XZA 10-11  7- 8-2010 App. B, §§ 3.30.13 E., 8.50.4 A., 12.20 A.-D. XZA 11-01  3- 3-2011 App. B, § 9.30 A. XZA 11-10  6-16-2011 App. B, § 6.20 11-1  6-20-2011 34-31-34-37 XZA 11-23  1-19-2012 App. B, § 5.30.2 XZA 11-24  1-19-2012 App. B, §§ 10.30.2 B.iii, C, 10.30.3(table), 10.30.4(table), 10.30.5, 10.30.6, 10.30.7 I, K, 10.30.8 A XZA 11-25  1-19-2012 App. B, § 6.20 (table 6.2),       Added App. B, § 6.20.1(note 7), App. B, § 6.30.7 12-1  3-19-2012 14-171-14-184 XZA 11-26  3- 1-2012       Added App. B, § 8.80       Added App. B, § 8.30.2.iv App. B, § 4.20       Added App. B, § 4.20.1.13 App. B, § 5.20       Added App. B, § 5.20.1(26) App. B, § 6.20       Added App. B, § 6.20.1.7, 8 XZA 12-02  5- 3-2012       Added App. B, § 4.40.6 XZA 12-05  6-21-2012 1 App. B, § 6.20 2 App. B, § 6.20.1 3 App. B, § 2.30 PH 2747  7- 5-2012 App. B, § 4.10       Added App. B, § 4.10.1.11 App. B, § 4.10.2 A, B, J App. B, § 4.20       Added App. B, § 4.30.22 App. B, § 4.40 App. B, § 4.40.2 A App. B, § 4.40.3 A.v. XZA 12-08 11- 1-2012 3.40.2.C 3.40.4.D 3.40.5 13-1  3- 4-2013 30-2 XZA 13-03  3-21-2013 A 2.30 B       Added 4.30.23 13-2  6- 3-2013 86-87 13-3 10-21-2013       Rpld 86-31, 
86-51-86-57, 
86-81-86-90, 
86-111-86-114, 
86-131-86-137, 
86-181-86-184, 
86-201-86-204       Added 86-51-86-57, 
86-81-86-90, 
86-111-86-114, 
86-131-86-137, 
86-181-86-184, 
86-201-86-204 Ord. of  2-24-2014       Rpld App. B, §§ 1.00- 
1.40.1, 
2.00-2.30, 
3.00-3.40, 
4.00-4.40, 
5.00-5.70, 
6.00-6.30, 
7.00-7.20, 
8.00-8.80, 
9.00-9.30, 
10.00-10.30, 
11.00-11.20, 
12.00-12.40       Added App. B, §§ 1.00- 
1.40.1, 
2.00-2.30, 
3.00-3.40, 
4.00-4.70, 
5.00-5.70, 
6.00-6.30, 
7.00-7.20, 
8.00-8.90, 
9.00-9.30, 
10.00-10.30, 
11.00-11.20, 
12.00-12.40 14-1  3-17-2014 2-101-2-108 2-231-2-238 14-2  7- 7-2014 86-81 86-181, 86-182 14-3  9-15-2014 14-32 14-4 10- 6-2014 14-177, 14-178 14-5 10-20-2014 22-33 22-34(a), (b) 22-36, 22-37 XZA 14-12 12- 8-2014 App. B, § 9.10.7 14-6 12-15-2014 App. A, § 2-49 14-7 12-15-2014 2-121 2-125(a), (b) 2-127 2-129(j), (k) XZA 15-01  1-22-2015 App. B, § 4.50.7 15-1 10- 5-2015       Added 58-61-58-66 XZA 15-11 12-10-2015 App. B, § 8.80.1.5.d. 16-1  2- 1-2016 2-125(b) 16-2  3-21-2016 22-31, 22-32 16-3  3-21-2016 34-36 XZA 16-02  5- 9-2016 App. B, § 8.80.1.5.d XZA 16-03  5- 9-2016       Added App. B, § 3.40.1.D       Amended App. B, §§ 3.40.1.C, 3.40.4.D 16-4  8- 1-2016       Added 58-35 16-5 10-17-2016       Added 14-32(m) 17-1  1- 3-2017       Added 78-2 17-2  6- 5-2017       Rpld 2-201-2-203 17-3  6- 5-2017 26-35 XZA 17-01  7-14-2017       Added App. B, § 5.10.1.15 XZA 17-02  7-14-2017 App. B, § 6.30.2 17-4  9-18-2017       Rpld 58-61-58-66       Added 58-61-58-65 17-5 12-18-2017 14-32 18-1  1- 2-2018 22-34(b) 18-2  4-16-2018 14-212 Ord. of  9-21-2018       Rpld App. B, §§ 1.00-12.40       Added §§ 1.00-12.40 18-3 12-17-2018 14-171-14-187       Rpld 38-141-38-149  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Connecticut General Statutes. 
G.S. Section  
this Code 1-1 1-2 1-1(s), 1-1(t) 1-7, 1-8 1-3 1-3 1-82a 2-125 1-225 Char. Ch. III, § 4 1-231 Char. Ch. III, § 4 tit. II Char. Ch. VII, § 3 4-124i-4-124p 2-81 4-124c-4-124f 2-101 2-103 4-124j 2-81 7-10 et seq. Char. Ch. VIII, § 1 7-16a et seq. Char. Ch. V, § 6 7-131a 38-31 38-34 7-136 26-33, 26-34 7-137d et seq. Char. Ch. VI, § 3 7-147i 46-35 7-147a 46-32 7-147a-7-147k 46-32 46-34 7-147c 46-82 7-147d 46-82 7-147e(b) 46-84 7-147f 46-83 7-147g 46-84 7-147h 46-34 7-147j 46-36 7-148 38-144 42-31 82-40 7-148(c)(2) Char. Ch. VI, § 10, 
Char. Ch. VI, § 11 7-148(c)(4)(H) 70-1 7-148(c)(4)(H)(xv) 70-1 7-148(c)(5)(A) Ch. 62 7-148(c)(6)(B) Ch. 86 7-148(c)(6)(C) Ch. 74 Ch. 74, Art. IV 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v) 74-104 7-148(c)(7) 14-171 7-148(c)(7)(E) Ch. 38, Art. V 7-148(c)(7)(F) Ch. 50 7-148(c)(7)(H) Ch. 18 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iv) Ch. 58 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xiv) Ch. 34 7-148(c)(7)(H)(14) Ch. 34, Art. II 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) 38-142 70-1 7-148(c)(10)(A) 1-13 7-148(c)(10)(B) 2-122 7-148(e)(7)(H)(viii) Ch. 38 7-148aa 14-171 14-183 38-149 70-10 7-148b 2-152 7-148b et seq. 2-154 7-148b-7-148f 2-152 7-148c 2-155 7-148d 2-156 7-148gg 14-177 7-148h 2-122, 2-123 2-125 7-149a 74-31 7-152b 82-40 7-152c 14-171 14-172 14-180 14-182 34-34 38-148 58-35 58-64 70-12 74-103 7-170-7-186 18-1 7-188 et seq. Char. Ch. VIII, § 4 7-194 42-31 7-245 et seq. Ch. 86 7-253a 86-31 7-258 86-184 86-204 7-273aa-oo 70-13 7-273aa 70-13 7-274 et seq. Char. Ch. V, § 10 7-282b Ch. 34 7-292-7-294 62-1 7-369 et seq. Char. Ch. VI, § 10 7-421 et seq. Char. Ch. VII, § 2 7-436 et seq. Char. Ch. VII, § 3 7-450 Ch. 62 7-450(b) 62-65 7-452 62-3 7-452 et seq. Char. Ch. VII, § 3 7-467 et seq. Ch. 62 7-468 62-32 7-472 62-35 8-1 et seq. Char. Ch. V, § 2 App. B App. B, § 11.00 8-1b 66-31 8-1c 66-91 8-1c: 66-97 8-2 82-131 App. B, § 1.10 8-3 App. B, § 12.10 8-3c 82-93 8-3d 82-93 8-4a App. C 8-5 et seq. Char. Ch. V, § 3 8-6 App. B, § 3.30 8-8 42-63 46-35 App. C, § 4 8-18 et seq. Char. Ch. V, § 2 App. C 8-23 82-131 8-25 App. C, § 3 8-25 et seq. App. C 8-26 App. C, § 4 App. C, § 7 8-26c App. C, § 6 8-26d App. C, § 4 8-31a 66-61, 66-62 8-31a-8-37a 66-61 8-39a App. C, § 3 8-124-8-169w 26-71 26-75 8-336f(b) 2-202 9-15a 30-1 9-140(d) 30-3 9-167a 38-32 App. A, § 2-49 9-169 Char. Ch. II, § 5 9-169d Char. Ch. II, § 5 9-200 Char. Ch. II, § 2 9-369b 30-3 12-40 et seq. Char. Ch. VI, § 7 12-41 78-35 12-62c 78-2 12-81(7) 78-34 12-81(11), 12-81(12) 78-34 12-81(15), 12-81(16) 78-34 12-81(21) 78-31 12-81(56) 78-62 12-81(56)(a) 78-62 12-81(56)(b) 78-61 12-81(56)(c) 78-63 12-81b 78-34 12-81c 78-36 12-81c (1), (3) 78-36 12-81i 78-33 12-81j 78-32 12-81w 78-131 12-110 et seq. Char. Ch. V, § 4 12-122 et seq. Char. Ch. VI, § 7 12-129 78-1 12-129b 86-31 12-129b-12-129d 78-82, 78-83 12-129n 78-81 12-130 Char. Ch. VI, § 6 12-145 86-204 12-146 78-30 86-204 12-170aa 86-31 13a-247 Ch. 74 14-1 14-172 58-35 82-1 14-1(47) 38-102 14-66 38-144 14-107 82-40 14-150 38-142 38-144 14-150a Ch. 38, Art. V 14-250a 82-6 14-251 82-31 14-253a 82-38, 82-39 14-254 82-38 14-297 82-1 14-297 et seq. Ch. 82 14-297(6) Char. Ch. V, § 10 14-301 82-31 14-305-14-308 82-40 14-318 et seq. App. B, § 11.00 16-229-16-231 74-67 16a-4a 2-101 66-61 17a-220(e) App. B, § 2.30 19a-77(a)(1)- 
19a-77(a)(3) App. B, § 2.30 19a-507a App. B, § 2.30 20-206a 18-32 20-206a-20-206e 18-35 21-36 et seq. Ch. 58 22-3(b) 14-174 22-358 10-56 22a-1-22a-6 82-131 22a-27j 66-94, 66-95 66-97 22a-36-22a-45 App. A, § 2-48 App. A, § 2-51 22a-36-22a-45d 82-131 22a-38(13) App. A, § 2-51 22a-42a App. A, § 2-51 22a-69-4 38-105 22a-73 Ch. 38 22a-114 et seq. 82-131 22a-115 70-2 82-132 22a-151 70-2 82-132 22a-207 70-2 22a-207 et seq. 82-131 22a-207(3) 70-2 22a-220 70-1 70-11 22a-220a 70-1 22a-260 70-2 22a-354v 38-1 22a-354e 38-1 22a-354f 38-1 22a-354o et seq. 38-1 22a-354p 38-1 22a-416 et seq. 82-131 22a-430 86-82 tit. 25, ch. 477c App. B, § 8.50 25-84 38-62 25-84-25-94 38-61 25-84-25-98 38-67 27-103 78-30 29-253 14-31 29-292 82-91 30-1 App. B, § 8.10 30-91 6-1 31-91-31-100 62-35 31-102, 31-103 62-31 31-275 et seq. 62-4 31-275-31-355a Ch. 62 46a-60 Char. Ch. VII, § 3 49-73b 14-183 51-164p 1-13 34-37 51-197b 14-67 52-180 82-40 52-259 82-40 52-558 Ch. 74 tit. 53 2-121 53a-117a Ch. 34 53a-182a Ch. 74 ch. 54 78-61 ch. 103 86-51, 86-52 86-203 ch. 103b 70-13 ch. 124, § 8 App. B, § 11.00 ch. 124, § 8-2 App. B, § 1.10 tit. 124, § 8-3 App. B, § 12.10 ch. 124, § 8-8 42-63 ch. 124, 126 App. B, § 12.10 ch. 126 App. C ch. 249 82-33 ch. 250, § 14 App. B, § 11.00 chs. 368o, 830, 833a 14-121 ch. 446d 70-13 ch. 446e 70-2 70-13 ch. 477c App. B, § 8.50 ch. 828 App. B, § 4.30 App. B, § 4.40  
